
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03476/2018

                                                        EA/03478/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2019                         |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                   Tejalben goswami and jineshgiri goswami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Badar, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellants.
For the Respondent:    Miss Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants with permission, appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal ( hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who, in  a
    determination promulgated on the 28th  November  2018  dismissed  their
    appeals against the decision of the  Respondent  to  refuse  the  first
    Appellant's application for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as a primary carer of  a  British
    Citizen pursuant to Regulations 20  and  16(5)  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("hereinafter referred to  as
    the 2016 Regulations").

 2. The Appellants are citizens of India and are husband and  wife.  On  15
    November 2017 applications were made by the first and second Appellants
    for derivative residence cards  as  confirmation  that  they  were  the
    primary carers of a British citizen. The  sponsor,  who  is  a  British
    citizen, is the mother of the first Appellant.

 3. In  a  decision  made  on  1  May  2018  the  Respondent  refused  that
    application. The application was considered under Regulation 20 and  16
    (5) of the 2016 Regulations and was refused on the basis that the first
    Appellant had not provided adequate evidence to show that she  was  the
    primary carer of a British citizen.  In particular it was  stated  that
    the Appellant had not provided adequate evidence  to  demonstrate  that
    the British citizen's needs could not be met by the NHS/local authority
    or private care nor had she demonstrated that the  sponsor  was  solely
    dependent upon her for her care. The decision letter acknowledged  that
    the British citizen concerned suffered from a range of health  problems
    but had not received a diagnosis of a specific disorder that required a
    full-time carer. Furthermore, the  psychological  assessment  had  been
    conducted privately rather than having been conducted by  a  consultant
    in charge of the British citizen's care. The decision letter considered
    that the Appellant had failed to provide evidence that only  she  could
    assume the role of carer and why. Thus, the Respondent considered  that
    the Appellant had not demonstrated that  the  British  citizen  sponsor
    would be unable to reside in the UK or in  another  EEA  state  if  the
    Appellant was required to leave for an indefinite period.

 4. The second appellant is the son-in-law of the British  citizen  sponsor
    and is therefore not considered a "direct relative" or "legal guardian"
    and was told that he did not  have  a  right  of  appeal  at  all  (see
    paragraph 5 of the FtTJ decision). There  is  reference  in  the  court
    papers at page 7 to the Tribunal having accepted an appeal  in  respect
    of the second appellant but  that  the  application  had  been  refused
    without a right of appeal under Regulation 36 and that this was  to  be
    determined as a preliminary issue. It is unclear  to  me  whether  that
    issue was in fact resolved.

 5. The Appellants lodged grounds of appeal against that decision on 9  May
    2018. It is recorded in the grounds that the  Respondent  had  made  an
    error by not issuing a  right  of  appeal  in  respect  of  the  second
    Appellant and it was asserted that he also had a right of appeal as  he
    was a family member citing Regulation 7(1) (c) of the 2016 Regulations.
    It was the second Appellant's case that he was also a primary carer  of
    his mother-in-law.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 20 November 2018.  In
    a decision promulgated on 28 November 2018 the appeals were  dismissed.
    The judge  did  not  hear  any  oral  evidence,  either  from  the  two
    Appellants or from the sponsor, and referred to the issues  before  the
    Tribunal as being "an argument on an extremely narrow legal  principle,
    not really a factual dispute" (see paragraph 10). At paragraph 14,  the
    judge also made reference to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Patel and observed that the "case rested solely on a point of law". The
    judge then proceeded to  consider  the  medical  circumstances  of  the
    sponsor  by  reference  to  specific  conditions  and  purportedly   by
    reference to the medical evidence but also based, it  appears,  on  the
    judge's own understanding of the medical conditions described and  what
    may or could be appropriate medication or further diagnosis. The  judge
    concluded that the Appellants  did  not  satisfy  the  Regulations  and
    dismissed the appeals.

 7. On 11 December 2018 grounds of appeal were  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants. There were three specific grounds  relied  upon;  ground  1
    asserted that the judge had made a  material  misdirection  in  law  by
    failure to follow the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  Patel;  ground  2
    asserted that the judge failed to consider the importance of the appeal
    of Patel to the Supreme Court and a ground 3 it was asserted  that  the
    judge had made perverse/irrational medical findings which were  outside
    his remit to make.

 8. Permission to appeal the decision was granted on 28 December 2018.

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, it was common ground  between
    the advocates that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  the  correct  course  to
    adopt would be for the decision to be set aside in  its  entirety  with
    none of the findings of fact preserved  and  for  the  decision  to  be
    remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

10.  It is therefore only necessary for me to set out why I agree with that
    course and to set out briefly my reasons. I am satisfied  that  grounds
    one and three are made out.

11. As Mr Badar submitted, the judge erred in law by failing to  apply  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Patel v The Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2028 (hereinafter referred to  as  "Patel").
    In that decision the Court of Appeal was asked to address the  question
    of derivative claims of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  those
    without rights of residence based upon their care for British  citizens
    who are their "direct relatives" whether children or adults in need  of
    care. At paragraphs 81 - 82 of the decision, the court  made  reference
    to the test which remained the test of compulsion. As  set  out  above,
    the judge did not hear any oral evidence from the parties or  from  the
    sponsor and observed that the case before him was "an  argument  on  an
    extremely narrow legal principle, not really a factual  dispute."  (See
    paragraph 10) at paragraph 14 the judge made reference to the  decision
    in Patel stating, "it became apparent that the case rested solely on  a
    point of law in the Patel case given by Irwin  LJ".  Therefore,  whilst
    the judge had made reference to the case, and also at paragraph 22)  he
    did not consider the issue of compulsion or choice  when  reaching  his
    overall conclusions. Miss Everett conceded that  at  no  point  in  the
    determination was there any assessment of this issue  by  reference  to
    the evidence. Instead, the vast body of the  decision  comprises  of  a
    discussion  of  medication,  appropriate  alternatives  (not   in   any
    evidence) and the position of alternative carers.  Both  parties  agree
    that the judge failed to apply the correct legal test.

12. Furthermore, both advocates agree that the judge made findings of  fact
    on evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  grounds
    set out  and  make  reference  to  a  number  of  examples  within  the
    determination whereby the judge appeared to use his  own  knowledge  of
    medical conditions and appropriate medication to make findings of fact.
    For  example,  the  judge  makes  reference  to  the  various   medical
    conditions that the  Appellant  has  at  paragraph  31.  Thereafter  he
    considers those conditions in the light of treatment or medication that
    could be provided which was not in any evidence before the Tribunal. At
    paragraph 32 he makes reference to medication  to  offset  deficiencies
    that the Appellant may have, at paragraph 33 he makes reference to  the
    general practitioner being  invited  to  prescribe  different  ointment
    which could lead to a full  long-term  recovery  and  at  paragraph  35
    proffers suggestions as to how her mobility issues could be treated  by
    the medical profession. There are similar examples of paragraphs 36 and
    37 and at paragraph 48- 49 making reference to medication for pain. The
    statements made by the judge do  not  emanate  from  any  evidence  and
    appear to be medical advice as to what the correct treatment should be.



13. It is  plain  from  reading  the  judge's  determination  that  he  has
    experience in medical based  legal  appeals  (see  his  observation  at
    paragraph 59) but however well-intentioned, the findings made from  the
    actual evidence before the Tribunal is muddled up with his own  medical
    opinion and thus it is difficult with any certainty to  ascertain  what
    findings were made on the actual evidence that was before the Tribunal.
    As  both  parties  submit,  it  is  difficult  if  not  impossible   to
    extrapolate findings from the decision that have not been influenced by
    the judges own medical views. As the grounds state, the  appeal  should
    be decided on the evidence and if there were other issues, at the  very
    least they should have been raised with the parties to  give  them  the
    opportunity to address them.

14. For those reasons, and as both parties agree, the decision of  the  FtT
    involves making an error on a point of law and should be set aside.  It
    is further agreed that the nature of the error of law is such that none
    of the findings of fact can be preserved and new findings will have  to
    be made in accordance with the evidence.

15. As to the remaking of the decision, ground  2  made  reference  to  the
    failure of the Tribunal to stay the proceedings to await  the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in Patel.
    The  issue  of  staying  proceedings  was  the  subject   of   detailed
    consideration by the Court of Appeal in AB (Sudan) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  921.   The  Court,  firstly,
    contrasted a stay of proceedings  with  a  stay  of  enforcement  of  a
    judicial decision or order.  It emphasised that stay issue involve case
    management decisions.  It added, at [25]:

         "Such decisions will rarely be challenged and even more  rarely  be
         reversed on appeal."

16. The Court added the following observations of  specified  relevance  in
    immigration cases:

         "28. Immigration law has a  tendency  to  develop  rapidly,  indeed
             sometimes  at  bewildering  speed.  The   constant   flow   of
             developments arises from the industry  of  legislators,  rule-
             makers, judges and practitioners. Not only  does  the  law  in
             this area change fast. So also  do  the  political,  military,
             social and economic circumstances in  the  numerous  countries
             from which asylum seekers or other migrants may come.


         29.  Both the tribunals and the courts have   to   keep  pace  with
             these constant changes.  When  a  new  appellate  decision  is
             awaited it   is not unusual for  parties  in  pending  similar
             cases to seek a stay of their proceedings.


         30.  Sometimes it is obviously necessary  to  grant  such  a  stay,
             because  the  anticipated  appellate  decision  will  have   a
             critical impact upon the proceedings in hand. There  is  also,
             however, a need for realism. In the world of immigration it is
             a fact of life that the law which the judge applies is  liable
             to change in the future, quite possibly in  the  near  future.
             This cannot usually be a reason  for  staying  proceedings.  I
             started dealing with immigration  cases  some  fourteen  years
             ago. I cannot remember any occasion during  that  period  when
             important decisions on one or more aspects of immigration  law
             were not eagerly awaited from the appellate courts.


         31.  As Pill LJ observed in R (Bahta) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 895 at
             [70], what the Court of Appeal says is the law,  is  the  law,
             unless  and  until  overruled  by  a  superior  court  or   by
             Parliament.  Likewise  country   guidance   decisions   should
             generally be applied unless and until  they  are  reversed  or
             superseded.


         32   In my view the power  to  stay  immigration  cases  pending  a
             future appellate decision in other litigation is a power which
             must be exercised cautiously and only when, in  the  interests
             of justice, it is necessary to do so. It may be  necessary  to
             grant a stay if the impending appellate decision is likely  to
             have a critical impact on the current litigation. If courts or
             tribunals exercise their power to stay cases too  freely,  the
             immigration system (which is  already  overloaded  with  work)
             will become even more clogged up."


17. I indicated to the parties that in my judgment the  judge  was  not  in
    error in refusing to stay the proceedings. He did  not  expressly  make
    reference to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  but  did  apply  the
    principles from that case. Given that the case is not to be heard until
    May (the judge heard the appeal in 2018)  and  there  was  no  evidence
    before him as to when  the  Supreme  Court  would  give  their  written
    decision. For the same reasons, I do not  consider  it  appropriate  to
    stay the proceedings at this stage. However, it is plain  from  hearing
    the submissions of Mr Badar that it is likely that oral  evidence  will
    be given by the parties concerned and that  any  medical  evidence  may
    also require updating and therefore I  am  satisfied  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to make findings of  fact
    on the evidence and apply the correct legal test.

18. I therefore direct that a case  management  review  hearing  should  be
    listed before the First-tier Tribunal  and  any  further  arguments  or
    submissions that relate to the issue  of  a  stay  of  the  proceedings
    pending the decision of the Supreme Court can be advanced at  the  case
    management review hearing, who will be in a better placed  position  to
    consider what course is appropriate at that time.









Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set  aside  and  is  remitted  for  a  fresh
hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  and  in
accordance with the directions given above.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14/02/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


