
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03191/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2019                             |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                            muhammed ashraf khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On 10 May 2016, he  married  a
    Lithuanian national,  Raimonda  Lapinskaite.   On  8  August  2016,  he
    applied for  a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom under reg 18(1)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052).  On 22  March  2017,
    the Secretary of State refused that application on the basis  that  the
    appellant was a party to a "marriage of convenience" and so was  not  a
    "spouse" of an EEA national.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 28 March 2018, Judge Mathews dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  He concluded that the  appellant  was  indeed  a  party  to  a
    "marriage of convenience".

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.   Permission  was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 16  October  2018  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Kebede) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 4. On 20 November 2018 the Secretary of  State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's adverse decision.

The Judge's Decision

 5.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Mathews,  the  respondent   was   not
    represented.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  and   the
    appellant, sponsor and her son gave oral evidence.  This  evidence  was
    not, of course, challenged by cross-examination in  the  absence  of  a
    Presenting Officer.  In addition, the judge had  written  evidence,  in
    particular from a  health  visitor  (Louise  Crawford)  supporting  the
    genuineness of the relationship between the appellant and sponsor.  She
    had become involved with  the  appellant  and  sponsor  because  on  25
    November 2017, the sponsor gave birth to a child of which the appellant
    is the father.

 6. There were a number of issues raised in the refusal  letter,  including
    discrepancies in the evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor  at  their
    respective interviews  concerning  their  relationship  and  there  was
    evidence of council tax bills relating to properties in Scarborough and
    Newport where the appellant and sponsor said they  lived  together  but
    that the sponsor had, until she more recently made repayment, claimed a
    25% reduction for single occupancy.

 7. In his determination, Judge Mathews set  out  that  the  legal  burden,
    together with the initial evidential burden, was upon the Secretary  of
    State to establish that the appellant's marriage  was  a  "marriage  of
    convenience".  The judge then went on  to  consider  the  evidence,  in
    relation to the council tax bills, the evidence from the health visitor
    (including that the appellant and sponsor now had a child together) and
    a number of "discrepancies" between the evidence  of  the  sponsor  and
    appellant in their respective interviews.  The  judge  also  took  into
    account that the appellant had previously sought to remain in the UK as
    the "potential spouse" of another woman  even  after  he  had  met  the
    sponsor.  The judge also referred to the fact that the appellant had  a
    "poor immigration history" and has sought to avoid immigration control.
     The judge's reasons are at paras 17 to 37 as follows:

         "17. My findings are inevitably set out sequentially,  but  I  have
             considered all evidence in the round before  prior  to  making
             any findings or reaching any conclusions.

         18.  I also note, as observed by the respondent, that  council  tax
             bills  submitted  to  prove  the  claimed  addresses  of   the
             appellant and sponsor in Scarborough and later  Newport,  give
             properties in the name of the sponsor, but then also grant her
             a 25% reduction for single occupancy.

         19.  The reference to single occupancy at the claimed addresses  of
             cohabitation, together with the apparent discrepancies on  the
             face of the marriage interviews, such as the appellant stating
             that his wife went with him to hospital in the last 12 months,
             when she denied any such attendance, are matters that persuade
             me to find that the respondent has met  the  legal  burden  of
             proof imposed by the decision of Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ.

         20.  I have noted the DNA results, photographs and maternity  notes
             before me, I note too the letter from Louise Crawford  (health
             visitor) at page 316 of the bundle.

         21.  I am persuaded to find from the consistent oral evidence,  DNA
             paternity assessment, and supporting letter  from  the  health
             visitor, that the appellant and sponsor have a child  born  on
             the 25th November 2017.  I note that the  health  visitor  has
             conducted parenting assessments over weekly  visits  for  a  7
             week period prior to her letter of the 12th January 2018.  She
             suggests that the appellant  and  sponsor  are  committed  and
             caring parents, and are in a genuine  relationship  with  each
             other.

         22.  The account of the health visitor is supported by the  account
             of the sponsor's son, who spoke of  similar  commitments,  and
             other letters of support.

         23.  I keep in mind the  evidence  above,  and  consider  next  the
             contents of the marriage interviews.  I have noted  with  care
             that the appellant suggests that during his interview  he  was
             nervous and struggled to understand some questions, hence  the
             apparently contradictory replies given by him and the  sponsor
             in their interviews.

         24.  On reading the interviews in full I do  find  that  there  are
             significant   discrepancies   despite   the   assertions    of
             nervousness and confusion by the parties.

         25.  I note simple erroneous answers,  such  as  stating  that  the
             sponsor was with him at hospital, then later stating that  she
             was not.

         26.  The sponsor could not give the names of the witnesses  at  the
             couple's marriage, did not know what work her husband had been
             doing before he came to the UK.  Was not sure how long he  had
             been in Ireland claiming asylum, despite claiming to have been
             in a relationship at that point.

         27.  Both parties were unable to give full and consistent  accounts
             of the jobs of their respective fathers.

         28.  I view those replies in  the  context  of  council  tax  bills
             indicating single occupancy of the homes claimed to have  been
             occupied by both appellant and sponsor.

         29.  The sponsor said in relation to her Newport property that  she
             had subsequently repaid her  council  tax  refund,  I  do  not
             accept that fact given that she made no mention of it  in  her
             witness statement, and produced no receipt for such repayment,
             something that would be reasonable to expect had she  realised
             her error, recognised the impression of single occupancy  that
             it had given, and sought to remedy it.

         30.  I also note that in her evidence the sponsor stated  that  the
             appellant had  not  been  to  Ireland,  since  they  moved  to
             Newport.  That rather begs the question as to how the  council
             tax for their  property  would  ever  had  included  a  single
             occupancy discount if truthful details were provided when  the
             accommodation was first taken up.

         31.  For the reasons given above,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             couple have co-habited as claimed for the period  claimed.   I
             am not persuaded that they have had a  genuine  and  committed
             relationship for the  period  claimed  prior  to  the  present
             application.

         32.  I note that the appellant accepts a previous attempt to secure
             status in the UK as the potential spouse of a woman in the UK,
             and that occurred after he had met this sponsor, yet she  knew
             nothing of that fact.   The  appellant  did  not  pursue  that
             matter after refusal, despite asserting that the  relationship
             had been genuine when making the application.

         33.  I note too that he accepts having been previously removed from
             the UK, and returning covertly.  I find that  he  has  a  poor
             immigration history and  has  demonstrated  a  willingness  to
             avoid immigration  control  by  illegal  entry,  and  to  work
             illegally within the UK.

         34.  Bringing together these strands of evidence I  find  that  the
             appellant and sponsor have a new child as claimed.   I  accept
             that the appellant is a  caring  and  loving  parent  of  that
             child, as noted by the health visitor.

         35.  I note the helath visitor's views as to  the  relationship  of
             the parents, but I must view all of the  evidence  before  me.
             For the reasons set out above I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
             relationship in this case is genuine and subsisting, despite a
             decision to conceive and gave birth to a child.  I  make  that
             finding given the  telling  lack  of  knowledge  displayed  in
             marriage interviews, and the documentation recording that  the
             sponsor lived alone in Newport and  Scarborough,  rather  than
             with the  appellant  as  claimed.   The  dreadful  immigration
             history of the appellant reflects on his credibility,  but  is
             of course only a single factor.

         36.  I note and recognise the implication of my findings, that this
             man and the sponsor have conceived a child  despite  the  fact
             that their relationship is not a genuine one  as  claimed.   I
             have considered all matter at length, and I regret  having  to
             make such a finding, but I note that considerable lengths that
             this man has already  gone  to  in  the  past  to  secure  his
             position in the UK.

         37.  I find that the marriage in  this  case,  was  a  marriage  of
             convenience in light of the concerns set out and found  above.
             The respondent's concerns have not been  adequately  addressed
             in the evidence, and are made out on the evidence  before  me.
             I find that the appellant has further sought to strengthen his
             position in the UK by conceiving a child with the sponsor.   I
             do not  find  that  the  sponsor  necessarily  knew  that  the
             appellant's  intentions  were  dishonourable  in  fathering  a
             child, hence the appearance of a happy couple  to  the  health
             visitor.   But  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the   appellant's
             intentions have been honourable or genuine."

 8. As will be clear, the judge concluded that despite the evidence of  the
    health worker and that the appellant and sponsor had a child, the "lack
    of knowledge displayed in the marriage interviews" and the judge's view
    that the council tax documentation demonstrated that the couple had not
    been  living  together,  together  with   the   appellant's   "dreadful
    immigration history", led to the conclusion that their relationship was
    not a "genuine and subsisting" one and was a "marriage of  convenience"
    (see paras 35 and 37 in particular).

The Submissions

 9. In her oral submissions, Ms Bayoumi made a  number  of  focused  points
    arising out of the grounds.

10. First, she submitted, in effect,  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a
    balanced assessment of the evidence as required by the Supreme Court in
    Sadovska and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 at [34].  She submitted that
    there had been no challenge to the evidence of the health  visitor  (in
    the absence of cross-examination) or, indeed,  of  the  sponsor's  son.
    The judge had focused, and relied  upon,  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    interviews without having regard to the consistencies in their evidence
    as well.

11. Secondly, she submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to  engage
    with the appellant's explanation in relation to the sponsor's claim for
    "single occupancy", namely that she had repaid it when  she  discovered
    her error.  Ms Bayoumi was  unable  to  say  whether  the  council  tax
    documents were an issue before the judge.

12. Thirdly, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had made a simple  mistake
    in identifying a discrepancy between the evidence of the appellant  and
    sponsor at their interviews as  to  whether  or  not  the  sponsor  had
    accompanied the appellant to hospital for a scan.  The judge 'read' the
    evidence as being that the appellant had said, at first she accompanied
    him, but then secondly said she had not.   Ms  Bayoumi  submitted  that
    looking at the interview records it  was  clear  from  the  appellant's
    interview (at questions  39-46)  that  he  had  not  said  the  sponsor
    accompanied him  but  rather  had  said  she  had  not.   Likewise,  in
    identifying the inconsistency between their evidence at interview,  the
    judge had wrongly interpreted her answer at question 44  when  she  had
    been asked whether the appellant had been "in hospital at all over  the
    last year" - to which the sponsor answered "no" - as inconsistent  with
    the appellant's evidence which was not about being  "in  hospital"  but
    about attending as an outpatient for a scan.

13. Finally, Ms Bayoumi submitted that if the judge was to, as  he  did  in
    para 36, find that the sponsor and appellant had conceived their  child
    in order to secure the appellant's immigration  position,  that  matter
    should have been put to them in their evidence, at least by  the  judge
    raising the issue.

14. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge had properly directed himself on the burden and standard of proof
    consistently with the Court of Appeal's decision in Rosa v SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 14 (approving the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Papajorgji
    [2012] UKUT 38  (IAC)).   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the evidence in the round and the evidence in  the  marriage
    interviews was key evidence bearing in mind that  the  interviews  were
    conducted in English, so there  was  no  translation  which  could,  if
    mistranslated, could result  in  apparent  discrepancies.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the fact that the Presenting Officer was not present  at
    the hearing did not mean that the judge was obliged to accept  all  the
    oral and documentary evidence at its face value without considering its
    reliability and what weight to give it.  Relying upon a passage in  the
    judgment in R (Molina) v SSHD [2017] EWHC  1730  (Admin)  at  [73],  Mr
    Howells submitted that the judge had correctly considered whether  this
    was a "marriage of convenience" based upon the parties'  intentions  at
    the date the marriage was contracted.

15. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had  been  wrong,  in  para  25,  to
    identify a discrepancy in the evidence of the sponsor and appellant  as
    to whether or not she accompanied him to hospital  for  his  scan.   He
    accepted that the appellant had not said that she  accompanied  him  in
    his answers at interview.  However,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  this
    error was not material as there  were  other  discrepancies  which  the
    judge could properly rely upon.

Discussion

16. I accept Mr Howells' submission that the judge correctly identified (at
    para 15) that the legal burden of proof was upon the Secretary of State
    to  establish  that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  a  "marriage   of
    convenience".   Further,  the  judge  correctly  identified  that   the
    evidential burden lay upon the Secretary of State.  Finally,  I  accept
    that the judge correctly looked to the "intentions" of the  parties  at
    the date of contracting  the  marriage  as  to  whether  or  not  their
    marriage was a "marriage of convenience."  That is a distinct  question
    from whether or not their relationship is a "genuine" one; the focus is
    upon whether the predominant purpose of contracting the marriage was to
    gain a right of residence for the appellant under EU law (see Molina at
    [73] and Sadovska and Another  at  [34]).   Thus  far,  therefore,  the
    judge's decision is sound.  I do not  accept  Ms  Bayoumi's  submission
    that, despite his reference to the correct and relevant law, the  judge
    in effect placed the burden upon the appellant.

17. That said, however, I have nevertheless concluded that  the  judge  did
    not carry out a lawful assessment of the evidence, in the  sense  of  a
    balanced assessment of the factors weighing in favour of the  appellant
    against those weighing against the appellant.

18. It is, perhaps, axiomatic  that  a  judge  must  undertake  a  balanced
    assessment of the  evidence  and  it  is  illustrated  by  Lady  Hale's
    approach in [34] of Sadovska and  Another.   Here,  the  judge,  in  my
    judgment, gave undue prominence to discrepancies between  the  evidence
    of the appellant and sponsor.  Those  discrepancies  were,  of  course,
    entirely relevant to his assessment but had, as Lady Hale pointed  out,
    to be considered in the light of  both  parts  of  the  evidence  which
    support their claim.  Here, it is accepted, by Mr Howells that in  para
    25 the judge fell into error in identifying a discrepancy  between  the
    evidence of the appellant and sponsor.  The  appellant  did  not  state
    that he was accompanied to  hospital  for  his  scan  by  the  sponsor.
    Likewise, the answer which the sponsor  gave  at  question  44  of  her
    interview was in answer to the question "has he been in hospital at all
    over the last year?"; to which she replied 'no'.  The  interviewer  did
    not follow up on that answer and the judge  took  it  (in  my  judgment
    erroneously) as an unequivocal statement that  the  appellant  had  not
    been "to" hospital.  In fact, the question concerns whether he had been
    "in" hospital.  The fact that the appellant had attended  a  clinic  in
    order to have a scan did not mean that had been "in" hospital - in  the
    sense of admitted to hospital but only that he had been "to"  hospital.
    Without further elaboration, in my judgment,  the  judge  placed  undue
    weight on this  answer  as  being  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had been to hospital in order to have a scan.

19. In addition, there was evidence before the judge, quite independent  of
    both the appellant and sponsor, that their relationship was a "genuine"
    one from a health visitor who had the opportunity to see the  appellant
    and sponsor regularly following the birth of their child on 25 November
    2017.  This evidence was, of course, in the  absence  of  a  Presenting
    Officer effectively not challenged.  Of course, the health visitor  may
    be mistaken and the evidence was only some evidence of their intentions
    when marrying.  It could not, however, be simply  discounted.   It  was
    also  supported,  albeit  by  evidence  not  likewise  describable   as
    independent, from the sponsor's son.

20.  The  appellant's  case  was  not,  on  the   evidence,   without   its
    difficulties.  There were  discrepancies  in  the  evidence,  including
    absences of knowledge about each other's lives which  the  judge  could
    take into account.  There was also the evidence concerning the  council
    tax payments and that the sponsor claimed a single  occupancy  discount
    during 2016 when the appellant and she claimed to  live  together.   It
    may well be that the judge was entitled to disbelieve  her  explanation
    that this was an innocent mistake.

21. However, having identified those parts of the  evidence  which  weighed
    against the appellant's claim, it was nevertheless incumbent  upon  the
    judge to give due weight to those parts of the evidence which supported
    his claim.  The judge's focus is readily apparent and it  is  upon  the
    negative  factors,  including  the  appellant's   adverse   immigration
    history.  The positive evidence, which included the consistent parts of
    their evidence, the independent evidence of the health visitor and  the
    fact that they had had a child together were not, in my judgment, given
    due weight such that a balanced assessment of the evidence resulted  in
    the judge's adverse finding.

22. This was a case which 'cried out' for an assessment of the evidence  of
    the appellant and sponsor following cross-examination.  The  judge  was
    deprived of that option because  no  Presenting  Officer  was  present.
    Entirely properly, the judge did not seek to descend into the arena and
    cross-examine the witnesses.  Their evidence  was,  as  a  result,  not
    directly challenged before  him.   Likewise,  the  'new'  evidence  was
    simply not subject to  challenge.   In  the  circumstances,  the  judge
    should have given due weight to the support evidence.  His legal  error
    is, in my judgment, a failure to engage in a 'balanced'  assessment  of
    the positive aspects of the evidence which, as a  result,  led  him  to
    focus on the negative aspects of the evidence.  That was  an  error  of
    approach in assessing the evidence which amounts to an error of law.

23. For these reasons, the judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding and in concluding that the appellant's marriage was
    a "marriage  of  convenience".   That  finding,  and  consequently  his
    decision, cannot stand.

Decision

24.  Thus,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

25. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding and having regard  to  para
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, and as  was  accepted
    by both representatives before me, the proper disposal of the appeal in
    the circumstances is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Mathews.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             18 January 2019
