
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03500/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 29th November 2017                     |On 28th December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES
                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [n a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chris Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Self representing


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, born on the [ ] 2010, is a citizen of the Cameroon,  and
    is male.  Although he is in fact the Respondent for the purposes of the
    appeal before us, this being an appeal by the Secretary  of  State,  we
    will continue to refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal below.

 2. This is an appeal by [NA].  His appeal was on  the  basis  of  being  a
    family member of an EEA national who is in  the  UK  exercising  treaty
    rights.  His case was heard at Harmondsworth on the 31st March of  this
    year by Judge Telford and the appeal was allowed under the  Regulations
    in a brief decision which was promulgated on the 10th April 2017.

 3. The Judge focussed  on  evidence  that  the  Sponsor,  the  Appellant's
    mother, had worked for the Royal Mail and had been in  receipt  of  job
    seeker's allowance.  The Judge erred in a number of ways, and we do not
    need to go into this in great detail, that he focused on  the  date  of
    the decision and not on the evidence that was available at the date  of
    the hearing.  That was itself an error.  He also erred in  relation  to
    his understanding of his interpretation of  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 and focused on the wrong issue.   On  that  basis  the
    decision cannot stand and we set the decision aside and we remit it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. We would make a few more observations.   The  Judge  was  not  assisted
    particularly by the bundle that was provided to him.  The only relevant
    evidence to the decision of the Sponsor at the  date  of  the  decision
    came at pages  46  and  47  of  the  bundle  that  had  been  provided.
    Considerably more evidence of her position would have helped, when  she
    started work, evidence of all  of  her  payslips  and  supporting  bank
    statements for the period stated.  That is the sort  of  evidence  that
    would have assisted the Judge in  finding  whether  she  was  a  worker
    within the meaning of the Regulations as required.

 5. In remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal we  observe  that  the
    Appellant through his father has a choice whether to pursue the  appeal
    with evidence that shows the whole picture of employment from the  time
    of the Sponsor's arrival in the UK to date, or the family on the  basis
    of the evidence can reapply for residence cards on  the  evidence  that
    they have been here for over five years.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed.

The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.




Signed                              Date 13th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

