

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: EA/03436/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Rolls Buildings in London    |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 16 February 2018                       |   On 22 February 2018           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR M D AMINUR RAHMAN
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bashar      (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") whereupon  it  decided  he
did not have a right of appeal to it from a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State refusing to grant him an EEA residence  card  as  an  extended  family
member.

2.    The tribunal, although it said  it  was  dismissing  the  appeal,  was
actually deciding it did not have jurisdiction because there  was  no  right
of appeal and it took  that  view  because  of  what  had  been  said  in  a
relatively recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFM's: Right  of
Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

3.    Before me it was accepted by all  parties  that  it  had  subsequently
authoritatively been determined that Sala had been wrongly decided.  It  was
accepted that the claimant did indeed have a right of appeal to  the  First-
tier Tribunal from the relevant decision of the Secretary of  State.   Both
parties urged me, on that basis, to remit to the First-tier Tribunal and  I
do so.

4.    There will, therefore, be a full hearing  of  the  appeal  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.  Such will take place in accordance with the following
directions:

      A.    The appeal will be heard by the First-tier Tribunal by  way  of
           an oral hearing.  The claimant shall be provided with a  Bengali
           speaking interpreter.  The time estimate for the  hearing  shall
           be two hours.

      B.    The hearing shall take  place  before  a  Judge  of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal other than Judge Ian Howard or by a Panel of the
           First-tier Tribunal which does not include  Judge Ian Howard.
           The appeal shall be heard at the Birmingham Hearing Centre since
           the claimant resides in Birmingham.

      C.    These directions may be  varied,  replaced  or  supplemented  by
           further directions made by any  Salaried  Judge  of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision to the effect that there was  no  appeal
before it because the claimant did not have a right of appeal is set  aside.


The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that there  is
a right of appeal and for it to decide that appeal.

I make no anonymity direction since none was sought before me.



Signed:                Date: 16 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                      Date: 16 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

