

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/03103/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On : 29 January 2018                  |            On 14 February 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                   yan ma
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Meyer, instructed by Camden Community Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
refuse to issue  her  with  an  EEA  family  permit  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  as  the
parent/ primary carer of an EEA national child.

The appellant applied for an EEA family permit in  order  to  accompany  her
British child, Lisa Lai, to the UK.  The  appellant  and  her  daughter  had
lived in China all their lives. The appellant had been  separated  from  her
spouse, Lisa's father, Leung Lai, for 9 years,  when  he  contacted  her  in
2013 requesting that his daughter come to the UK  to  use  her  right  as  a
British citizen to seek education. The appellant's ex-spouse lived with  his
new spouse, Li Liu, in the UK and contacted  her  in  2013  after  having  a
stroke which left him confined to a wheelchair. He lived with  his  wife  in
his own home and had a part-time carer.

The respondent refused the application on 29 October  2015.  The  respondent
considered  that  the  relevant  provision  of  the  EEA   Regulations   was
Regulation 15A which set out the conditions to be satisfied for a person  to
have a derivative right of residence in  the  UK.  The  conditions  included
that the applicant was the primary carer of an EEA national child  and  that
the EEA national child would be unable to remain in the UK  if  the  primary
carer was required to leave the  UK.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant was not entitled to derivative rights since it was  her  ex-spouse
who was the decision-maker in their daughter's life and was able to  provide
accommodation and facilitate her accessing her rights as a UK citizen.


The appellant appealed against that decision, asserting  that  she  was  the
sole carer of her daughter and that her daughter was not  able  to  exercise
her right to live in the UK unless she was with her, as her father  was  too
sick to care for her.


The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor on  11
April 2015. The appellant's daughter's father and his wife,  Leung  Lai  and
Li Liu, attended the hearing  and  adopted  their  witness  statements.  The
evidence of Leung Lai was that he was wheelchair  bound  since  suffering  a
series of strokes and his wife was  his  full-time  carer.   He  wanted  his
daughter to be educated in the UK. She had come to the UK in  2015  and  had
been living with him and his wife and attending school but as  a  result  of
his health problems they could no  longer  care  for  her  and  so  she  had
returned to China. It was for that reason that the appellant needed to  come
to the UK, to take care of their daughter and enable her  to  attend  school
here. Li Liu's evidence was that she had married Leung Lai in 2001 and  they
had lived in Cyprus. Leung Lai had had an affair with the appellant when  on
business in China and the appellant had become pregnant with Lisa,  who  was
born in December 2002. In order to ensure that  Lisa  was  able  to  acquire
British citizenship they got divorced, he married  the  appellant,  he  then
divorced the appellant after Lisa was born and  re-married  her.  Leung  Lai
had seen his daughter regularly until his stroke but he was then  unable  to
travel and Lisa visited them in 2015 and attended school  in  the  UK.  They
had tried to care for Lisa but were unable  to  as  she  provided  full-time
care to her husband and so Lisa had had to return to China.  They  therefore
needed the appellant to be in the UK so that Lisa could return and  continue
her studies. Reliance was placed before the judge, in  submissions,  on  the
principles in Zambrano, which  were  said  to  apply  equally  to  cases  of
admission to the UK.

Judge Traynor considered that it was the child's father, Leung Lai, who  was
her primary carer as he made all the decisions in  her  life  affecting  her
ability to exercise her treaty rights in the  UK.  He  considered  that  the
appellant was subservient to the  wishes  of  Leung  Lai  and  was  not  the
primary carer of their daughter. Since the child was now  sixteen  years  of
age, the level of care required to look after  her  was  not  such  that  it
could not be  given  by  her  father  and  stepmother  and  she  would  not,
therefore, be prevented from returning to the UK to  access  education.  The
judge found that the appellant's application did not meet  the  requirements
of Regulation 15A and he dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on three grounds. Firstly, that the judge had  failed  to  consider
the impact of the father's medical problems on his  ability  to  assume  the
day to day care of his daughter. It was asserted that the judge had  applied
the wrong test for EEA cases. Secondly that the judge wrongly  took  account
of the father's  moral  conduct  rather  than  applying  the  relevant  law.
Thirdly that the judge failed to consider  the  guidance  in  Chavez-Vilchez
and Others v Netherlands C-133/15 in regard to the child's  welfare  ad  the
impact of separation of the child from her mother.


Permission was granted on 29 November 2017 on the grounds  that  the  judge,
in finding that the appellant  was  not  the  child's  primary  carer  under
Regulation 15A, arguably applied the test in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):  "sole
responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049  for  sole  responsibility  rather
than considering the question  of  day  to  day  care  and  that  the  judge
arguably failed to consider the decision in Chavez-Vilchez.

At the hearing before me, Ms Meyer relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Mr
Tarlow accepted that the judge had erred in law in his consideration of  the
relationship between the child and her mother and requested that the  matter
be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Meyer submitted  that  there  was
no need to remit the case and that the decision  could  be  re-made  on  the
available  evidence  and  the  appeal  allowed.  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that
remittal for a de novo  hearing  was  necessary  because  findings  of  fact
needed to be made. I advised the  parties  that  in  light  of  Mr  Tarlow's
concession I was setting aside Judge Traynor's decision. I indicated that  I
would reserve my decision and that I  would  re-make  the  decision  on  the
evidence  available  if  I  considered  that  appropriate,  but  that  if  I
considered a remittal necessary then I would so direct.

As Mr Tarlow conceded,  the  judge  erred  by  applying  the  test  of  sole
responsibility in TD (Yemen) rather than considering the day to day care  of
the appellant's daughter. The question of who was the primary carer  of  the
child therefore remains to be re-determined, applying the correct  test.  It
is also the case, as the grounds of appeal assert, that the judge failed  to
make any proper findings on Leung Lai's medical condition and the impact  of
his medical problems on his ability to care for his  daughter,  as  well  as
the caring responsibilities of his wife and her ability to care for Lisa.  I
note that the medical evidence before the Tribunal was limited  and  it  may
be that the appellant would wish to produce more detailed evidence of  Leung
Lai's condition. Furthermore it is necessary for findings to be made on  the
welfare and best interests of the child and the impact of Lisa's  separation
from her mother, in accordance  with  the  guidance  in  Chavez-Vilchez  and
Others v Netherlands C-133/15. It seems to me that these are findings  which
need to be made by way of a fresh, de novo hearing and that the  appropriate
course would therefore be a remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Indeed
that was the request made in the appellant's grounds of appeal.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  with  no
findings preserved,  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b),  before  any
judge aside from Judge Traynor.








Signed: [pic]                           Dated:           12 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

