
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03952/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 March 2019                    |On: 21 March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              abdoulaye samoura
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Guinea born on 9 January  1988,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
permanent residence card under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations"), as the former family member of  an
EEA national who has retained a right of residence in the UK upon divorce.

The appellant entered the UK on 20 January 2008 with a student visa and  was
granted further leave to remain as a student until 31 May 2010.  He  married
a French national, [NI], on 14 May 2010,  and  was  subsequently  granted  a
residence card as the family member  of  an  EEA  national  valid  until  26
October 2015. The couple were divorced on 15 June 2015.

On 22 October 2015 the appellant applied  for  a  permanent  residence  card
under the EEA Regulations 2006 as a family member who had retained  a  right
of residence upon divorce. His application was refused on 25 March  2016  on
the basis that he had failed to provide evidence of his  ex-spouse's  Treaty
rights and therefore was unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  Regulation
10(5) and he  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  that  he  had  resided  in
accordance with the regulations for five continuous years for  the  purposes
of Regulation 15(1)(f).

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 25 September  2018,  following  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
respondent to obtain information about the appellant's  former  spouse  from
other government agencies since the  appellant  was  unable  to  obtain  the
information  from  his  former  spouse  himself.  The  respondent   produced
evidence from HMRC and the DWP in regard to the appellant's former  spouse's
employment status. The appellant's evidence was that he  and  his  wife  had
separated in August 2013 and he had lost contact with her.  He  later  found
out that she had finished a university course in November 2014 and had  been
on job seekers' allowance  from  then  until  she  fell  ill  in  2015.  The
appellant produced a statement from a solicitor who had been  instructed  to
obtain  evidence   from   his   ex-wife   together   with   attached   email
correspondence between  the  solicitor  and  his  ex-wife.  The  appellant's
representative argued  that,  in  the  alternative  to  showing  five  years
continuous residence  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  prior  to  the
divorce, the appellant had retained  a  right  of  residence  following  the
divorce and had an extended right of residence under Regulation 14.

The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  only  independent  and  reliable
evidence was that from HMRC and the  DWP  which  failed  to  show  that  the
appellant's former spouse was a  qualified  person  for  the  whole  of  the
relevant period as there were a number  of  gaps.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
considered that the  appellant's  claim  to  permanent  residence  therefore
failed. For the same reasons the Tribunal considered  that  the  appellant's
claim to an extended right of residence also failed and that  the  appellant
had been unable to show that his ex-wife was a qualified person. The  First-
tier Tribunal accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision  was  sought  on  the  grounds  that  the
Tribunal had failed properly to consider the alternative argument in  regard
to  a  retained  right  of  residence,  as  the  evidence  showed  that  the
appellant's ex-wife was a qualified person at the time  of  the  termination
of the marriage. The evidence from HMRC was  that  the  appellant's  ex-wife
was self-employed from 2010 to 2011 and from 2011 to  2012  and  then  again
from 2016 to 2017. The appellant's evidence  was  that  his  ex-wife  ceased
activity as a result of disability. The evidence from  DWP  showed  that  at
the time of the  divorce  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  receiving  income-
related Employment and Support Allowance which was awarded to claimants  who
were ill or disabled and unable to  work.  There  was  therefore  sufficient
evidence to found a claim that  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  a  qualified
person at the date of divorce, on the basis of being a self-employed  person
who was temporarily incapacitated through illness.

Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 22 January 2019.

At the hearing Ms Foot submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's findings  on
five years continuous exercise of treaty rights prior  to  divorce  and  the
appellant's entitlement to permanent  residence  were  not  challenged.  The
challenge was only to the findings on the  alternative  argument,  that  the
appellant had a retained right of  residence  on  divorce  and  an  extended
right under Regulation 14(3). Ms Foot submitted  that  the  appellant's  ex-
wife was a qualified person at the time of the divorce, within the terms  of
Regulation  6(3),  as  a  person  no  longer  in  self-employment  who   was
temporarily unable to  pursue  her  self-employment  as  the  result  of  an
illness or accident. The First-tier Tribunal's  findings  at  [23]  did  not
take account of the evidence of  her  incapacity  and  disability.  Ms  Foot
referred to the evidence from HMRC and DWP together with the email from  the
appellant's former wife at page 36 of the appeal bundle  which  showed  that
she fell within Regulation 6(3) and was temporarily  unable  to  pursue  her
self-employment due to her disability but then resumed  her  self-employment
in 2016. She relied upon the decision in FMB (EEA  Regulations  -  reg  6(2)
(a) - 'temporarily unable to work') Uganda [2010] UKUT  447  in  support  of
her submission that the period in which  the  appellant's  former  wife  was
unable to work was temporary.

Mr Walker submitted that the Secretary of State agreed that  the  First-tier
Tribunal had failed to look at the evidence  of  the  appellant's  ex-wife's
circumstances which did demonstrate that she  fell  within  Regulation  6(3)
and that the Tribunal had therefore materially erred in law. He agreed  with
Ms Foot's submissions and  conceded  that  the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  a
qualified person at the time of the divorce and that the appellant  met  the
requirements of Regulation 10(5) and 14(3).  He  conceded  that  the  appeal
should be allowed on that basis.

In view of Mr Walker's concession, there is no  need  for  me  to  make  any
detailed findings. The respondent had refused  the  appellant's  application
only on the basis that the evidence did not show that his  former  wife  was
exercising treaty rights  at  the  time  of  the  divorce.  The  appellant's
ability to satisfy the other parts of Regulation 10(5) was not  in  dispute.
The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was sufficient to show that  the
appellant's former wife was a qualified person at the  relevant  time  under
Regulation 6(3). Accordingly the evidence was sufficient to  show  that  the
appellant was entitled to a retained right  of  residence  in  the  UK  upon
divorce, pursuant to Regulation 10(5) and  an  extended  right  pursuant  to
Regulation 14(3), albeit that he had  not  demonstrated  an  entitlement  to
permanent residence. The appeal is therefore allowed on that basis.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is  re-made  by
allowing the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  2006,  with
reference to regulation 10(5) and 14(3).

Signed:[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 18 March
2019
