
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03826/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                            |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          mr Gbenga Michael Shoyemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Idris, Messrs Rees Myers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 1  January  1979,   appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Miller who in a determination promulgated on 24  March  2017  dismissed
    his appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  4
    December 2015 to refuse his application for a permanent residence  card
    as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant had  been  married  to  an  EEA  national  but  had  been
    divorced on 2 February 2014.  To qualify under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 he had to show that  his  wife   had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights at the time of the divorce,  that the marriage had lasted
    for 3 years and that he was currently in  employment   or  economically
    self sufficient. He was  required  to  show  that  he  had  resided  in
    accordance with the regulations for a period of 5 years.

3.   The appellant submitted a considerable bundle  of  documents,  many  of
    which are in the respondent's bundle which show the bank  accounts  for
    his business - GMS Investments of Kent.  These cover the period from 17
    February 2014 through until 12 June 2015.  In the  bundle  supplied  by
    the appellant for the hearing were approximately 40 pages of  documents
    which indicated the work his wife had been undertaking in Britain.

4.   The judge stated that there was insufficient evidence to show  that  he
    and his wife had worked in Britain.  In particular,  in  paragraph  17,
    the judge, when  considering  the  payments  made  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's work here indicated that there  were  only  three  payments
    paid by BACS and said that he should have produced documentary evidence
    showing the period between May and September  2015.   It  is  of  note,
    however, that the appellant had made his application in July  2015  and
    that the Secretary of State  in  the  letter  of  refusal  specifically
    stated  that  what  was  required  was  evidence  up  to  the  date  of
    application: that is the five year period from July 2010 to July  2015.
    The judge concluded that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that
    the appellant's wife and then he had been exercising Treaty rights over
    the relevant five year period.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

5.   The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had erred in  that  he  had
    not taken into account the appellant's company account statements which
    showed income payments from February  2014  to  June  2015.  They  also
    referred to the pay slips for his wife provided at pages 33  to  71  of
    the appellant's bundle.

6.   Mr Idris relied on those grounds of appeal.

7.   Mr Avery commented that the  judge  had  been  placed  in  a  difficult
    position because there were no clear schedules of work  undertaken  and
    payments made.  He stated that the judge had looked at the evidence and
    although he had not specifically referred to the  documentary  evidence
    he had surely taken that into account.  He accepted, however, that  the
    judge had not given clear reasons  why  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    totality of the evidence did  not  show  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.

8.   I consider that there is a material error of law in  the  determination
    of the First-tier Judge in that the judge did not appear to have  taken
    into account the quantity of evidence produced relating to the earnings
    of the appellant's wife and then his own earnings  after  the  divorce.
    Nor indeed has he given clear reasons for his decision  not  to  accept
    the evidence that was submitted.  I consider that these are a  material
    errors of law.

9.   Taking into  account  the  Senior  President's  of  Tribunals  Practice
    Directions it is appropriate that this appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal as there need to be further findings of  fact  made.   To
    assist the judge I have directed below that  proper  schedules  of  the
    evidence submitted, cross-referenced between invoices and transfers  to
    the bank statements showing the appellant's earnings together with  the
    relevant evidence showing the earnings of the appellant's  wife  should
    be submitted.

Decision

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  afresh  on
all issues.

Directions

(1)   Within  fourteen  days  of  the  promulgation  of  this  decision  the
    appellant will prepare and serve detailed schedules of evidence showing
    all relevant invoices, and BACS transfers, cross-references to payments
    into the appellant's account.

(2)  A separate bundle must be served showing the income of the  appellant's
    wife over the period from July 2010 to February 2014, together with any
    further relevant evidence regarding the appellant's wife's earnings.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   [pic]                      Date: 13 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


