
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/03604/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 October 2018                       |On 07 November 2018                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                oTIS FRIMPONG
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Lanlehin, Counsel instructed by JF Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.  The appellant is a citizen of Ghana. His  date  of  birth  is  8  August
   1974.

2. On 19 September 2016 the appellant  made  an  application  for  permanent
   residence under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
   (the "2016 Regulations").

3. This application was  refused  on  20  March  2017  because  it  was  not
   accepted by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  had  retained  a
   right of residence following the end of his marriage to an EEA national.

4. The appellant appealed.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal (FTT) Judge  Coutts  following  a  hearing  on  24  April  2018.
   Permission was granted to the appellant by the Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum
   on 1 August 2018. The matter came before me on 25th of  October  2018  to
   determine whether the judge made an error of law. I heard representations
   from both representatives

5. Although it was not made clear in the decision of the FTT, the  appellant
   and the EEA sponsor married on 26 December 2010. The appellant's evidence
   was that the relationship started to deteriorate in 2014.  There  was  in
   the  appellant's  bundle  a  Decree  Absolute  dated  the  26  July  2016
   indicating that the Decree Nisi was made on 7 June 2016.

6. The appellant submitted payslips to show that the  sponsor  was  employed
   in January 2016 to the date of divorce on 26 July 2016. This was accepted
   by the judge. The judge found that the evidence established that she  was
   employed from the start of the tax year in April 2015 until  the  end  of
   September 2015. The judge  identified  the  issue  before  him  as  being
   whether the sponsor exercised treaty  rights  between  October  2015  and
   December 2015. The appellant's evidence was that  the  sponsor  told  him
   that she had taken unpaid leave during that time because of stress.

7. The judge found that the appellant gave his  evidence  in  an  "open  and
   straightforward manner and that he was a credible witness." His  evidence
   was that throughout the two-month period  between  October  and  December
   2015 his wife was a worker. She was on unpaid leave from  her  employment
   with the NHS. The judge stated at paragraph  25  "the  evidence,  in  the
   round, suggests that she had decided to take a break from work while  she
   resolved family land dispute."  The judge found that the sponsor left her
   employment at the end of September  2015  and  was  not  working  between
   October and December 2015.  The judge found that during this time she was
   not a worker or a job seeker.  He found that she  recommenced  employment
   in January 2016 (having considered the evidence  before  him  he  decided
   that she had in fact started a new job in January 2016).

8. The grounds assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the  law  having
   expected the appellant to  establish  that  his  ex-wife  was  exercising
   treaty rights throughout the period of the marriage until the date of the
   divorce. It is also asserted that the judge  was  wrong  when  concluding
   that the sponsor was not a worker  was  she  was  on  unpaid  leave  from
   October to December 2015.

9. I heard submissions from both parties.  Both  agreed  that  Baigazieva  v
   SSHD [2018] EWCA 1088 sets out the law as it currently stands, and as  it
   was at the date of the hearing before the FTT. Mr Lindsay submitted  that
   in the absence of evidence about when divorce proceedings were issued the
   appeal cannot succeed. Ms Lanlehin submitted that despite the absence  of
   evidence relating to the issue of  proceedings  and  when  this  was  and
   whether the sponsor was at that time exercising  treaty  rights,  in  the
   light of the fact that there was clear evidence that she  was  exercising
   treaty rights at the date of the Decree  Absolute  and  since  2015,  the
   judge should have allowed the appeal.

10. The approach of the Secretary of State which was accepted by  the  Court
   of Appeal in Baigazieva is that a third country national, to  retain  the
   right of residence in the UK reliance on regulation 10 (5), does not need
   to show that their  former  EEA  spouse  exercised  treaty  rights  as  a
   "qualified person" until the divorce itself. Rather, it is sufficient  to
   show that the former EEA spouse exercised  treaty  rights  until  divorce
   proceedings were commenced. The Secretary State's submission  before  the
   Court of Appeal was that for the right to be retained  at  the  point  of
   divorce when the decree absolute was granted, it was  necessary  to  show
   that the EEA spouse was a qualified person when divorce proceedings  were
   commenced. The Court of Appeal agreed.

11. Whilst there was evidence that the judge accepted that the  EEA  sponsor
   was employed from April 2015 to September 2015 and January 2016 until  26
   of July 2016, the appellant's evidence was that his marriage  broke  down
   in 2014. There was no evidence in the appellant's witness statement or in
   oral evidence relating to the date when legal proceedings commenced.

12. The relevant law was not brought to the attention of the FTT  by  either
   party and the appellant's solicitors  failed  to  properly  identify  the
   material time in the  grounds  seeking  permission.  However,  the  judge
   materially erred because he did not consider whether the EEA sponsor  was
   exercising treaty rights at the correct time in accordance with  the  law
   as it stood set out in Baigazieva. In fact, the judge did not  apply  the
   law as it was before this decision.  It is not clear to me why he focused
   on the period from October 2015 to  December  2015  and  why  the  appeal
   should have failed, if the  sponsor  was  not  exercising  Treaty  Rights
   during that period. I set aside the decision of the judge to dismiss  the
   appeal.

13. The appellant did not submit further evidence in the event that  the  UT
   were to find a material error and go on to re-determine the appeal.  I am
   surprised that neither party drew my attention to  the  evidence  in  the
   application form.  I  have  considered  the  application  form  that  the
   appellant submitted to the respondent when applying for a retained  right
   of residence. At question 8.17, the appellant was  asked  the  date  when
   legal proceedings began to end the marriage; namely, the date the divorce
   petition was filed. He did not give an exact date but indicated  that  it
   was in March 2016. There is no  reason  for  me  to  disbelieve  what  is
   written in the form; particularly, considering the appellant was found to
   be entirely credible by the FTT. It is believable that  proceedings  were
   issued at that time. The judge found that at this time the  EEA  national
   was exercising treaty right.

14. The law as it stands when properly applied to the evidence in this  case
   establishes that the appellant retained a right of residence at the point
   of divorce.

15. There was no other  issue  raised  by  respondent  in  the  reasons  for
   refusal letter, before the FTT or at the hearing before  me  which  would
   suggest that because the appellant has established that his ex-wife was a
   qualified person when divorce proceedings commenced,  his  appeal  should
   not be allowed under the EEA regulations. There was no issue in  relation
   to the appellant's employment. His evidence was that he had been employed
   since the date of divorce. I re-make the decision and  allow  the  appeal
   under the EEA Regulations 2016.


16. The appeal is allowed under the 2016 Regulations.







   Signed Joanna McWilliam                            Date 30 October 2018


   Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
