
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number EA/03919/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 28th July 2021                |On the 03rd August 2021              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     A L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Gray & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco, aged 39.  The respondent refused
    his application for a family permit  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations,  2016/1052,  for  reasons  given  in  her
    decision dated 1 July 2019.

 2. FtT Judge Connal dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons given  in
    her decision promulgated on 27 January 2021.

 3. The appellant appeals to the UT on grounds, in summary, as follows:

      i) Failure to address human rights grounds.

     ii) Failure to address the long period of time  since  the  appellant's
         offence.

    iii) Leaving out of account that no additional sentence was  imposed  on
         the appellant for failing to return to prison after  an  authorised
         period of release.

     iv) Contradictory findings on the appellant's explanation  for  failing
         to return to prison.

      v) In assessing the appellant's attitude to his offence,  leaving  out
         of account that it occurred over a decade ago.

     vi) In the "balance sheet"  at  [37  -  38],  leaving  out  of  account
         [unspecified] matters in the appellant's favour.

    vii) [Repeats iii]

   viii) Leaving out of account that the offence  was  "a  one-off  incident
         .... that should properly have been viewed as an aberration".

     ix) In giving reasons for finding  the  appellant  to  pose  a  threat,
         leaving out of account the "protective factors" that  he  would  be
         living in the UK with the sponsor and their child.

      x) [Rounds off]

Submissions for the appellant.

 4. On ground (i), the  judge  engaged  in  "no  proper  consideration"  of
    article 8, in absence of any reference to section 117B(vi) of the  2002
    Act.  This was not a deportation case, so the public interest would not
    require removal, where it was not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave.  The sub-section was to be "narrowly construed".

 5. There was an overlap with the  EU  Directive  on  free  movement  which
    provided for a right of recourse on material change of circumstances in
    an article 3 expulsion case.  The  UK  regulations  differed  from  the
    Directive in that they had not required the  state  to  check  after  2
    years whether there had been any material change of circumstances,  but
    the  Directive  applied  in  Spain.   In  this  case  there  had   been
    significant positive changes - relationships with a partner and  child,
    and no "bad behaviour", apart from not returning to prison,  which  the
    appellant put right  voluntarily,  and  10  years  had  gone  by  since
    conviction.  It was significant that the regulation 34 had provided for
    revocation of a deportation order on material change of circumstances.

 6. It had to be accepted that the appellant's denial of guilt was a factor
    against him, but the judge very  specifically  found  that  the  public
    interest factor was the threat of further offending, and  she  did  not
    strike the article 8 balance.

 7. On ground (ii), the judge did not refer to the fact  that  the  offence
    appeared to have taken place significantly over a decade ago, and  gave
    "no proper consideration" to the appellant's crime-free life before and
    after the offence.

 8. On ground (iii), it was accepted that the judge was  entitled  to  give
    some adverse significance to  the  appellant's  failure  to  return  to
    prison after temporary release, but it was also important to note  that
    no additional sentence was imposed.

 9. There had been evidence from Spain showing no criminal  record  to  the
    date of disclosure.  The judge did not accept that  was  because  there
    had been a successful appeal.  Rehabilitation of offenders was a matter
    of domestic law.  If Spain, where the offence was committed, showed  no
    conviction on record, it was up to the respondent to explain that.

10. On ground (iv), the judge's attitude to the appellant's  non-return  to
    prison was confused.  She failed  to  explain  why  his  accounts  were
    mutually exclusive.

11. It was accepted that ground (v) does not add to (ii).

12. Ground (vi) was abandoned, because the criticism is  erroneously  aimed
    at part of the record of submissions,  not  at  the  judge's  decision-
    making.

13. On ground (vii), the submission was like ground (iii).  The attitude of
    the country where the offence was committed was a  matter  of  domestic
    law, and it was wrong to "re-categorise" that in Scotland.

14. On ground (viii), on a "proper reading"  of  the  evidence,  the  judge
    should have found the offence  to  be  a  single  aberration  from  the
    appellant's normal conduct.  Her decision failed to reflect that.

15. On ground (ix),  the  judge  should  have  considered  the  appellant's
    situation if admitted, when he would be living  in  relationships  with
    his partner and child.

16. Ground (x) adds nothing.

17. The decision of the FtT should  be  set  aside.   The  case  should  be
    retained in the UT for a fresh decision after updating the evidence.

Submissions for the respondent.

18. The judge was entitled to find at [44] "a significant  risk"  that  the
    appellant "will re-offend" and that he posed "a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, namely protecting the public".

19. Those conclusions were well considered, leaving out nothing  which  was
    relevant.  The offence was serious.  The appellant  showed  no  remorse
    and took no responsibility.  There was no error in the finding that  he
    failed to show that he was the victim of a miscarriage of justice.

20. There was no self-contradiction in the findings about the appellant not
    returning to custody.  Any contradictions were  in  his  account.   The
    judge's point was that he gave no good explanation.  She  was  entitled
    to find that his protracted failure to return was adverse to his case.

21. The judge was well aware of the appellant's  relationships,  which  she
    accepted.  No more needed to be said.   The consideration of article  8
    at [45] might be brief, but it was legally all that was required.

22. No error was shown, and the decision should stand.

Reply for the appellant.

23. It was telling that the respondent glossed over the appellant's  "clean
    decade", the vital point on which  the  judge  went  wrong,  and  which
    showed the difficulty in defending the decision.

24. The judge at [45] was dealing with  proportionality  not  in  terms  of
    article 8, but of EU law.  In terms of part 5A of  the  2002  Act,  the
    decision contained "simply no justification which bears analysis".  The
    question whether it was proportionate to prevent the husband and father
    of the family from joining his wife and child was "invisible".

25. The judge failed to recognise that this was a public policy case  where
    the onus was on the SSHD, and wrongly placed the onus on the appellant.



Decision.

26. The FtT's findings did not turn on which party had the onus.  They were
    based on all the evidence which both parties chose to lead.

27. The appellant's case in the FtT was not that his  crime  was  a  unique
    aberration.  He asked the FtT to find that he did not offend,  and  was
    the victim of malicious lies from his  former  partner;  brutality  and
    perversion of justice by the Spanish police; and  incompetence  of  his
    lawyers.

28. The appellant was convicted in Spain of the permanent disfigurement  of
    his ex-partner and sentenced to 5 years  imprisonment.   The  judge  at
    [40] declined to accept his  case  on  miscarriage  of  justice,  on  a
    successful appeal, or on his conviction being spent.   The  grounds  do
    not challenge those  findings;  and  even  if  the  submissions  veered
    faintly in that direction, there is no reason to set them aside.

29. The reason for absence of mention in the decision of  section  117B(vi)
    of the 2002 Act, of any EU Directive, or of regulation 34 is, no doubt,
    that the judge was not asked to give those any direct consideration.

30. I accept that although section 117B(vi) does not  apply  directly,  its
    principle might be relevant.  However, the appellant not to develop any
    case that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
    UK. There was no reason for the judge to take this as a  feature  which
    led to the appeal being granted.

31. The appellant's relationships, the impact of the  decision  upon  them,
    the lapse of time, and  the  absence  of  further  offending  were  all
    obvious facts, and changes of circumstances, at the heart of the  case.
    The appellant disagrees on the  weight  attached,  but  none  of  those
    matters was left out of account.

32.  The  grounds  about  failure  to  return  to  prison  show  no   self-
    contradiction by the judge.  As the presenting officer  submitted,  the
    significant point was that the appellant had no good explanation -  see
    [43].  There is no error of law in that finding.

33. The grounds and submissions do not show that the judge's conclusions at
    [44] on threat posed by the appellant, or at [45]  on  proportionality,
    should be set aside for having involved the making of any  error  on  a
    point of law.

34. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

35. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      28 July 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.



