
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03009/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2018                            |On 21 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                             mr Noorullah Zafar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  was  born  on  22  January
    1991.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to  issue  him
    with a residence card as the alleged extended family member of  an  EEA
    national.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 28 June 2017, Judge  M  J  Gillespie  (the
    judge) found there was no valid  right  of  appeal  and  dismissed  the
    appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred in dismissing the appeal for want  of
    jurisdiction and relied upon MM (Sudan) [2014] UKUT 105  (IAC),  Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal on 21 December
    2017.   The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  for  want  of  jurisdiction
    following Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC).   She
    considered the grounds arguing that the decision was unreasonable,  had
    merit in light of the Court of Appeal's decision in  Khan  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1755 which found that Sala was  incorrectly  decided  and  extended
    family members had a right of appeal under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 6. The Rule 24 response said that whilst it was right that  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Khan overturned the Upper Tribunal in Sala, there was a  stay
    on the effect  of  the  judgment  pending  a  renewed  application  for
    permission to the Supreme Court.  An application for permission in Khan
    has now been filed with the Supreme Court and therefore the overturning
    of  Sala  remains  stayed.   The  Secretary  of  State   requested   an
    adjournment until the matter is resolved or at least until judgment  is
    given in SM (Algeria).

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Avery relied upon the Rule 24 response and requested an adjournment.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. It is inappropriate to grant an adjournment in these circumstances.  In
    light of Khan, Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal
    on the basis that it was arguably wrong in law for the  judge  to  have
    concluded that he did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 9. The parties both accept that the judge, through no fault  of  his  own,
    erred in law for the reasons set out in Khan.  Accordingly, the  First-
    tier Tribunal does  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  the  appeal  and
    therefore the decision to the contrary of the judge is set aside.

10. The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to allow  substantive
    consideration of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  a  material
error of law.  I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
remit the appeal for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
