

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/03413/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 January 2018                     |           On 9 January 2018         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                           MOJISOLA ABIOLA DESIYE
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms O Ogundipe of Fountain Gate Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 22  March  1981.  She
          entered the UK as a student  in  September  2011.  Her  leave  was
          curtailed to expire on 6 July  2015  when  the  college  lost  its
          licence. The appellant then overstayed and in October 2015 made an
          application for a residence card under the EEA Regulations as  the
          unmarried partner of a  dual  Nigeria  and  Irish  national.  That
          application was refused under reg. 8(5) on 11 March 2016  and  the
          appellant now challenges the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Devittie promulgated on 5 October 2017 dismissing her appeal
          against the respondent's decision.


       2. The respondent considered that there was no evidence to show  when
          cohabitation commenced but observed that the earliest evidence  of
          the relationship was a proxy marriage certificate dated  23  March
          2015. She noted that the only other evidence was in  the  form  of
          bank statements which covered a four-month period between June and
          September  2015.  She  was,  therefore,  not  satisfied  that  the
          appellant had been in a  durable  relationship  akin  to  marriage
          which had subsisted for  at  least  two  years  with  evidence  of
          cohabitation.



       3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant
          appears to have changed the basis of her case and  argued  through
          her representatives that she was entitled to a residence card as a
          family member because  she  was  legally  married.  She  submitted
          various documents confirming  that  a  proxy  marriage  had  taken
          place. The judge observed that these documents had not been placed
          before the respondent who had not, therefore, had  an  opportunity
          to check their authenticity. He stated that in  the  circumstances
          he was not in a position to consider the merits of the claim  that
          the appellant and sponsor  were  married.  He  then  made  various
          observations about  the  documents  which  he  stated  would  have
          impacted upon the weight he  would  have  given  to  them  had  he
          considered them. He proceeded to consider whether the parties were
          in a genuine and durable relationship but concluded  there  was  a
          paucity of evidence to establish that.



       4. Permission was granted by Judge Murray on 26 October 2017  on  the
          basis that the judge had arguably been procedurally unfair  as  he
          had not put the issue of authenticity  to  the  appellant  at  the
          hearing. The matter then came before me on  4  January  2018.  The
          appellant attended the hearing.  The sponsor did not.



      Submissions



       5. Ms Ogundipe submitted that the  appellant's  marriage  certificate
          had been submitted to  the  respondent  and  that  the  judge  had
          therefore been wrong to maintain that it had  been  submitted  for
          the first time shortly before the hearing and that the  respondent
          had been wrong to state in her Rule 24 response that she  had  not
          seen it previously. She submitted  that  it  was  plain  from  the
          decision letter that the respondent had seen the certificate, that
          the supporting documents were part of the certificate and so  must
          have been sent with  the  application  and  that  no  issue  about
          authenticity  had  been  raised  before.  She  argued   that   the
          affidavits of support copied in the appellant's bundle  would  all
          have been sent with the application as they  formed  part  of  the
          marriage certificate.


       6. Mr Avery responded. He pointed out that the application  had  been
          made as an unmarried partner as was  plain  from  the  application
          form. The marriage certificate may have been submitted as evidence
          of a subsisting relationship but there was no evidence to  support
          the submission that the additional documents were  also  submitted
          and the grounds did not maintain they were. Nor was there anything
          on the Home Office file to show that they had been submitted  with
          the application. He submitted that  for  the  appeal  hearing  the
          appellant had changed the basis of her appeal and argued that  she
          was legally married. He submitted that given  the  fact  that  the
          entire basis of the appeal had changed, it was  incumbent  on  the
          appellant to deal with the  fresh  evidence  and  to  resolve  any
          deficiencies within the documents such as those identified by  the
          judge.



       7. Mr Avery submitted that there was no  indication  of  whether  the
          case referred to in the grounds was reported; no  name  was  given
          for it. He repeated that the  grounds  did  not  assert  that  the
          additional documents had been submitted to the respondent or  that
          the judge had been wrong to say that they had not been. There  was
          no challenge to that finding or to the finding on  the  durability
          of the relationship and there was no error or law.



       8. Ms Ogundipe submitted that the judge had failed to  attach  weight
          to the proxy marriage. She submitted  that  he  had  no  right  to
          assert  the  documents  were  not  authentic;  only  the   issuing
          authorities could determine that. The statutory declarations  were
          issued after the marriage which is why they did not bear the  same
          date. She submitted that findings had to be made on  evidence  and
          not just by looking at documents. His decision was based  on  that
          assertion that the documents had not been shown  to  be  authentic
          and as such was wrong. The appellant and sponsor were still living
          together.  The  marriage  was  genuine.  Had  the  appellant  been
          represented by the present solicitors they  would  not  have  made
          such an application.  She  may  have  been  wrongly  advised.  The
          appellant and her husband had been together over  two  years.  The
          husband was at work and so had not attended the hearing.



       9. Ms Ogundipe referred me to a Rule 15(2)(a) application made on  21
          December 2017 which did not appear on my file but which was copied
          in the appellant's bundle. She submitted that there  was  evidence
          in the form of a witness statement from the appellant's mother and
          a tenancy agreement to show cohabitation.



      10. Mr Avery submitted that even if the fresh evidence  was  admitted,
          it did not assist as it had not been before the  judge.  Secondly,
          the  documents  now  adduced  went  to  the  durability   of   the
          relationship but that was an issue not pursued in the grounds.



      11. Ms Ogundipe argued that the court could admit  documents  even  if
          they had not been before the decision maker if they  would  assist
          in the determination of the appeal. She submitted there  had  been
          no adverse finding as to the claimed relationship or about whether
          the appellant and sponsor were together.



      12. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.



      Discussion and Conclusions



      13. I have considered the submissions and the evidence  with  care.  I
          deal first of all with the application to admit  further  evidence
          under rule 15  (2)(a)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules.
          Although this had not  made  it  to  the  Tribunal  file,  it  was
          included in the bundle of documents submitted by  Ms  Ogundipe  at
          the commencement of the hearing. The evidence the appellant  seeks
          to adduce consists of a witness  statement  from  the  appellant's
          mother, a copy of the mother's tenancy  agreement  dated  15  June
          2009 and a copy of a tenancy agreement in the name of the  sponsor
          and the sponsor dated 25 November 2017. The  application  contains
          no explanation for why the documents from the  appellant's  mother
          could not have been provided for the hearing or why they were  not
          sent to the respondent with  the  application.  I  note  that  the
          initial hearing  listed  for  August  2017  was  notified  to  the
          appellant in March 2017; it was then adjourned at the  request  of
          her sponsor for one month. There was ample opportunity  to  gather
          the evidence for the appeal. The more recent  document  post-dates
          the appeal hearing. Despite these difficulties, there having  been
          no objection raised by Mr Avery who had the  opportunity  to  make
          submissions on them, I admit the evidence. I shall deal later with
          whether they assist the appellant.



      14.  I  now  turn  to  the  grounds  and  the  submissions  made.  The
          application to the respondent was  for  a  residence  card  as  an
          extended family member and not as a spouse. That is plain from the
          application form which is contained in the respondent's bundle and
          on which the appellant maintains that she  is  "not  yet  married"
          (possibly she means no civil marriage has taken  place)  and  from
          the accompanying letter from her representatives dated  1  October
          2015. Ms Ogundipe submitted that her firm of solicitors would  not
          have made such an application and she suggested that the appellant
          acted on advice given to her by her  previous  representatives.  I
          have no evidence of the circumstances in which the application was
          made. There is no evidence from the appellant about this and I am,
          therefore, not prepared to accept  Ms  Ogundipe's  submissions  on
          this point.  I have seen no evidence of any complaint made by  the
          appellant against her  previous  representatives  and  indeed  she
          seemed content to instruct them to represent her  at  the  hearing
          and to make an application for permission to appeal. I, therefore,
          proceed on the basis that it was  her  decision  to  apply  as  an
          unmarried partner. I note that both she and the sponsor signed the
          application form  and  confirmed  the  contents  to  be  true  and
          accurate. The respondent considered the application on that  basis
          and appeal was lodged on that basis.



      15. The problem arose at the hearing. On 24 July  2017,  a  bundle  of
          documents was received by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  bundle
          contained a witness statement from the  appellant  dated  17  July
          2017 maintaining that she was married to the sponsor and should be
          issued a residence  card  as  a  spouse.  There  were  also  three
          statutory declarations sworn before a court in Ibadan on 23  March
          2015, three further copies of the same documents certified  on  19
          June 2017 as being true copies and a letter / statement  dated  19
          June 2017 from the registrar who oversaw the marriage on 21  March
          2015. It is the appellant's case that these documents were sent to
          the respondent with her EEA  application.  That  was  emphatically
          confirmed by Ms Ogundipe in her submissions before me although she
          was unable to point to any evidence to support that.



      16. The judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  bundle  contained  these
          documents and he then said: "It seems to  be  the  case  therefore
          that the respondent has not had the opportunity  to  consider  the
          authenticity of the documents submitted in the  appeal  bundle  to
          demonstrate that a  lawful  proxy  marriage  has  taken  place...I
          consider that this is a decision to be made in the first  instance
          by the respondent upon consideration of all the relevant evidence.
          It is clear from the amended grounds of appeal that even  at  that
          stage the documents now relied upon for the  proxy  marriage  were
          not placed before the respondent" (at 9). I note  that  the  judge
          refers to documents from Ghana at paragraphs 8 and 9 but  this  is
          plainly a typographical error and does not impact upon the outcome
          of the appeal. I note that the representatives themselves maintain
          that error in paragraph 5 of ground 1.



      17. The appellant's grounds and her representative's submissions  take
          issue with those  comments  and  essentially  argue  that  as  the
          respondent had not raised the issue of authenticity, the judge had
          no authority to do so and that he erred in dismissing  the  appeal
          on the basis that the proxy marriage  certificate  raised  serious
          questions as to  authenticity.  It  was  also  argued  that  these
          matters should have been put to  the  appellant  at  the  hearing.
          Issue was also taken with the observations the  judge  made  about
          the documents themselves and  it  was  argued  that  the  marriage
          certificate was not given due weight as evidence  of  a  committed
          relationship.



      18. I take the complaint  about  the  authenticity  of  the  documents
          first; this was the appellant's main argument both in her  grounds
          and at the hearing before me. Tied in with this was  the  question
          of  whether  the  documents  had  been  included  with   the   EEA
          application form completed on 29 September 2015.



      19. I have noted the submission that the  documents  would  have  been
          sent with the application form as they formed part and  parcel  of
          the marriage certificate but there is no evidence to support  that
          contention; indeed, the evidence points in the opposite direction.
          First,   the   letter   from   the   appellant's   representatives
          accompanying the application form lists all  the  documents  sent,
          and I accept that the marriage certificate  itself  was  included;
          but the sworn statements, registrar's letter and certified  copies
          are not mentioned. Secondly, the documents received and considered
          by the respondent are listed  in  her  decision  letter  and  once
          again, there is no mention of these additional  documents.  Third,
          had they been submitted to the respondent, I consider  they  would
          have been reproduced in the respondent's appeals  bundle  as  have
          all the other documents listed in the application form.  Fourthly,
          and most significantly, they could not have all been sent with the
          application because that was made in 2015 and  at  least  four  of
          these documents post-date  that.  Whilst  Ms  Ogundipe  forcefully
          submitted that the later documents  had  different  dates  to  the
          marriage certificate because they were prepared subsequently,  she
          apparently  completely  overlooked  the  fact  that  four  of  the
          documents are dated 19 June 2017 (I accept that the judge  wrongly
          cited a date of 17 June 2017 at paragraph 10 of his  determination
          but nothing turns on that). It would not have  been  possible  for
          them to have been served  with  the  application  form  two  years
          previously and, indeed, if they had  been,  that  would  certainly
          give rise to serious  issues  about  their  reliability.  I  find,
          therefore,  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  state  that   the
          respondent had not seen  the  documents  supporting  the  marriage
          certificate prior to receiving the bundle for the  hearing  before
          the First-tier Tribunal.


      20. Ms Ogundipe also argued that the respondent would not have  issued
          a  "Certificate  of  Application"   (confirmation   of   the   EEA
          application) had all the documents not been submitted. I  fail  to
          see any merit in that submission. Given that the  application  was
          made as an unmarried partner, the issue of the validity of a proxy
          marriage was not an issue  so  it  mattered  not  whether  it  was
          submitted or not. In any event, I have already explained above why
          I  do  not  accept  that  all  the  documents  were  sent  to  the
          respondent.



      21. I do not read the respondent's Rule 24  response  as  Ms  Ogundipe
          did. The observation that "the First-tier Tribunal took account of
          the fact that the appellant had provided the documents in relation
          to the proxy marriage with the appeal hearing bundle" is simply  a
          statement of fact and in any event even it implied the  respondent
          had not seen the documents previously, that is what I have  found.
          There was no error of law in the judge so finding.


      22. The next part of the complaint turns on the judge's  view  of  the
          documents. In fact, what he stated at paragraph 9 was not that  he
          did not find the documents to be authentic but that the respondent
          had not had an opportunity to consider that for  herself.  It  was
          argued for the appellant that the respondent had  not  raised  any
          issue with the authenticity of these documents but if she did  not
          have them before her, it is difficult to see how  she  could  have
          done so. The emphasis placed on this comment is unwarranted.



      23. At paragraph 10 the judge states that "it would not  be  competent
          for me to consider the merits of this appeal on the basis that the
          parties are in a proxy marriage". Given that the  application  was
          on the basis  that  there  had  been  no  marriage  and  that  the
          appellant was seeking a residence card as  an  unmarried  partner,
          that is a view he was entitled to take. Had the  appellant  wished
          to change the basis of her application, it was open to her to make
          the  appropriate  application  to  the  respondent  with  all  the
          relevant documentary evidence. Indeed, that course  of  action  is
          still open to her.



      24. What the judge adds in paragraph 10 is essentially an "aside".  He
          sets out his observations on the  documents,  pointing  out  valid
          concerns which the appellant  may  wish  to  engage  with  in  any
          further application she chooses to make but his decision  was  not
          based on these observations. Indeed, he had  just  made  it  plain
          that he was not prepared to determine the issue of the legality of
          marriage. I find that his comments have been taken out of context,
          given far more emphasis than they merit and have no bearing at all
          on the issue which he did base his decision -  the  durability  of
          the relationship.



      25. The grounds have little to  say  about  his  conclusions  on  that
          matter. It is only maintained that he should have given weight  to
          the certificate of proxy marriage and should have viewed that as a
          commitment to the relationship. Whilst that  may  have  lent  some
          weight to the evidence had there been anything substantial to show
          cohabitation, regrettably as the judge found, there was a  paucity
          of evidence to support the claimed  relationship.  The  respondent
          had been provided with bank statements which covered just a  four-
          month period. The evidence before the judge was not a lot  better.
          For the sponsor, there is just  a  single  payslip  for  September
          2015, one for May 2017, a letter of employment from September 2015
          which provides no  address,  one  P60  for  April  2017  and  bank
          statements for April - July 2017,  April  2016  October  2015  and
          December 2015. For the appellant, there are two P60s  dated  April
          2017, bank statements from mid June - mid August 2015, one week in
          September 2015 and a letter  from  Barclaycard  from  April  2017.
          There are four undated photographs, three of which were  taken  on
          the same day. There are no  supporting  statements  from  friends.
          There is no evidence that they were both in Nigeria in  2014  when
          they claimed to have met. Given that the appellant claims to  have
          lived at that address even during her student days,  and  to  have
          spent over two  years  there  with  her  partner,  the  judge  was
          entitled to take the view that more evidence of  cohabitation  was
          required. The appellant has sought to adduce a statement from  her
          mother to support the claim of  cohabitation.  No  explanation  is
          provided for why that evidence could not have been  placed  before
          the judge or why her mother could not attend the hearing. Only the
          mother is named as tenant on the tenancy agreement. There were  no
          witnesses to the signatures on that document. There is no evidence
          from landlord that permission given for further  tenants  to  live
          there or of who those tenants are.  Further,  when  the  appellant
          completed her application form and was asked to list relatives  in
          the UK, she only referred to her partner and not to her mother (on
          p. 84 of 91).


      26. The grounds complain that the judge should  have  found  that  the
          proxy  marriage  certificate   was   evidence   of   a   committed
          relationship but a certificate of itself does  not  demonstrate  a
          durable  relationship.   It   certainly   cannot   show   that   a
          relationship is subsisting. The judge noted inconsistencies in the
          evidence  and  noted   the   limited   documentary   evidence   of
          cohabitation. Taking account of all the circumstances and what  he
          rightly described as "a paucity of evidence", he was  entitled  to
          find  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  a  durable
          relationship. Given that finding, Ms Ogundipe is wrong to maintain
          that no adverse findings were made on the relationship.



      27. In conclusion, therefore, I find that the judge did not  make  any
          errors of law which necessitate the setting aside of his decision.
          As mentioned earlier, it is open to the appellant to make a  fresh
          application on the basis of her marriage should she wish to do so,
          to gather together meaningful documentary evidence in  support  of
          it and to resolve any  obvious  deficiencies  in  the  documentary
          evidence submitted to the Tribunal.


      28. Decision


      29. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  any  errors  of  law.  The
          decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.



      30. Anonymity



      31. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and in any event see no
          reason to do so.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 5 January 2018




