
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/03841/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 March 2018                           |On 11 April 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                              mr Jatinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Kiss, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India who was born on  5  October  1980.
    On 12 August 2015 the appellant applied for retained right of permanent
    residence card as a non-EEA national who was married to an EEA national
    who had been exercising treaty rights in the UK for  five  years  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 21 March 2016  on
    the basis that the appellant had not provided  sufficient  evidence  to
    show that his EEA spouse ('the sponsor')  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights for a continuous period of five years.



The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 21 August 2017  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Samimi dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision and
    on  29  January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 5. The grounds of appeal are in essence that  the  sponsor  satisfies  the
    conditions of the  EEA  Regulations  as,  although  she  did  not  work
    continuously during the relevant five year period, she was ill and  had
    two pregnancies and therefore was unable to work. These periods do  not
    affect her continuity of residence. Reliance is placed on the  case  of
    Weldemichael and another (St Prix C-507/12;  effect)  [2015]  UKUT  540
    IAC.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6.  Prior  to  the   commencement   of   the   hearing   the   appellant's
    representative, Mr Choda, who  had  attended  for  the  hearing  became
    unwell and was unable to represent the appellant. I was  informed  that
    there was no application to adjourn the hearing. The appellant and  the
    sponsor both had court appointed interpreters. I noted that  the  court
    file no  longer  had  Mr  Choda  recorded  as  representative.  At  the
    commencement of the hearing I checked with the appellant that he wished
    to proceed and explained that he  could  request  an  adjournment.  The
    appellant indicated that he did not  want  to  adjourn  and  wanted  to
    proceed without his representative.

 7. The appellant made lengthy  submissions  through  the  interpreter.  He
    confirmed that the sponsor did not work for 3 years between  2010-2014.
    He told me that his wife had had numerous  problems  including  anaemia
    which was very debilitating and meant  that  she  required  extra  care
    during her pregnancies. His wife was advised by  the  agency  that  she
    worked through to take her p45  and  there  would  be  no  issues  with
    returning to work after giving birth. There were numerous problems with
    the pregnancy and after the birth she was very weak and took longer  to
    recover. In March 2102 they  went  to  India  and  discovered  she  was
    pregnant. On return to the UK she was told she still  had  anaemia  and
    had the same problems as in the first pregnancy. His wife also suffered
    from haemorrhoids  which  was  severe  and  caused  problems  with  her
    walking. There were  health  problems  continuously  during  the  whole
    period. They did not ask for sick notes at the time. His wife still has
    health problems now and has been given sick notes for various  periods.
    She worked for some months in 2014, some  months  in  2015  and  for  a
    couple of months in 2016.

 8. Mrs Kiss submitted that the  appellant  has  to  demonstrate  that  the
    sponsor satisfied the requirements of the  Regulations  in  the  period
    23/8/2010 - 23/8/2015. It was accepted that she was  a  worker  at  the
    beginning of the period. The evidence that was available was  that  the
    sponsor stopped working  in  April  2010.  The  Regulations  allow  for
    periods when a person is not working. The maximum limit  for  a  person
    who is not working because of pregnancy is 12  months.  This  appellant
    had significantly more time off - she was not  working  between  August
    2010 (the time when the 5 year period commenced) and April 2014. During
    this period she had 2 pregnancies which can account for a maximum of 24
    months. She drew attention to the fact that on the birth certificate of
    the sponsor's second child the sponsor's  occupation  was  recorded  as
    full time mother. If the sponsor had been able to provide  evidence  of
    serious ill health that prevented her from working during the remaining
    periods then the exemption would also apply. However  on  the  evidence
    that was produced there was no evidence that she was unfit to work.  In
    2016 the sponsor had asked her GP to  provide  evidence  that  she  was
    unable to work. The GP was unable to confirm this stating only that she
    was unfit from 20 April 2016 onwards and  not  before  that  date.  The
    judge considered the evidence carefully and found  that  because  there
    was no medical evidence the sponsor did not satisfy the Regulations.

 9. She referred to the medical evidence and submitted  that  the  evidence
    did not suggest a serious illness throughout the relevant periods  that
    incapacitated the sponsor to the extent she could not work. She  had  3
    years off out of the five year period.

Discussion

10. In order to satisfy the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the  EEA
    Regulations the appellant has to demonstrate that he is a family member
    of an EEA National who has resided in the UK  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years.  For  the  purposes  of
    this appeal the sponsor was said to be exercising treaty rights  as  an
    employed worker. It was accepted by the appellant's representative,  as
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 9, that the  appellant
    had not qualified for permanent residence. The grounds of appeal do not
    challenge  that  concession.  However,  the   appellant   was   granted
    permission to appeal and the judge has considered the medical  evidence
    so I will ignore that concession for the purpose of considering whether
    there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

11. Although the judge has not made a specific finding in respect of the  2
    pregnancies this case  turns  on  whether  or  not  the  appellant  can
    demonstrate that the sponsor was unable to work as a result of  serious
    ill health. The judge considered the medical evidence:

         "8 I have had regard to the medical evidence from Gravesend Medical
         Centre dated 2.6.2016. This confirm that  the  Sponsor  was  issued
         with MED3 from 20.4.2016 onwards and never before that. The  letter
         confirms that the Sponsor had been seen in Maidstone hospital for a
         recurrent eye problem form October 2013 - March 2014 and  that  she
         had an outpatient appointment at Haematology on 30.3.2016. The  two
         hospital stays been for an iron infusion and  on  for  Colonoscopy.
         There is no evidence that the Sponsor has been suffering  from  ill
         health so as to incapacitate her  from  any  form  of  genuine  and
         effective employment. I do not find that the EEA Sponsor  has  been
         exercising treaty rights as a qualified person in  accordance  with
         the EEA Regulations for 5 continuous years. Accordingly  I  do  not
         find that the Appellant has qualified for  permanent  residence  in
         accordance with the EEA Regulations.  This  has  been  accepted  by
         counsel on the appellant's behalf."

12. Unfortunately for the appellant there was no evidence submitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (to support the  assertion  that  the  sponsor  was
    unfit to work) that  demonstrated  that  her  illnesses  were  of  such
    severity that she was unable to work during  the  relevant  period.  No
    sick notes were obtained. The medical evidence is  insufficient  as  it
    does not indicate that the sponsor was unfit to work over  the  lengthy
    period. Without such evidence, after allowing for the two  pregnancies,
    there remains a considerable period of time during  which  the  sponsor
    was not exercising treaty rights. The judge considered all the  medical
    evidence. The conclusions reached were  ones  that  were  open  to  the
    judge. There was no material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

Decision

There was no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the respondent stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 9 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw













