
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03777/2018
                                                               EA/03779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th June 2019                     | On 10th June 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                            MR raja naseer ahmed
                              MRS KHATOON BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellants.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, with permission, appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  who, in a determination promulgated on 25th  March
    2019 dismissed the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent  to  refuse  their  applications  for   residence  cards  as
    confirmation of their right to reside in the United Kingdom as a family
    member of  a  British  Citizen  pursuant  to  Regulation  9  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("hereinafter
    referred to as the 2016 Regulations").

 2. The history of the application is set out in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Appellants are nationals of  Pakistan.  Their  son,
    (hereinafter referred to as "sponsor")  became  a  naturalised  British
    citizen on 5 January 2012 as a result of his marriage but that marriage
    broke down, he separated  from  his  wife  in  2012.  They  were  later
    divorced in December 2015.

 3. The Appellants have been visiting their family  relatives  residing  in
    the UK since 2003 and it is common ground that on the  expiry  of  each
    visa they returned to Pakistan. The last visit made was on the 16th May
    2015 and they left the UK on the 4th October 2015.

 4. It is also asserted on behalf of the  appellants  that  their  son  has
    provided money to them for their support by way of money transfers  and
    had been supporting his parents since 2015. They  had  previously  been
    supported by his brother between the years 2013-2015.

 5.  It is said that following finalisation of  his  divorce,  the  sponsor
    made a decision to make a fresh start and live and work in  Italy  (see
    witness statement at paragraph 6). It was also suggested that as he had
    been unable to find employment in the UK and  having  had  contacts  in
    Italy, he thought he would have better job prospects. He had previously
    visited Italy in 2015.

 6. The sponsor entered Italy in February 2016 began employment on 1  March
    2016 until July 2017. He continued to financially support  his  parents
    (see money transfer receipts from April 2016 - October 2016).

 7. The appellants arrived in Italy on 1 December  2016  and  began  living
    with their son until 21 June 2017. It is said  that  in  May  2017  the
    applicants  became  "very  unwell  and  were  unable  to   look   after
    themselves" and thus their son had to take a week off work to care  for
    his parents. In his witness statement he sets out that  there  were  no
    close family members Italy to offer such support. As a result of  this,
    it is asserted that the sponsor was sacked from his  employment  on  30
    May 2017. As he was unable to obtain any further work  and  as  he  was
    supporting his parents, he returned to the UK on  21  June  2017  along
    with his parents.

 8. The appellants were granted Italian residency for a period of 10  years
    from 21 June 2017 until 12 April 2028.

 9. On the 10th November  2017  the  appellants  made  an  application  for
    residence cards as a confirmation of  their  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom.

10. In a decision dated the 10th  May  2018  the  Respondent  refused  that
    application. The FtTJ set out the reasons briefly at paragraph 7 of his
    decision. In summary, the Respondent took into account that  he  was  a
    naturalised British citizen and formed the view that the United Kingdom
    was his country of choice and thus his staying Italy was only  intended
    to be temporary. His claim that he chose to go  live  in  Italy  for  a
    fresh start after his divorce was not credible when  the  marriage  had
    broken up four years before he went to Italy. It was  also  not  deemed
    credible that the sponsor would be more likely to find  work  in  Italy
    rather than remaining in the United Kingdom. This was also evidenced by
    the fact he could find work within less than one month of returning  to
    the United Kingdom. Furthermore, had the sponsor genuinely  transferred
    the centre of his life to Italy, he would have been  expected  to  have
    stayed in Italy to find employment rather than returning to the  United
    Kingdom. Thus, it was concluded that the stay in Italy  was  to  enable
    the appellants to enter the United Kingdom under  the  EEA  Regulations
    and therefore circumventing the Immigration Rules.

11. The Appellant issued grounds of appeal and the appeal came  before  FtT
    on the 19th February 2019.

12. In a decision promulgated on the 25th March 2019,  the  FtTJ  dismissed
    their appeals. The judge's findings and assessment of the legal  issues
    are set out at paragraphs 20 (a) and  (b).  He  accepted,  as  did  the
    respondent, the sponsor had worked in Italy and lived there  but  found
    that he had no family contacts in Italy and it only visited  Italy  two
    weeks before deciding to move there in 2016. The judge considered  that
    he  had  not  demonstrated  connections  in  Italy,  nor  that  he  had
    researched jobs in the labour market in Italy or that he had  made  any
    attempt to integrate. The judge found that his marriage had broken down
    in 2012 and that he continued to live and work in the UK after that for
    a period of four years. Whilst the decree was issued in  December  2015
    he had been living separately from his  wife  and  family  for  several
    years before that. He also found that  the  appellants'  and  sponsor's
    entire family are in the UK and  there  was  no  family  connection  to
    Italy. He did not expressly  say  so  at  paragraph  20  (a),  but  the
    findings appear to indicate that he did not consider that the centre of
    the British citizens life are transferred to the EEA  State.  Paragraph
    20 (b) considered whether the purpose of residence in the EEA State was
    a means of circumventing the immigration rules. The judge accepted that
    the appellants had a  good  immigration  history.  He  also  took  into
    account that all the appellants' children were settled in  the  UK  and
    were British citizens. He reached the conclusion that  as  the  sponsor
    returned to the same property after a "relatively short  period  away",
    the fact that it had obtained a job immediately upon return,  the  lack
    of links to Italy and no reasonable explanation  as  to  why  he  would
    choose to go to Italy when his daughter  and  family  are  in  the  UK,
    demonstrated that the respondent had shown that "the real motivation to
    move to  Italy was to attempt to bring his ageing  parents  permanently
    into the UK and to circumvent the Immigration Rules."

13. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by FtTJ Pooler on all grounds.

14. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Waheed relied upon the grounds in part  as
    set out in the papers. He supplemented those written grounds with  oral
    submissions. Insofar as it was argued by  Mr  Clarke  that  those  oral
    submissions went beyond the grounds, I reached the  conclusion  at  the
    hearing that the submissions made were consistent in broad  terms  with
    the grounds, in particular ground 2 ( c)  and (d) and  paragraph  3  at
    page 5 of the grounds which expressly challenged paragraph 20.

15. I should also record that Mr Waheed did not seek to rely on paragraph 2
    of the grounds which made reference to the issue of whether there was a
    concession made on behalf of the appellants as set out at paragraph  4.
    As he stated, the issues under consideration with those set  out  under
    the Regulations. Furthermore, as Mr  Clarke  submitted,  where  it  was
    recorded that the representative for the appellant  conceded  that  the
    appellant would not be to benefit from the EEA Regulations if the judge
    found there was to be an abuse of free movement  rights,  this  was  in
    fact a proper interpretation of the Regulations.

16. There was no Rule 24 response on behalf of the  respondent  however  Mr
    Clarke made oral submissions and also provided a copy of  the  decision
    in O and B in support of those submissions. In  essence,  he  submitted
    that was no material error of law in the decision of the FtTJ  who  had
    regard to the evidence. I shall incorporate the  advocates  submissions
    in my analysis of the issues relevant to this appeal.

Discussion:

17. The core issue in this case is correct interpretation of  Regulation  9
    of the 2016 Regulations which provides as follows: -

    '9. -    (2)  The conditions are that-


            (a)   BC-


                (i)    is residing in  an  EEA  State  as  a  worker,  self-
                employed person, self-sufficient person or a student, or  so
                resided immediately before returning to the United  Kingdom;
                or


                (ii)   has acquired the right of permanent residence  in  an
                EEA State;


            (b)   F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and


            (c)   F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


         (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State  is  or
            was genuine include-


            (a)   whether the centre of BC's life transferred  to  the  EEA
                State;


            (b)   the length of F and  BC's  joint  residence  in  the  EEA
                State;


            (c)   the nature and quality of the F and BC's accommodation in
                the EEA State, and whether  it  is  or  was  BC's  principal
                residence;


            (d)   the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;


            (e)   whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC  was
                in the EEA State.


         (4)  This Regulation does not apply-


            (a)   where the purpose of the residence in the EEA  State  was
                as a means for circumventing any immigration  laws  applying
                to non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise  be  subject
                (such as any applicable requirement under the  1971  Act  to
                have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or


            (b)   to a person who is only  eligible  to  be  treated  as  a
                family member as  a  result  of  Regulation  7(3)  (extended
                family members treated as family members).'


18. The origin of rights for family members of British Citizens on re-entry
    to the United Kingdom having exercised treaty rights in another  Member
    State comes not from Directive 2004/38/EC  but  from  the  case  of  C-
    370/90, Surinder Singh.

19. The Court of Justice said this: -

         "19  A national of a Member State might be  deterred  from  leaving
         his country of origin in order to pursue an activity as an employed
         or self-employed person as envisaged by the Treaty in the territory
         of another Member State if, on returning to  the  Member  State  of
         which he is a national in order to pursue an activity there  as  an
         employed or self-employed person, the conditions of his  entry  and
         residence were not at least equivalent  to  those  which  he  would
         enjoy under the Treaty or secondary law in the territory of another
         Member State.


         20   He would in particular be deterred from so doing if his spouse
         and children were not also permitted to enter  and  reside  in  the
         territory of his Member State of origin under conditions  at  least
         equivalent to those granted them by Community law in the  territory
         of another Member State.


         21   It follows that a national of a Member State who has  gone  to
         another Member State in order to work there as an  employed  person
         pursuant to Article 48 of  the  Treaty  and  returns  to  establish
         himself in order to pursue an activity as a self-employed person in
         the territory of the Member State of which he is a national has the
         right, under Article 52 of the Treaty, to  be  accompanied  in  the
         territory of the latter State by his spouse, a national of  a  non-
         member country, under the same  conditions  as  are  laid  down  by
         Regulation No 1612/68, Directive 68/360 or Directive 73/148,  cited
         above.


         22   Admittedly, as the United Kingdom submits,  a  national  of  a
         Member State enters and resides in the territory of that  State  by
         virtue of the rights attendant upon  his  nationality  and  not  by
         virtue of those conferred on him by Community law.  In  particular,
         as is provided, moreover, by Article 3 of the  Fourth  Protocol  to
         the European Convention on Human Rights, a State may not expel  one
         of its own nationals or deny him entry to its territory.


         23   However, this  case  is  concerned  not  with  a  right  under
         national law but with the  rights  of  movement  and  establishment
         granted to a Community national  by  Articles  48  and  52  of  the
         Treaty. These rights cannot be fully effective if such a person may
         be deterred from exercising them by obstacles raised in his or  her
         country of origin to the entry and residence of his or her  spouse.
         Accordingly, when a Community national who has availed  himself  or
         herself of those rights returns to his or her  country  of  origin,
         his or her spouse must enjoy at least the same rights of entry  and
         residence as would be granted to him or her under Community law  if
         his or her spouse chose to  enter  and  reside  in  another  Member
         State. Nevertheless, Articles 48  and  52  of  the  Treaty  do  not
         prevent Member States from applying to foreign spouses of their own
         nationals' rules on entry and residence more favourable than  those
         provided for by Community law.


         24   As regards the  risk  of  fraud  referred  to  by  the  United
         Kingdom,  it  is  sufficient  to  note  that,  as  the  Court   has
         consistently held (see in particular the judgments in  Case  115/78
         Knoors v Secretary of State for Economic Affairs  [1979]  ECR  399,
         paragraph 25,  and  Case  C-61/89  Bouchoucha  [1990]  ECR  I-3551,
         paragraph 14), the facilities created by the Treaty cannot have the
         effect of allowing the persons who benefit from them to  evade  the
         application of  national  legislation  and  of  prohibiting  Member
         States from taking the measures necessary to prevent such abuse."


20. I have been referred to the  decision  of  O  and  B  v  Minister  voor
    Immigratie,  Intergratie  en  Asiel  [2014]  QB  1163  by   Mr   Clarke
    (hereinafter referred to as "O and B").

21. The general conclusion of the Court in O and B is as follows:

         "Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted as  meaning  that  where  a
         Union citizen has created or strengthened  a  family  life  with  a
         third-country national during genuine residence, pursuant to and in
         conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)  and
         Article 16(1) and (2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
         Parliament and of the Council of 29 April  2004  on  the  right  of
         citizens of the Union and their family members to move  and  reside
         freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member   States   amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
         68/360/EEC,   72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,    75/34/EEC,    75/35/EEC,
         90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, in a Member State other  than
         that of which he is a national, the provisions  of  that  directive
         apply by analogy where that Union citizen returns, with the  family
         member in question, to his Member State of origin.  Therefore,  the
         conditions for granting a derived right of residence  to  a  third-
         country national who is a family member of that Union  citizen,  in
         the latter's Member State of origin, should not, in  principle,  be
         more strict than those provided for by that directive for the grant
         of a derived right of residence to a third-country national who  is
         a family member of a Union citizen who has exercised his  right  of
         freedom of movement by becoming established in a Member State other
         than the Member State of which he is a national."


22. In Surinder Singh, the European Court of  Justice  confirmed  that  the
    rights for family members did not include situations  of  an  abuse  of
    rights, stating in paragraph 24 as follows:

         "As regards the risk of fraud referred to by the United Kingdom, it
         is sufficient to note that, as the Court has consistently held (see
         in particular the judgements in Case 155/78 Knoors v  Secretary  of
         State for Economic Affairs [1979] ECR 399, paragraph 25, and Case C-
         61/89 Bouchoucha [1990] ECR I-3551, paragraph 14),  the  facilities
         created by the Treaty  cannot  have  the  effect  of  allowing  the
         persons who benefit from them to evade the application of  national
         legislation and  of  prohibiting  Member  States  from  taking  the
         measures necessary to prevent such abuse."


23. Similarly, the Court stated in O and B in paragraph 22:

         "It should be added that the scope of Union law cannot be  extended
         to cover abuses  (see,  to  that  effect,  C-110/99  Emsland-Starke
         [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 51, and Case C-303/08 Bozkurt  [2010]
         ECR I-13445, paragraph 47). Proof of such an abuse requires, first,
         a combination of objective circumstances in which,  despite  formal
         observance of the conditions laid down by the European Union rules,
         the purpose of those rules has not been achieved, and, secondly,  a
         subjective  element  consisting  in  the  intention  to  obtain  an
         advantage from the European Union rules  by  artificially  creating
         the conditions laid down for obtaining it (Case C-364/10) Hungary v
         Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58).


24. Therefore, in order to qualify under Regulation 9, an applicant and his
    or her family member must have resided in  another  member  state;  and
    secondly, that residence must have been genuine. The  approach  of  the
    CJEU is whether the EU national would be discouraged from  leaving  his
    state of nationality to exercise  his  right  of  residence  under  the
    Treaty owing to an uncertainty over whether he can  continue  a  family
    life which has been created or strengthened during a genuine residence.

25. The FtTJ was satisfied that the sponsor  had  resided  in  Italy  as  a
    worker (see paragraph 11 and 20 (a)) and thus the judge  was  therefore
    required to consider whether  the  parties  had  genuinely  established
    themselves in Italy.

26. In his analysis, it appears that the  FtTJ  did  not  accept  that  the
    centre of the sponsor's life transferred  to  the  EEA  State  for  the
    reasons set out at paragraph  20(a).  He  did  not  make  reference  to
    Regulation 9(3) at either that paragraph or  earlier  in  the  decision
    when making reference to the EEA Regulations. The only  reference  made
    was to Regulation 9(4) (see paragraphs 12 - 13).

27. Mr Clarke submits that whilst  the  judge  made  no  reference  to  the
    relevant case law of the CJEU he applied the substance of the  decision
    in O and B. In his submissions he directed the Tribunal's attention  to
    specific paragraphs within that decision notably paragraphs 50 -58.  He
    submitted that the decision in O and B was distinct from  the  decision
    in Akrich and that what was of relevance was evidence  of  settling  in
    the host state (paragraph 53) and that  only  genuine  residence  would
    qualify (paragraph 54 - 56).  He further submitted that at paragraph 58
    the decision set out the  test  for  an  abuse  of  rights  by  way  of
    artificially creating the conditions and even  if  the  appellants  had
    resided with the sponsor this can still be sufficient to support a test
    of abuse of rights.

28. Mr Clarke therefore submitted that the judge  found  that  the  sponsor
    complied with Regulation 7 but that that did not disclose an  intention
    to "settle". When it was highlighted to him that the FtTJ had  made  no
    reference to the length of residence in the host state by the  sponsor,
    Mr Clarke submitted that it was implicit in his general  findings  that
    he had lived there in compliance with Regulation 7 although he accepted
    that had not been part of his reasoning. He further submitted that  the
    judge found no evidence of integration and dealt with the issue of  the
    lapse of time between the sponsor  and  his  wife  separating  and  him
    leaving the UK to live in Italy and that there was no explanation as to
    why he chose Italy when his other family members lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom. They were not perverse findings and that  this  is  consistent
    with the reasoning set out in O and B at paragraph 51.

29. The factors set out in Regulation 9(3)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
    state that they are relevant to whether residence in the EEA  State  is
    or was genuine. However, it becomes  clear  from  the  summary  of  the
    relevant case law that the test of whether the British citizens  centre
    of life had  transferred  to  the  EEA  state  and  the  other  factors
    identified in Regulation 9(3) were drawn from the opinion  of  Advocate
    General Sharpston in the case of O.  When the Grand Chamber went on  to
    decide the case in O and B it  did  not  follow  or  approve  the  test
    recommended by Advocate General Sharpston. The Grand Chamber emphasised
    that failure to confirm a derived right of residence on a family member
    on return to the Member State of nationality may create an obstacle  to
    the exercise of rights of free movement. At [51] the only test laid out
    by the CJEU was that residence  in  the  host  Member  State  has  been
    "sufficiently genuine to  as  to  enable  that  citizen  to  create  or
    strengthen family life in that Member State." In O and B, the CJEU  did
    not seek to lay down a strict set of criteria  required  to  show  that
    residence in the host Member State was 'genuine and effective'. Some of
    the factors outlined in Regulation  9(3)  might  be  relevant  to  that
    assessment, but they cannot be taken as  strict  requirements  for  the
    issue of a  derivative  residence  card  if  the  evidence  shows  that
    residence in the host Member State was a genuine.

30. As I have set out, the  judge  did  not  direct  himself  or  make  any
    reference to Regulation 9(3) and only made reference  to  Regulation  9
    (4) (see paragraphs 12 -  13).  At  paragraph  13  he  made  his  self-
    direction in terms that Regulation 9(4) required him to "consider.  The
    quality of the residence, degree  of  integration  and  the  length  of
    residence ... . This is arguably a wrong  self-direction;  however,  it
    would only be material if his analysis thereafter at paragraph  20  was
    in error.

31. In this context I accept the submission made by Mr Waheed  relevant  to
    ground 3, that when considering the evidence which had been advanced to
    demonstrate a genuine establishment of residence, that the FtTJ did not
    engage with all of that evidence. In  particular,  there  was  evidence
    from the Appellants and the sponsor as to the establishment  of  family
    life in Italy and why that family life had come to an  end.  There  was
    evidence before the FtTJ in the form of a letter dated 9 November  2017
    which set out  the  factual  basis  of  the  chronology  and  expressly
    provided an account as to why the sponsor returned to the  UK  and  the
    circumstances of his parents. This was  referred  to  in  part  in  the
    decision letter and in the witness statements albeit in brief terms.

32. There was some discussion at the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  as
    to whether there had been documentary evidence before the FtTJ  dealing
    with the medical problems. It was plain that it had formed part of  the
    evidence  submitted  to  the  respondent.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
    submissions it was agreed by both advocates that the evidence had  been
    before the FtTJ. However, when considering the  relevant  issues  under
    Regulation that did not form part of the assessment. It is not possible
    to see what evidence was elicited in this respect as the resume of  the
    evidence at paragraph 19 makes no reference to it nor in  the  findings
    of fact and analysis at paragraph 20.

33. The judge did not consider the evidence of the parties in  the  context
    of the nature of the family life in which it was asserted  that  family
    life was not only created in the EEA State but was  also  strengthened.
    Whilst it  was  not  expressly  raised  by  Mr  Waheed,  there  was  no
    consideration of the issue of the dependency by the appellants on their
    son and the evidence of the money transfers which was set  out  in  the
    bundle. There was  reference  within  the  documents  (principally  the
    letter of 9 November 2017 and the witness statements from the  sponsor)
    that he had been financially supporting his parents from 2015  and  did
    so prior to the appellants joining him in Italy, whilst he  resided  in
    Italy  and  thereafter.  The  Italian  authorities  also  granted   the
    appellants a residence permit which must presumably have been based  on
    their acceptance that they were dependent upon the sponsor. That was  a
    further issue which required some consideration within the analysis.

34. Whilst Mr Clarke submitted that it had been open to the judge  to  find
    that there was no evidence of integration, as Mr Waheed submitted  this
    did  not  take  into  account  other  evidence  provided  relating   to
    friendships that he had in Italy prior  to  his  residence  there,  the
    number of jobs that he had obtained and the length of residence. Again,
    those were matters that required further analysis.

35. Regulation 9(3) requires a quantitative evaluation of the residence and
    those  evidential  matters  had  not  been  taken  into  account   when
    undertaking such an assessment and whether it was "genuine".

36. The CJEU did not seek to lay down criteria for assessing  what  factors
    should be taken into account in assessing the quality of the  residence
    over and above noting that the initial three-month period permitted  by
    the directive would not be sufficient. The Grand Chamber's decision  in
    O and B, unlike Regulation 9, makes no  reference  to  any  "centre  of
    life" test, the nature and quality of accommodation,  the  question  of
    principal residence and integration. However, the decision of O  and  B
    at paragraph 54 stated:

         "Where, during the genuine residence of the union  citizen  in  the
         host  member  state,  pursuant  to  and  in  conformity  with   the
         conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)  of  Directive  2004/38,
         family life is created or strengthened in that  member  state,  the
         effectiveness of the rights conferred  on  the  union  citizens  by
         Article 21(1) TFEU requires that the citizen's family in  the  host
         member state may continue on returning to the member state of which
         he is a national, through the grant of a derived right of residence
         to the family member who is a third-country national.  If  no  such
         derived right of residence were granted, that union  citizen  could
         be discouraged from leaving the member  state  of  which  he  is  a
         national in order to exercise his right of residence under  Article
         21(1) TFEU in another member state because he is uncertain  whether
         he will be able to continue in his member state of origin a  family
         life with his immediate family members which has  been  created  or
         strengthened in  the  host  member  state  (see,  to  that  effect,
         paragraphs 35 and 36)."


37. The grounds make reference to  the  issue  of  the  motivation  of  the
    Appellants and Sponsor for making use of free movement rights which  is
    stated to be irrelevant. The court determined in Akrich C-109/01:

         "Where the marriage between a national of  a  member  state  and  a
         national of a non-member  state  is  genuine,  the  fact  that  the
         spouses install themselves in another member  state  in  order,  on
         their return to the member state of which the former is a national,
         to obtain the benefit of rights conferred by community law  is  not
         relevant to an assessment of their legal situation by the competent
         authorities of the latter state."


38. Whilst Mr Clarke submits that the issue of motivation is not  relevant,
    a reading of the jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of  Justice  refers  to
    residence being "genuine", it does not import with it  a  consideration
    of the motives behind that residence in the abuse of rights  sense.  It
    is, in my judgment, a  qualitative  assessment  or  evaluation  of  the
    residence which needs to be undertaken. It  is  in  that  context  that
    intentions are relevant -what was it they intended to do? Could  it  be
    said that the sponsor was properly exercising treaty rights or  was  it
    an extended holiday or was it fixed term employment ( see  decision  of
    Knoch) or were the sponsor and the appellants visiting the residence in
    the host state  and thus artificially creating the conditions laid down
    for obtaining an advantage  form the European Union Rules  ( see  facts
    in  O and B). The focus on cases should be on what actually  occurs  in
    the host member state and for example, if what occurs is a device  such
    as maintaining an address and  only  visiting  infrequently,  then  the
    abuse identified by Mr Clarke at paragraph [58] of O and B may be  made
    out.

39. I agree with the submission made by Mr Waheed that there  were  matters
    of evidence raised in the papers that were relevant in the  qualitative
    assessment as to what had occurred in Italy; not only why  the  sponsor
    left Italy but the evidence as to the provision  of  medical  treatment
    and installation in the host country which was relevant to the issue of
    integration and genuineness of the residence. The judge expressly found
    that there was no attempts  to  integrate  into  Italy  (see  paragraph
    20(a)) but there was evidence that he had friends in  Italy  which  had
    helped him obtain employment and that he had taken on a number of  jobs
    (as specified in  the  letter  9/1//17  and  supported  by  documentary
    evidence). It would have been open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    evidence was insufficient or lacking  in  some  respect  but  what  was
    required was an analysis of that evidence. The same could be said as to
    the medical evidence as set out above.

40. Furthermore, it is also not clear as to whether the judge  applied  the
    right test -that in order to establish an abuse of  rights  the  action
    taken must be at least the primary reason for undertaking the  changes,
    which in this case would mean that taking the  job  in  Italy  was  not
    genuine and moving and establishing himself there for the  long  period
    from February 2016 to July 2017 was also not genuine (see the  decision
    in Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54 and O and B at [58-59].

41. In light of the identified errors, I am satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a  point  of
    law and that the decision should be set aside. Due to the nature of the
    errors of law identified, Mr Waheed submitted that it will be necessary
    for a fresh hearing and for findings of fact be made. I agree with that
    submission.  I have therefore determined  that  the  appeal  should  be
    reheard by the FtT in accordance with the practice statement.

42. For the avoidance of doubt, any legal arguments to be  advanced  before
    the FtT upon remittal should be fully set out in  a  skeleton  argument
    and served on the Tribunal and the other party prior to the hearing. It
    will not be  necessary  to  re-serve  and  file  the  large  bundle  of
    documents already with the Tribunal. Any further evidence  relied  upon
    shall form part of a supplementary bundle.

43. I also note that the judge at paragraph 21 made  the  observation  that
    there were "puzzling matters in the documents supplied by the sponsor".
    That was a reference to the documents set out at paragraphs 17 and  18.
    At the next hearing any inconsistencies relating to documents  must  be
    clarified.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set  aside  and  is  remitted  for  a  fresh
hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  and  in
accordance with the directions given.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                             Date: 5/6/19

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
