
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC/FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03664/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2020                           |On 18 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                        MD TANWIR UL ISLAM CHOWDHURY
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Samuel Ross Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  21  July  2018
    refusing his application for a residence card under Regulation 8 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.   The judge noted, at paragraph 9 of his decision,  that  the  burden  of
    proof was on the appellant,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.   The
    essential issue before the judge was whether there had  been  shown  to
    have existed a relationship of dependency or household membership  when
    the appellant lived in  Bangladesh,  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2011.  The sponsor is his cousin and is  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands.  The appellant had lived in Bangladesh until 2006 and then
    lived in Cyprus until 2009, and thereafter returned to Bangladesh until
    he came to the United Kingdom in 2011.

3.   The judge set out and considered the guidance of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Reyes [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC) and also the guidance from the  Court  of
    Justice in Rahman [2012] CJEU Case - 83/11.

4.   There was a complication, though not one which featured  materially  in
    argument before the judge, that there were two  identical  applications
    by the appellant, the first of which was refused on the date  to  which
    we have referred above and the second on 9 July 2019.   In  the  latter
    refusal the issue of the  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant was conceded.  In the former, the decision  under  challenge,
    there was no allegation that false documents had  been  provided.   The
    judge referred at paragraph 13 of his decision to the respondent having
    determined that the bank statements provided by the appellant from  the
    Islami Bank Bangladesh Limited were fraudulent and said he would return
    to that issue below, but in fact it does not appear that  he  gave  any
    further consideration to the point.

5.   At paragraph 26 the judge identified the key question, that of  whether
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom the appellant  was  dependent  on
    the sponsor.  He went on to describe the evidence as  being  less  than
    compelling, addressing the  Islami  Bank  statements,  which  were  not
    before him and the failure by the appellant to obtain copies  from  the
    bank.  At paragraph 28 of his decision, having considered the  evidence
    of the three witnesses, he observed that  the  sponsor  had  failed  to
    provide any documentary evidence of cash withdrawals to  give  cash  to
    the appellant or of the money transfers and there was  no  evidence  to
    support the sponsor's contention that a number of people had  travelled
    from the Netherlands to Bangladesh to give money to the appellant.

6.   The judge went on at paragraph  29  to  observe  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence and remarked,  having  considered  the  evidence  over  living
    arrangements at 1995, that the  position  when  the  appellant  was  in
    Cyprus was even less convincing.  As a  consequence  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

7.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  against  the
    judge's decision.

8.   Before us Mr Malik relied on his skeleton argument and made four  brief
    and relevant points.  The first concerned the standard of  proof.   The
    reference by the judge at paragraph 27 to "less than compelling" and at
    paragraph 29 to  "less  convincing"  ...  indicated  that  the  correct
    standard of proof had not been applied.  There was  no  burden  on  the
    appellant to show that the evidence was compelling.

9.   The second ground contended that there was an emphasis on the need  for
    documentary proof made by the judge in particular at paragraphs 27  and
    28, remarking on such matters as the absence of documentary evidence of
    cash withdrawals, and the indication  was  that  it  was  necessary  to
    provide documentary evidence to succeed, contrary to  the  guidance  in
    Reyes.

10.  Mr Malik's third point was with regard to paragraph 29 of  the  judge's
    decision.  The judge had referred to evidence being  contradictory  and
    unconvincing but did  not  say  why.   The  evidence  was  set  out  at
    paragraphs 12 to 17.  The judge had not identified the  inconsistencies
    in the evidence but made a bare statement without adequate reasons.

11.  The fourth ground concerned the way in which  the  judge  had  assessed
    the dependency requirement.  He had referred at paragraph 29  to  "real
    material dependency" and it was unclear what  that  meant  and  it  was
    clear that the appellant did not have  to  show  a  dependency  on  the
    sponsor to meet all or most of his needs.

12.  In his submissions Mr Tufan argued the use  of  the  word  "convincing"
    was a means of writing and there was nothing to say  that  the  correct
    standard had not been applied.  The judge had to be convinced.  He  had
    not applied a higher standard.  It could however be read in  that  way.
    There was an issue of no evidence from the bank and also with reference
    to A7 at 5 to 6 which  omitted  reference  to  the  application  on  31
    October 2012 which was refused on 25 September 2013  on  the  basis  of
    producing false bank documents.  In this regard Mr  Tufan  argued  that
    weight should be attached to the guidance in Moneke [2011]  UKUT  00430
    ((IAC) and the need for appellants to provide sufficient  evidence  and
    that was lacking in this case.

13.  In Moneke it had been said that if documentary proof could be  provided
    then it should be.  It also addressed gaps in the evidence, as in  this
    case.

14.  With regard to the issue of reasoning, the reasoning of the  judge  was
    clear.  He had referred to Reyes but the test was  settled  earlier  in
    Lim [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 which referred to Reyes at paragraphs  25  and
    32.  If the appellant could support himself there  was  no  dependency.
    It was unclear what amounts the appellant needed and  no  schedule  had
    been provided.   The  judge  had  referred  to  the  right  test  in  a
    roundabout way.  The Regulation was discretionary for the Secretary  of
    State and the provision of documents went against the appellant.  There
    was no material error of law.

15.  By way of reply Mr Malik argued that the language  used  by  the  judge
    did not apply the correct standard of proof.  The 2012 refusal was  not
    a point the Secretary of State had taken and it was not open to her  to
    take that point now.  There was no  evidence  of  any  false  documents
    submitted by the appellant.  As regards the argument made by  Mr  Tufan
    concerning bare assertions, there were none.  There were three  witness
    statements with statements of truth and all had  given  oral  evidence.
    The judge had to say why he found it contradictory and consistent.  The
    quotation from the Secretary of State's guidance set out at paragraph 7
    of Mr Malik's skeleton was correct and properly to be applied.

16.  After consideration we stated that the appeal would be allowed  to  the
    extent that it would be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
    rehearing and that we would give our reasons later.  This we now do.

17.  We see force in all of the points made by  Mr  Malik.   Describing  the
    evidence as being less than compelling did not conform to  the  correct
    standard of proof earlier set out by the  judge.   Certainly,  evidence
    that does not satisfy the balance of probabilities of test will be less
    than compelling, but the use  of  such  a  phrase  leaves  it  entirely
    unclear how far  short  of  less  than  compelling  the  evidence  was.
    Evidence can be less than  compelling  but  falls  short  of  a  higher
    standard than the balance of probabilities.   In  our  view  the  judge
    clearly erred in law in this respect.

18.  Having cited Reyes, we consider the judge did not properly  apply  that
    guidance to the issue of the kind of evidence required.   Undue  weight
    was placed,  at  paragraphs  27  and  28  and  29  on  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence and  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  matter
    holistically as the guidance in Reyes urges.

19.  We also agree that the judge did not adequately reason  his  conclusion
    that the  oral  evidence  was  contradictory  and  unconvincing.   That
    evidence had been set out.  The judge did not make  clear  findings  on
    that evidence and therefore  did  not  demonstrate  in  what  ways  the
    evidence was contradictory and unconvincing.  We find an error  of  law
    in that regard also.

20.  The final ground in our view is also one of  significance.   The  judge
    found there was no real material dependency and it is  unclear,  as  Mr
    Malik argued, what is meant by that phrase.  The respondent's guidance,
    as set out in Mr Malik's skeleton, makes  it  clear  that  the  correct
    position is as follows "The applicant does not need to be dependent  on
    the EEA national to meet all or most of their  essential  needs".   The
    judge's conclusion failed to take account of that guidance and  placed,
    as noted above, an excessive  emphasis  on  the  receipt  of  financial
    assistance from the sponsor and there is an absence  of  the  necessary
    holistic assessment.

21.  As a consequence, as noted above, we find material  errors  of  law  in
    the judge's decision such that it is set aside in its entirety  and  we
    direct that it be reheard at Taylor House before  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Brewer.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 23 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


