
[pic]



    Upper Tribunal                                                    Appeal
                                                       Number: EA/03236/2017
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated              |
|On 13th September 2017          |On 26th September 2017                      |
|                                |                                            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Rafael Pereira De Almeida
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:      Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to parties as they were before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  namely  that  Mr  Rafael  Almeida  is  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State is the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Brazil.  With  his  mother  they  jointly
    made an application for a residence card as family members of a Sponsor
    who was an EEA national.  The judge at the First-tier  found  that  the
    mother's appeal should be allowed  and  that  she  was  entitled  to  a
    residence card.  The judge went on  to  allow  the  Second  Appellant's
    appeal - Mr Almeida - in part.  The reasoning was  that  he  had  shown
    that the Sponsor was and remained a qualified person but had not  shown
    that he was  dependent  upon  her.   His  failure  to  show  dependency
    disentitled him to a residence card.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed these findings on the basis that it was
    not competent for a judge to allow an appeal  in  part.   There  is  no
    dispute that the mother was entitled to a residence card and there  was
    no challenge to that.  However, given that this Appellant had  not  met
    the necessary criteria the grounds say that the appeal should have been
    dismissed.

 4. The judge who allowed permission to appeal in this case noted that  the
    judge had allowed the appeal, albeit only in part, when  the  reasoning
    suggested it should be dismissed.   While  there  was  no  prescriptive
    wording to describe an appeal outcome it was expected that in terms  of
    Presidential guidance appeals should be allowed or dismissed.

 5. I do not consider this to be in dispute.

 6. Thus the case came before me on the above date where I noted  from  the
    file that the Appellant had in fact been granted a  residence  card  by
    the Home Office.  There was a letter from the agents indicating that he
    did not wish to pursue  this  matter  further.   He  was  unrepresented
    before me with notification of the hearing having  been  given  to  DMA
    Consultancy Services.

 7. Before me Mr Clarke indicated that it had been an  error  by  the  Home
    Office to issue the residence card  and  he  was  not  withdrawing  the
    appeal.  The judge had been correct to find  that  dependency  had  not
    been proved in this case and because of  that  the  judge  should  have
    dismissed the appeal.

Conclusions

 8. The position is that the judge was not entitled to make the findings he
    did in the actual Notice of Decision.  It was  clear  enough  that  the
    Sponsor was a qualified person but there was a need to  show  that  the
    Appellant was dependent upon him.  As the judge said,  his  failure  to
    show dependency disentitled him to a residence  card.   It  would  have
    been legitimate if the judge had simply put this in  the  narrative  of
    the decision and then gone on to dismiss the appeal, but that  was  not
    the way he expressed it and therefore by allowing the  appeal  in  part
    only he made a material error in law.

 9. The Appellant's failure to show dependency should have been  a  crucial
    factor in deciding the appeal - it follows inexorably from that finding
    that the appeal should have been dismissed.

10. It is therefore necessary to set this decision aside  and  dismiss  the
    appeal.

11. It is unfortunate indeed that the Secretary of State  appears  to  have
    issued a residence card in error but that is not  a  matter  within  my
    jurisdiction at this time. If the Secretary of State seeks to  withdraw
    the residence card then no doubt she will grant the Appellant  a  fresh
    right of appeal.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                                                                     J
Macdonald                                                         Date  21st
September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                J                            Macdonald
                                                      Date 21st  September
2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

