
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/03209/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 March 2021                   |On 31 March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               BABATUNDE LAWAL

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr N Khan, IIAS Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Nigerian national with date  of  birth  given  as
   18.4.74, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 20.2.20 (Judge  Knowles),
   dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 18.6.19, to refuse his application  made  on  20.3.19  for  an  EEA
   Residence Card on the basis of a retained right  of  residence  following
   the termination of his 2011 marriage to an  EEA  national,  namely  Edith
   Pinas.

2. The application was refused as the respondent considered the marriage  as
   one of convenience and never genuine, not recognised under  Regulation  2
   of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

3. A previous refusal  based  on  the  same  relationship  was  successfully
   appealed in 2013, with the result that the appellant was  issued  an  EEA
   Residence Card  in  2014.  However,  immigration  officials  visited  the
   appellant's residence in April 2016 to find no evidence that Edith  Pinas
   lived at the address. In consequence, the Residence Card was  revoked  on
   the basis that the marriage was one of convenience.  His  appeal  against
   that decision was dismissed in 2017 on the basis that  the  marriage  was
   one of convenience.

4. In the meantime, the appellant  had  applied  for  a  retained  right  of
   residence on the  basis  that  the  marriage  to  Edith  Pinas  had  been
   terminated by decree  absolute  in  January  2017.  The  respondent  also
   refused this application and the appellant's appeal against that decision
   was dismissed in December 2018.

5. The  February  2020  dismissal  of  his  appeal  against  his  subsequent
   retained rights application from March 2019 is the subject matter of  the
   present appeal.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 7.5.20.However, when the application was renewed to the Upper
   Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan granted  permission,  considering
   it  arguable  that  "although  the  judge  at  paragraph  [27]  correctly
   identified that the legal burden lies on the respondent to prove that  an
   otherwise valid marriage is a marriage of  convenience,  it  is  arguable
   that the judge in fact placed the burden on the appellant as at paragraph
   [47] he found that: 'the appellant has  not  established  that  he  is  a
   credible witness or that it is more probable than not that this was not a
   marriage of convenience.'" It is worth noting that  Judge  Sheridan  also
   observed that whilst he did  not  restrict  the  grounds  of  appeal,  he
   considered the other points raised in the grounds to be weak.

7. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

8. I agree with Judge Sheridan and find that, in the main, the  grounds  are
   little more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the weight accorded to  the  evidence.  In  Herrera  v  SSHD
   [2018] EWCA Civ 412, the Court of Appeal said that  it  is  necessary  to
   guard against the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in
   truth no more  than  disagreements  about  the  weight  to  be  given  to
   different factors, particularly if the judge who decided the  appeal  had
   the advantage of hearing oral evidence. It is well-established  law  that
   the weight to be given to any particular factor in an appeal is a  matter
   for the judge and will rarely give rise to an error  of  law,  see  Green
   (Article 8 -new rules) [2013] UKUT 254.

9. Similarly, there is no merit in the argument that the judge was in  error
   to rely on the Devaseelan principle to take the  findings  from  previous
   appeals as his starting point. The submission  that  Devaseelan  was  not
   applicable because credibility was in issue is misguided. As  the  First-
   tier Tribunal pointed out in refusing  permission,  the  judge  carefully
   considered the evidence before him and reached  findings  properly  open,
   providing adequate reasoning.

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Khan introduced a new ground not  contained
   within the grounds of application for permission to appeal, arguing  that
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to address any of  the  requirements
   of Regulation 10(5) for a retained right of  residence.  However,  as  Mr
   McVeety pointed out this unpleaded point is entirely subject to the issue
   of a marriage of convenience. If it is suggested that there is a retained
   right of residence arising from what has been found to be a  marriage  of
   convenience, that submission is misguided. No error of law  is  disclosed
   by this ground, even if it had been pleaded in the grounds.

11. In relation to the the burden and  standard  of  proof  applied  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal, it is clear from [27] that the judge was fully aware
   that the legal burden of proof remained  on  the  respondent  throughout,
   citing the Court of Appeal  decision  of  Rosa  [2016].   As  Mr  McVeety
   pointed out, the decision has to be read as a whole,  including  at  [44]
   where the judge stated "The respondent has previously  established  facts
   that justified the inference that the marriage was not  genuine  and  the
   previous determinations on this are  my  starting  point."  Clearly,  the
   judge considered  that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential
   burden. The judge then went on to consider the evidence relied on by  the
   appellant which had not been previously considered,  as  referred  to  at
   [45] of the decision.

12. At  [31]  the  judge  found  that,  "considering  the  totality  of  the
   evidence", the appellant was not a credible witness,  pointing  to  "many
   contradictions" in the  overall  account  in  evidence,  as  well  as  in
   previous appeals, noting that he was found not credible in two  of  those
   earlier appeals. At [45]  the  judge  noted  that  it  was  open  to  the
   appellant to adduce  new  evidence  not  previously  available  in  those
   earlier appeals, indicating that the  judge's  mind  was  not  closed  to
   further consideration of the evidence. In effect, the  judge  found  that
   the appellant failed to discharge the evidential burden of proof.

13. The passage which the  appellant  criticises,  and  which  prompted  the
   grant of permission, is at [47] of the decision. There the judge  stated,
   "In the round my conclusion is that the  appellant  has  not  established
   that he is a credible witness or that it is more probable than  not  that
   this was not a marriage of convenience." Properly read, this  was  not  a
   reversal of the burden of proof but a finding that the  appellant  failed
   to discharge the evidential burden which had switched to him, because  of
   the prima facie case established by the respondent, so that  the  obvious
   conclusion  is  that  the  legal  burden  had  been  discharged  by   the
   respondent. Whilst the judge could have set this out more clearly,  I  am
   satisfied that at [47] the judge was  reflecting  the  authority  of  the
   Court of Appeal's decision in Agho  [2015],  set  out  at  [27]  that  "a
   Tribunal should consider the  totality  of  the  evidence  and  determine
   whether or not it is more probable than not that this is  a  marriage  of
   convenience.

14. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA  Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,
   "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when
   a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining  why  he  has
   reached a particular decision, of seeking  to  burrow  out  industriously
   areas of evidence that have been less fully dealt with  than  others  and
   then to use this as a basis for saying the judge's  decision  is  legally
   flawed because it did not deal with a particular matter more fully. In my
   judgment, with respect, that is no basis on which  to  sustain  a  proper
   challenge to a judge's finding of fact." In  effect,  this  is  what  has
   happened in the present appeal. The appellant has scoured the decision in
   an attempt to burrow out areas to support  a  challenge  to  the  adverse
   decision.

15. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 March 2021



