
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03504/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2018                     |On 26 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                              MS SAMEYA MANSOUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C J Wooley ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 7 February 2018.

 2. No anonymity direction was sought and none is required.



Background

 3. The appellant  was  married  to  an  EEA  national.  They  subsequently
    divorced. The  appellant  sought  a  residence  card  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    regulations").   That application was refused under those regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on the ground,  inter  alia,  that
    she had retained a right of residence under regulation  10.   The  FTTJ
    dismissed the appeal as follows: "The appeal of the  appellant  against
    the refusal to issue a residence card under Regulation 18 is  dismissed
    under the 2016 [sic] EEA Regulations".

 5. Permission to appeal to this tribunal was  granted  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the following terms:

         '...

         2. The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing to allow  the
         appeal under Regulation 10(5) as he found that she had  a  retained
         right of residence.

         3. It is arguable that the Judge should  have  allowed  the  appeal
         under  Regulation  10  as  he  found  the  requirements   satisfied
         notwithstanding that he dismissed her appeal under  Regulation  15.
         Regulation 18 provides for the issue of a residence  card  in  such
         circumstances."

 6. Hence the matter came before me.

Discussion and Findings

 7. I indicated at the outset of the hearing that it appeared there may  be
    some merit to the grounds of appeal to this tribunal, given that  there
    was no cross-appeal by the respondent with regard to the  fact  finding
    of the FTTJ in the context of regulation 10.

 8. Ms Pal, for the respondent, accepted that the FTTJ had  found  at  [18]
    that the appellant "was exercising treaty rights as if she were an  EEA
    national at the date of termination [of the marriage]".

 9. The FTTJ explained his reasons for that finding at [16] -  [18].  These
    findings of fact and reasoning are not challenged by the respondent.

10. Nor does the respondent challenge the FTTJ's conclusion at [19] that

         "... the appellant meets the conditions of Regulation 10 so  as  to
         be regarded as a family member  who  had  retained  the  rights  of
         residence at the date of termination.  The periods of residence are
         met and the marriage lasted for the required time. Her EEA national
         and she were both working at the date of termination."

11. The FTTJ then went on to consider whether the appellant had a right  of
    permanent residence.  He  found  she  did  not.  That  finding  is  not
    challenged by the appellant before me and I need not consider it.

12. The appellant had applied for a residence card on the basis  of  having
    retained a right of residence. This is clear  from  the  terms  of  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter. There is no reference in  that
    letter to her  having  applied  on  the  basis  of  an  entitlement  to
    permanent residence status.  Despite this the  respondent  went  on  to
    consider regulation 15 (mistakenly, Ms Pal told me).

13. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  make  it  clear  the
    appellant only claimed to have a retained right of residence. Thus  the
    issue was live before the FTTJ.

14. Ms Pal accepted, appropriately, there was no challenge to the  findings
    of fact of the FTTJ or indeed his conclusion at [19] that the appellant
    had demonstrated she fulfilled the criteria  in  regulation  10.   That
    being the case and, given the terms of the respondent's  decision,  the
    reasons for refusal (which addressed regulation 10) and the grounds  of
    appeal, the FTTJ should have allowed the appeal pursuant to regulations
    10 and 18. The FTTJ, in considering the appeal pursuant  to  regulation
    15, appears to have overlooked his earlier positive  findings  pursuant
    to  regulation  10.  Those  findings  warranted  a  successful  outcome
    pursuant to regulations 10 and 18.

15. Thus the decision contains a material error of  law  and  must  be  set
    aside.  The FTTJ's findings are preserved and I remake his decision and
    allow the appeal, adopting the FTTJ's reasoning at [16] - [19]  of  his
    decision.

Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    material error of law, as set out above.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I re-make the decision of the FTTJ by allowing the appeal.


Signed           A M Black
                                                   Date 24 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award.  Although I have remade the decision  and
allowed the appeal, I make no fee award because the success  of  the  appeal
is based  largely  on  documentary  evidence  produced  after  the  date  of
decision and on the appellant's oral evidence at the hearing. This  was  not
available to the respondent at the date of her decision.


Signed           A M Black
                                                   Date 24 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
