
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Heard on 22nd of January 2018          |On 13th of February 2018            |
|Prepared on 8th of February 2018       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               MR ASIM ASHRAF
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Charma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25th of August 1977.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Harris
    sitting at Hatton Cross on  2nd  of  March  2017  in  which  the  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 28th of November 2015. That decision was to refuse to  issue  the
    Appellant with a residence card pursuant to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). This followed
    an application made by the Appellant on 8th of June 2015 for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his  EEA  national  sponsor,  [KL]  a  Hungarian
    citizen ("the sponsor").

The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant's case was that he was the spouse of an EEA citizen,  his
    sponsor, who was exercising treaty rights in this country. He  and  his
    wife were in the process of divorcing but at the time  of  the  hearing
    before the Judge there had not been either a decree nisi  or  a  decree
    absolute. According to the Appellant's application form he had met  his
    sponsor on 2nd of  November  2012  and  their  relationship  began  the
    following month. They married in March 2013 and as at the date  of  the
    application form, June 2015, was still existing. He told the Judge that
    the relationship subsequently broke down in 2016.

 3. The Respondent did not accept that the marriage of  the  Appellant  and
    sponsor  was  genuine  and  subsisting  relying  on  the  evidence   of
    immigration officers  who  visited  the  Appellant's  home  address  in
    Southall on 12th of November  2015  and  found  no  evidence  that  the
    sponsor resided at that address. When interviewed  the  Appellant  told
    the officers that the sponsor was not present at the  property  because
    she had returned to Hungary taking everything that she owned with  her.
    The Respondent did not accept that the couple had lived together.

The Decision at First Instance

 4. At the hearing the Appellant applied for an adjournment  on  the  basis
    that he was presently obtaining a divorce from his sponsor. He had been
    advised that a decree nisi was likely to be granted in around 3 months'
    time (which would have been around May 2017). The Appellant argued that
    an adjournment would  assist  the  Tribunal  as  it  would  enable  the
    Respondent to comment on whether the Appellant had a  claim  under  the
    retained rights provisions arising in the event of the  termination  of
    the marriage.

 5. The Judge decided to refuse the application to adjourn as there was  no
    clear date provided to him when a decree nisi would be made. Some  gaps
    in the Appellant's divorce papers had been  identified  by  the  Family
    court which needed to be corrected  before  the  application  could  be
    taken further. The Judge had seen no evidence that these gaps had  been
    corrected. The Appellant had had  a  great  deal  of  time  already  to
    prepare his case.

 6. The case proceeded  and  in  his  determination  the  Judge  noted  the
    Respondent's argument  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  had  not  been
    genuine and subsisting but rather one of convenience. At  [12]  et  seq
    the Judge wrote: "even if I take the Appellant's case  at  its  highest
    that he should be treated as a spouse under the  2006  Regulations,  in
    order to qualify for a residence card it is still for the Appellant  to
    demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that as of the date of  the
    appeal hearing [the sponsor]  was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this
    country. The difficulty for the Appellant is that even on  his  account
    since she moved from the claimed marital home to an address in Southall
    he has not maintained contact with his wife and  at  present  does  not
    know her whereabouts. The Appellant cannot  himself  clarify  what  his
    wife is doing at present or where she is. He is not in  a  position  to
    show that she remains in the United Kingdom or if she is here what  her
    status is in this country. I am not satisfied that the  matter  can  be
    demonstrated on the documentary evidence before me  because  that  only
    concerns evidence up to the financial year ending in April 2016. On the
    evidence before me I consider sufficient  doubt  arises  about  whether
    there is current exercise of treaty rights by [the sponsor] that I find
    I am not satisfied this is demonstrated". He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 7. The Appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  that  there  had
    been procedural unfairness in the refusal to adjourn  the  appeal.  The
    Judge should have granted an adjournment based upon the fact  that  the
    Appellant was waiting for his divorce to be finalised.  The  Judge  had
    made findings against  the  Appellant's  evidence  without  giving  the
    Appellant the opportunity to address the issue.

 8. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 8th of November  2017.
    He found it arguable that the decision to refuse  the  application  was
    unfair and appeared to be unfair given the absence of analysis  by  the
    Judge in refusing the adjournment  as  to  the  potential  relationship
    between the benefits to be obtained  by  the  Appellant  from  such  an
    adjournment and the lacunae identified by the Judge in respect  of  the
    ambit of the  available  evidence  in  respect  of  the  issues  to  be
    demonstrated by the Appellant. The Judge set out those difficulties  at
    [13] and [14] of the decision.

 9. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  6th
    of December 2017 opposing the Appellant's appeal  submitting  that  the
    Judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately.  The   refusal   of   the
    adjournment request was fair in all of the circumstances.  It  did  not
    prevent the Appellant from making a new application on the basis of his
    retained rights once he  had  resolved  the  divorce.  Given  that  the
    divorce proceedings could have taken any length of time it was fair  in
    the circumstances for the Judge to  proceed.  The  representatives  may
    have been hopeful that the proceedings would be completed  in  90  days
    but this at best was  speculation  given  there  was  no  evidence  the
    application had even been properly lodged.

10. The Appellant was aware of the refusal against him and as such had  had
    ample time to prepare his case. The issues which were  the  subject  of
    the appeal would be relevant [whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting in the past] even if  the  Appellant  became  divorced.  The
    Appellant did not challenge the findings that the Appellant had  failed
    to demonstrate the sponsor was in the United Kingdom or  that  she  was
    exercising treaty rights. The Appellant adduced no reason  why  he  was
    not in a position to deal with the actual  decision  before  the  Judge
    rather than a potential retained rights application.

The Hearing Before Me

11. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine  whether  there  was  a  material  error  of   law   in   the
    determination such that it fell to be set  aside  and  the  matter  re-
    determined. If there was not the decision would stand. Counsel for  the
    Appellant argued that he was only proceeding with the  argument  as  to
    the failure to grant the adjournment (there had been a 2nd argument  in
    relation to Article 8 but this was not pursued).

12. The divorce changed the complexion of the case, it  was  submitted,  as
    the Judge was aware. The divorce was finalised  on  26th  of  May  2017
    after the hearing. An adjournment would have enabled the  Appellant  to
    obtain a divorce and request the Tribunal to  make  an  Amos  direction
    that is for the Respondent to  approach  HMRC  for  information  as  to
    whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights. The Judge had  failed
    to apply the fairness test.

13. In response the Presenting Officer argued there had  been  no  material
    error of law. What was being argued was that there should have been  an
    adjournment so that the Appellant could put his  case  on  a  different
    basis to the one before the Judge. The Respondent's case had been  that
    there was no evidence that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights  as
    she had returned to Hungary. This was a marriage  of  convenience.  The
    Judge had given adequate reasons for refusing the adjournment  request.
    The Appellant could not rely on the claim that  the  divorce  had  gone
    through in May 2017, there was no application to  adduce  post  hearing
    evidence.

14. It was not for the Tribunal to give an open-ended adjournment.  It  was
    not clear at the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  Judge  when  the
    Appellant's divorce proceedings would  be  concluded.  Before  an  Amos
    direction could be made the burden was on the Appellant  to  show  that
    all  reasonable  steps  had  been  taken  to   obtain   the   necessary
    information. The Appellant could not show that.

15. In conclusion counsel referred to the Respondent's claim  that  on  the
    enforcement visit in 2015  the  Respondent  had  seen  no  evidence  to
    suggest the Appellant was living with the sponsor. The  Judge  had  not
    addressed the issue of whether it was a genuine marriage that would  be
    open to another Tribunal to make a decision on. The Appellant  had  put
    forward the only  evidence  he  had  which  was  that  his  family  law
    solicitor had said the Family court would take 90 days to finalise  the
    divorce. That should have been sufficient for the Judge. Although there
    was nothing from the Family court to say  when  the  divorce  would  be
    finalised counsel representing the Appellant at first instance had been
    able to give a reasonable date to cover the period of  an  adjournment.
    It was open to the Appellant to make another EEA  application  but  the
    issue in this  case  was  whether  it  had  been  fair  to  refuse  the
    adjournment request. The First-tier decision should be set aside.

Findings

16. The difficulty for the Appellant in this case is that  his  application
    for an adjournment was to enable him to put his case  on  a  completely
    different basis. Once the divorce went through he would no longer be  a
    member  of  the  sponsor's  family  under  Regulation  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations. That had  been  the  basis  of  the  application  form  he
    submitted to the Respondent in June 2015. What the Appellant wanted was
    an adjournment so that he could make a different application but in the
    same appeal proceedings this time  under  Regulation  10  as  a  family
    member who has retained the right of residence.

17. Appealing on that new ground was not simply a matter for the  Appellant
    to produce a decree absolute of divorce. He would still have to  adduce
    evidence as to the length of  time  the  sponsor  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights which he was not in a position  to  put  forward  to  the
    Judge at the  hearing  as  the  Judge  pointed  out.  The  evidence  of
    employment had stopped some time before.

18. The Judge did not make a finding on whether the Appellant's marriage to
    the sponsor was one of convenience. It is not a fair criticism  of  the
    Appellant to say that he would also have  needed  to  produce  evidence
    that the marriage had been genuine and subsisting until the  moment  it
    broke down. The case had not reached that far.  However,  there  was  a
    good  deal  of  speculation  in  the  Appellant's  application  for  an
    adjournment. There was no evidence before the Judge  that  the  sponsor
    was in the  United  Kingdom.  The  divorce  papers  had  to  be  served
    somewhere but the Judge was not told what address the Appellant had for
    service of the divorce proceedings.

19. The test of whether to adjourn the proceedings  was  one  of  fairness.
    Fairness might require an adjournment where for example the appeal  was
    already being run on the basis of a retained right of residence but the
    Appellant for good reason did not have access to the  documentation  to
    show that his former spouse was exercising treaty rights. That  however
    was not the situation here. The application had not been proceeding  on
    the basis of retained rights of residence but on the basis of a genuine
    and subsisting  marriage.  In  those  circumstances  fairness  did  not
    require that the Appellant to be given even more time than he  had  had
    already to put together a different case to  the  one  which  had  been
    argued up until then. I do not agree with the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal in this case that the issue was even arguable.

20. There was very little evidence before the Judge  as  to  how  long  the
    period of adjournment would need  to  be.  As  matters  transpired  the
    divorce proceedings were completed within three months  but  the  Judge
    was not to know that and it was not unfair of the Judge to  proceed  on
    the basis of what he did know about the case rather than  speculate  on
    what he did not know.

21. It is still open to the Appellant to make an application on  the  basis
    of retained rights. He will of course have to show that his marriage to
    the sponsor was genuine and subsisting until it broke down. That matter
    has not yet been determined. It is however worth reflecting  that  when
    the immigration officers paid an enforcement visit to  the  Appellant's
    home in November 2015 the Appellant told  them  that  the  sponsor  had
    already left the country  and  was  now  in  Hungary.  The  Appellant's
    application form dated June  2015  indicated  that  the  Appellant  and
    sponsor were still living together at the same address.  The  Appellant
    would need to clarify when he and the sponsor  in  fact  separated.  He
    told the Judge at first instance that the marriage had broken  down  in
    2016 but that  is  inconsistent  with  what  he  told  the  immigration
    officers at the time of the enforcement visit.

22. As I have indicated I do not need to  make  findings  on  these  points
    because the case did not reach that far but they are difficulties which
    the Appellant will have to address  if  he  seeks  to  make  a  further
    application to the Respondent, this time under Regulation 10,  retained
    rights of residence. In the meantime, what I can say is that there  was
    no unfairness on the part of the Judge in refusing the application  for
    an adjournment. That is the only basis on which an  error  of  law  has
    been argued. Since it was fair for the Judge to proceed and  since  the
    Judge did not have sufficient evidence before  him  to  show  that  the
    Appellant could meet the requirements  of  Regulation  7  that  he  was
    married to a qualified person the Judge  was  correct  to  dismiss  the
    appeal and no material error of law is disclosed in the  determination.
    I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I make no anonymity order as none was requested.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Signed this 8th of February 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 8th of February 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
