
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03559/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2019                     |On 13th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                              CELESTINA AGHEDO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Shoye, CW Law Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Nigeria.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a student, on  23  September  2010  and  married  a  French
    national by proxy in a marriage conducted in Nigeria on 27 August 2011.
    She applied for a residence card, as his partner, on 3 March 2012.  Her
    application was refused but her subsequent appeal was allowed  and  she
    was granted a residence card as the spouse of an  EEA  national  on  27
    February 2013, which was valid for five years.

2.   The Appellant's marriage broke down and  a  petition  for  divorce  was
    filed on 23 March 2016. A decree absolute was granted on 2  July  2017.
    On 11 November 2017 the Appellant  applied  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence on the basis that she had previously been married to  an  EEA
    national.  Her application was refused on 19 February 2018.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision on the basis that she  had
    retained a right of residence under regulation 10(5) of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA  Regulations")  and
    had not sought a  residence  order  under  regulation  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulation. However,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  dismissed  his
    appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11  January  2019.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Garratt granted the Appellant permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal on 1 March 2019

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both representatives made oral submissions. During the  hearing  I  had
    drawn the case of MDB and others (Article  12,  1612/68)  Italy  [2010]
    UKUT 161 (IAC) to the attention of the parties and at the  end  of  the
    hearing I directed that they provide  further  written  submissions  in
    relation to this case. Both parties subsequently provided such  written
    submissions.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 states that:
    "(5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
         (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  ...  on
             the termination of the marriage ... of that person;
         (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations at the date of the termination;
         (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
         (d)  either-
             (i)  prior to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for  the
                  termination of the  marriage  ...  the  marriage  ...  had
                  lasted for at least three years and  the  parties  to  the
                  marriage ... had resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at
                  least one year during its duration; ...
    (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person -
         (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA  national,
             be a worker ..."


6.   Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations states:
    "15.-    (1)  The following persons acquire the right to reside in  the
         United Kingdom permanently-
             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;
             (b)  a family member of an EEA national  who  is  not  an  EEA
                  national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with
                  the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations  for
                  a continuous period of five years;
             (c)  a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;


             (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person who
                  has ceased activity, provided-
                  (i)  the person was the family member  of  the  worker  or
                      self-employed person at the point the worker or self-
                      employed person ceased activity; and
                  (ii) at that point, the family member enjoyed a  right  to
                      reside on the basis of being  the  family  member  of
                      that worker or self-employed person;
             (e)  a person who was the family member of a worker  or  self-
                  employed person where-
                  (i)  the worker or self-employed person has died;
                  (ii) the family member resided with the  worker  or  self-
                      employed person immediately before the death; and
                  (iii)    the worker or self-employed  person  had  resided
                      continuously in the United Kingdom for at  least  two
                      years immediately before dying or the death  was  the
                      result of an accident  at  work  or  an  occupational
                      disease;
             (f)  a person who-
                  (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                      these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
                      years; and
                  (ii) was, at the end of the period, a  family  member  who
                      has retained the right of residence.
         (2)  Residence in the United Kingdom as a result  of  a  derivative
         right to reside does not constitute residence for  the  purpose  of
         this regulation.
         (3)  The right of permanent residence under this regulation is lost
         through absence from the United Kingdom for a period exceeding  two
         years.
         (4)  A person who satisfies the criteria in this regulation is  not
         entitled to a right to permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom
         where the Secretary of State or an immigration officer has  made  a
         decision under regulation 23(6)(b), 24(1), 25(1), 26(3)  or  31(1),
         unless that decision is  set  aside  or  otherwise  no  longer  has
         effect."


7.   The Appellant  had  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  11
    November 2017 and in Section 8 of the application form,  she  indicated
    that she was relying on a retained right of residence and, in answer to
    question 1.10, she had also made it clear that she was applying  for  a
    retained right of residence as an ex-spouse.  There  were  two  refusal
    letters, both dated 19 February 2019, one  of  which  referred  to  the
    Appellant having applied for a permanent residence card to confirm that
    she had retained a right of residence.

8.   The Appellant's legal representative relied on a copy  of  Home  Office
    Guidance entitled Free Movement Rights: retained  rights  of  residence
    and submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul had  failed  to  take
    this guidance into account when reaching his decision.  In  particular,
    he relied upon the fact that on page  12  of  the  Guidance  under  the
    heading Marriage or civil partnership: officially terminated there is a
    bullet point which  provides  a  link  to  Decision  making;  permanent
    residence where the applicant has a retained right of residence. It was
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the fact that there is then a
    reference to regulation 10(5) further down the same page indicates that
    once the requirements of regulation  10(5)  are  met  an  applicant  is
    automatically entitled to permanent residence.



9.   One of the basis on which First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Garratt  granted
    permission to appeal was that it was arguable that First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Paul had failed to take this policy into account. However, having
    read the reference to the link to permanent residence in its context in
    the policy and giving the wording of  the  surrounding  passages  their
    plain and simple reason, I find that it is not possible to construe the
    policy as meaning that everyone, who is entitled to a retained right of
    residence is also entitled to  permanent  residence.  This  reading  is
    incompatible with the requirements provided in regulation 10(5) and  15
    of the EEA Regulations and, in  particular,  with  regulation  15(1)(f)
    which states that an applicant must have resided in the United  Kingdom
    in accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.  There is no evidence to show that this was  the  case  for  the
    Appellant or her sponsor. Therefore, I find that,  even  if  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul had failed to take this policy into  account,  this
    did not give rise to any material error of law.



10.  The Appellant was also granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    it was found in the case of Idezuna (EEA - permanent residence) Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00474 (IAC)  that  "sometimes  a  family  member  may  have
    acquired a right of permanent residence  on  the  basis  of  historical
    facts". In the Appellant's case,  she  had  married  her  EEA  national
    partner on 27 August 2011 and resided here  as  his  spouse  until  the
    divorce petition was  filed  on  23  March  2016.  It  was  potentially
    possible  for  her  to  accrued  a  right  of  permanent  residence  by
    aggregating her residence as a spouse and as  a  person  with  retained
    rights of residence.  However,  she  would  still  have  to  show  that
    throughout the necessary five-year period her spouse was  exercising  a
    Treaty  right  or  she  was  meeting  the  requirements  to  meet   the
    requirements for retaining a right of residence.



11.  The Appellant's legal representative was not able to  take  me  to  the
    necessary evidence to show that this was  the  case,  as  the  evidence
    relating to her ex-husband's employment was for the time  period  2015-
    2017, apart from one letter, dated 17 February 2012, referring  to  his
    national insurance number. Therefore, she can only  show  that  he  was
    working from 2015 to 23 March 2016 and that she had retained a right of
    residence from 23 March 2016 to date. This  does  not  add  up  to  the
    necessary continuous five-year period of residence.



12.  Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul made  no  material  error  of
    law when he found that the Appellant  was  not  entitled  to  permanent
    residence.


13.  However, it has not been  disputed  that  the  Appellant  and  her  ex-
    husband had been married for more than three years  or  that  they  had
    lived together in the United Kingdom for at least one year during their
    marriage.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been working here from 15 January  2015  to  19  February
    2018. As a  consequence,  at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  the
    Appellant did meet the requirements of  regulation  10(5)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

14.  In the case of MDB and others (Article 12, 1612/68) Italy  [2010]  UKUT
    161 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:
         "In a case concerned with an EEA decision  the  tribunal  judge  is
         obliged by s.84(1)(d) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 to  decide  whether  the  decision  breaches  any  of  the
         appellants' rights under the Community Treaties in respect of their
         entry to or residence in the United Kingdom (emphasis  added);  see
         also s.109(3). Where the decision is a refusal to issue a permanent
         residence card that may necessitate, in the event that  refusal  is
         found correct,  considering  whether  the  appellant  was  entitled
         nonetheless to an extended right of residence".

15.  The Appellant's legal representative submitted that MDB  remained  good
    law  as  the  substance  of  the  residence  rights  contained  in  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016    were
    substantially the same as those in the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

16.  However, schedule 2 to the 2016 Regulations states:
    "1.  The following provisions of, or made  under,  the  2002  Act  have
    effect in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as if it  were  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act (right of appeal
    to the Tribunal) -
         Section 84 (grounds  of  appeal),  as  though  the  sole  permitted
         grounds of appeal were that the decision breaches  the  appellant's
         rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in
         the United Kingdom ("an EU ground of appeal")."

17.  As the Home Office Presenting Officer  noted  in  his  submissions,  in
    Oksuzigku (EEA appeal - "new matter") [2018] UKUT 385 (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:
         "By virtue of schedule 2(1) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
         2016 ('the 2016 Regulations') a "new matter" in  section  85(6)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 includes not  only
         a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84 but also  an  EEA
         ground of appeal".


18.  Section 85(6) states that:
         "A matter is a 'new matter' if-
         (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in  section
             84, and
         (b)  the Secretary of  State  has  not  previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of -
             (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
             (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120".


19.  The Appellant had not previously  relied  on  the  fact  that  she  had
    retained a right of residence which entitled her to a further period of
    residence but not permanent residence. Therefore, this falls within the
    definition of a "new matter".

20.  As a consequence, for the  purposes  of  section  85(5)  I  could  only
    consider this new matter within the present appeal if the Secretary  of
    State had consented to me  doing  so  and  he  has  not  provided  such
    consent.

21.  It is open to the Appellant to apply for further residence  as  someone
    who has a retained right of residence. It would also  be  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to grant her such residence  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence already provided to him for the purposes of this appeal.

22.  For these reasons I find that there  were  no  errors  of  law  in  the
    manner in which First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul decided the appeal which
    was before him.


Decision

(1)  The appeal is dismissed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul is  maintained  for  the
    reasons given above.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 9 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


