
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03129/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2019                     |On 21 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                              Aderonke Sogbetun
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Okunowo, TolTops Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She  appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 6 March
    2017 refusing to issue her with a residence card under Regulation  7(1)
    and  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.

2.   Her appeal was dismissed by a  First-tier  Judge  who  found  that  the
    marriage which she had  entered  into  by  proxy  in  Nigeria  was  not
    properly registered and therefore was not valid.

3.   After a hearing on 8 February 2019 I found that the judge had erred  in
    law and directed that there be a further hearing which took place on 25
    June 2019.

4.   After that hearing I concluded that the marriage  had  properly  to  be
    recognised as a valid marriage within Nigerian law.

5.   There was a remaining issue which was the  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Judge at paragraph 41 of her decision that the  appellant  had  entered
    into a marriage of convenience.  I directed that  there  be  a  further
    hearing to address this issue.

Notice of Decision

6.   In effect the representatives were in agreement.  The  matter  had  not
    been raised in the refusal letter, and the judge appeared to have  made
    findings on the point without the  issue  having  been  a  live  matter
    before her.  In the circumstances I concluded  that  it  had  not  been
    shown that the marriage was one of convenience and therefore the appeal
    falls to be allowed on all grounds.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 13 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
