
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03642/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 27th September 2018               |On 5th October 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               LETIZIA FRANCO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Mavrantonis of Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

          1. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
             to refuse her a residence card certifying permanent  residence
             was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal judge Shamash for reasons
             set out in a decision  promulgated  on  6th  June  2018.   The
             appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  on  the
             grounds that it was arguable that the appellant's Italian EHIC
             card satisfied the  requirements  for  comprehensive  sickness
             insurance for the purposes of regulations 4 and  15,  contrary
             to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings that it did not.

          2. The First-tier Tribunal judge relied upon  Ahmed  v  the  Aire
             Centre [2014] EWCA Civ 988 as authority  for  the  proposition
             that her EHIC card did not satisfy the requirements.

          3.  Ahmed  considered  whether  there  was  a   requirement   for
             comprehensive sickness insurance cover ("CSIC") given that NHS
             treatment is free. The court found that an entitlement to free
             NHS treatment did not qualify as satisfying the requirement to
             have CSIC. The court concluded that the residence of a student
             would not be lawful unless s/he had CSIC whilst a student  and
             would not be able to qualify for  permanent  residence  unless
             that requirement had been strictly complied with.

          4. The respondent's policy  guidance  detailing  the  documentary
             evidence required to show  CSIC  includes  "a  valid  European
             Health Insurance Card (EHIC) issued by  an  EEA  member  state
             other than the UK...".

          5. The judge considered that Ahmed meant that the  possession  of
             an EHIC card issued by a member state other than  the  UK  did
             not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  regulations.   He   was
             incorrect.

          6. The judge materially erred in law in finding that the  Italian
             EHIC card did not meet the requirements of the regulations.  I
             set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

          7. The respondent did not dispute that  the  appellant  had  been
             working self-employed since July 2013  and  that  her  Italian
             EHIC card  satisfied  the  regulations  as  meeting  the  CSIC
             requirement from then. Nor did the respondent dispute that the
             appellant was, at the date of the decision two months  shy  of
             completing 5 years lawful residence as a self-employed person.
             Nor did the respondent dispute that the appellant had  held  a
             valid Italian EHIC card during May and June 2013 and thus,  by
             the time of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             she had held a valid Italian  EHIC  card  for  the  continuous
             period of five years prior to the hearing  during  which  time
             she had been lawfully present in the UK as a student and as  a
             self-employed person.

          8. Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  because  for  two  months  the
             appellant had been a student and was thus temporary then those
             two months did not qualify in the  five  year  calculation.  I
             must admit I found her  reasoning  difficult  to  follow  when
             viewed in the context of the respondent's very clear  guidance
             and in the light of Ahmed which makes  specific  reference  to
             residence under the regulations as a student  for  five  years
             with CSIC enabling a successful claim for permanent residence.

          9. An EHIC issued by another member state is clearly included  in
             the  respondent's  guidance  as  a   valid   compliance   CSIC
             requirements.

         10. This appellant was, at the date of the decision of the  First-
             tier Tribunal, entitled to permanent residence. She  had  held
             the required CSIC for five years.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




         Date 1st October 2018
    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
