
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03450/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2019                      |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                  OSANDA DARSHANA SANDARUWAN SILVA NILENTHI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by Lawland
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  Cameron  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  11  March  2019,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        dated 23 November 2015 refusing to issue him a residence card under
        the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006
        Regulations) as an extended family member.






   Background


     2. The appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  was  born  in  1986.  He
        entered the UK in 2010 as a student.  After  being  issued  further
        leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student, the appellant  applied  for  a
        Residence Card based  on  his  relationship  with  Mrs  Kottagedona
        Ratnaseeli (the sponsor), his maternal 1st cousin. At the  time  of
        the application the  sponsor  was  an  Italian  citizen  exercising
        treaty rights in the UK. This application was refused and an appeal
        before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K W Brown was dismissed  in
        a decision promulgated on 30 September 2014. Judge  Brown  was  not
        satisfied the appellant was dependent on his cousin when  he  lived
        in Sri Lanka as there was insufficient  evidence  to  support  this
        assertion. Judge Brown found that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
        lived in the same household until 1991 but they did not live in the
        same household after that time until March 2013.  Applications  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  were  refused  and  he
        became appeal rights exhausted on 13 April 2014.


     3. On 29 June 2015 the appellant again applied for a residence card as
        the extended  family  member  of  his  EEA  national  sponsor.  The
        respondent  was  not  however  satisfied  the  appellant   provided
        sufficient evidence to prove that he fell within  the  category  of
        extended family member. This decision attracted a right  of  appeal
        which the appellant duly exercised.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4. For reasons that will become apparent it is not necessary for me to
        consider  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  detail.  Judge
        Cameron had before him two large bundles of documents  relating  to
        the appellant's circumstances  and  those  of  his  sponsor.  These
        included some money remitted slips relating to money  sent  by  the
        sponsor  to  Sri  Lanka  between  2003  and  2010.  Judge   Cameron
        approached the decision of Judge Brown as his starting point. Judge
        Cameron was satisfied that, since her arrival in the  UK  in  March
        2013,  the  appellant  lived  with  the  sponsor  as  part  of  her
        household. Judge Cameron  considered  the  7  Western  Union  money
        transfers dated between 20 August 2003 and 15 January 2010, and the
        evidence of 3 visits by a Mr  Fernando  in  2008,  2009  and  2010,
        bearing funds from the sponsor. The  judge  noted  that,  when  the
        appellant came to the UK as a  student,  his  application  did  not
        refer to his receipt of monies from his sponsor in  order  to  meet
        his  educational   costs.   At   [37]   the   judge   found   that,
        notwithstanding the appellant's claim to have been dependent on the
        sponsor when he lived in Sri Lanka, the evidence before for him did
        not support the asserted dependency but indicated rather  that  the
        appellant was living in the family home and the family  were  being
        generally being supported by the sponsor. The judge then found that
        the appellant was a young child when the sponsor left Sri Lanka  in
        1991 and that he was supported by his own family rather than by the
        sponsor. The appeal was dismissed.


The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision and the  'error  of  law
hearing'

     5. The written grounds of  appeal  relied  on  Lim  (EEA  -dependency)
        [2013] UKUT 00437 (IAC) (although this was overturned by the  Court
        of Appeal decision in Lim v Entry Clearance Officer  Manila  [2015]
        EWCA Civ 1383) in contending that the judge erred in  his  approach
        to the issue of dependency  by seeking to evaluate the frequency of
        the funds remitted by the  sponsor  rather  than  to  the  intended
        purpose and significance of the funds. The  judge  also  failed  to
        give appropriate weight to the evidence that the sponsor  travelled
        to Sri Lanka and provided financial assistance  to  the  appellant.
        The grounds additionally relied on SM  (India)  v  Entry  Clearance
        Officer (Mumbai) [2009] EWCA Civ 1426  in  respect  of  the  proper
        definition of dependency.


     6. In granting permission to appeal Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Alis stated,

             "Whilst the findings on financial support may have  been  open
             to him it is arguable that there is an error in  the  way  the
             Judge approached Regulation 8(2)(a) of  the  2006  Regulations
             having regard to the papers contained on the file.


             The  Tribunal  should  have  been  considering   whether   the
             appellant was part of the sponsor's household as  against  who
             the appellant's carer actually  was.  Whilst  the  appellant's
             parents could be his primary carers nevertheless if they  were
             living in the sponsor's home then it  is  arguable  regulation
             8(2)(a) may be met."

     7. Mr Melvin provided  a  Rule  24  response  on  21  June  2019.  His
        submission was very  straightforward.  Regardless  of  whether  the
        judge erred in his approach to the issue of dependency, the sponsor
        only became an Italian citizen in 2013. This was apparent from  her
        own witness statement (at paragraph 6). In these circumstances  the
        appellant could not meet the requirements of  reg  8(2)(a)  of  the
        2006 Regulations and his application was bound to fail.


     8. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I invited Mr  Plowright
        to express his views of the content of the  Rule  24  response.  Mr
        Plowright drew my attention to the sponsor's Italian passport which
        was issued on 11 March 2013, and to what appears to be  an  Italian
        identity card issued on 14  February  2013.  Mr  Plowright  however
        accepted that the available evidence pointed to  the  sponsor  only
        obtaining Italian citizenship in 2013. Mr Plowright was mindful  of
        the requirements  of  reg  8(2)(a)  of  the  2006  Regulations  and
        accepted that the application for a residence card as  an  extended
        family member could not have succeeded.

     9. I indicated that I would dismiss the appeal on the basis  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal's  decision  did  not  need  to  be  set  aside
        because, even if there  was  an  error  on  a  point  of  law,  the
        appellant could not, on any view, be successful in his application.


Discussion

    10. Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC)
        provides, so far as is relevant:

             'Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
             the persons concerned may have in their own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:


             (a)   any  other  family  members,   irrespective   of   their
             nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2  of
             Article 2 who, in the country from which they have  come,  are
             dependants or members of the household of  the  Union  citizen
             having the primary right of residence, or where serious health
             grounds strictly require  the  personal  care  of  the  family
             member by the Union citizen;'

    11. Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations indicated, at the  material
        time, that an 'extended family member' (the  equivalent  of  'other
        family members' in  the  Directive  included  a  person  who  is  a
        relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner and -,

             'The person is residing in a country  other  than  the  United
             Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a  member
             of his household'

    12. In her statement the sponsor indicated that she became  an  Italian
        citizen and an EEA national in March 2013. This is supported by the
        contained in the appellant's bundle. This wasn't  disputed  by  the
        appellant  at  the  'error  of  law'  hearing  or  by   his   legal
        representative.


    13. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  2010.  Any  financial
        support that may have been provided by the sponsor to the appellant
        when he lived in Sri Lanka was provided when she  was  not  an  EEA
        national. When the appellant and  the  sponsor  lived  together  in
        1991, the sponsor was not an EEA national. In  these  circumstances
        the  appellant  could  never  succeed  in  his  application  for  a
        residence card, either by reference to  the  definition  of  'other
        family members' in the Directive, or the  definition  of  'extended
        family member' in the 2006 Regulations, because his sponsor did not
        become an EEA national until after the appellant left Sri Lanka.

    14. It was never suggested that anyone else provided financial  support
        to the appellant when he lived in Sri Lanka. I note, in any  event,
        that in the recent case of Fatima & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 124 the Court of Appeal  wasted
        little time in rejecting an applicant's argument  that  "dependents
        or members of the household of the Union Citizen" in the  Directive
        can include dependents or members of the household of the spouse of
        the Union Citizen. This was said to be "clear on its face".

    15. In the circumstances any appeal would have been bound to  fail  and
        it is not appropriate to set aside the judge's decision  dismissing
        the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law requiring the decision to be set aside.
The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]                               24 June 2019
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


