
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03072/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2019                               |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                 Ahsan asim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          UK BORDER FORCE, HEATHROW

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar of Counsel, Lee Valley Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Pakistan, has permission to challenge  the
    decision of Judge  Malcolm  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sent  on  15
    November 2018.  In that decision the judge found that the appellant, an
    extended family member in a durable relationship with an EEA  national,
    had not shown that he met  the  requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    because he had not established "the required five  year  period".   The
    judge went on to further find that the appellant's current relationship
    with his British national wife was not a matter which  required  to  be
    taken into consideration when considering  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

2.    The  appellant's  grounds  contend  first  of  all  that   the   judge
    incorrectly identified the decision  under  challenge  in  the  current
    appeal.  At paragraph 1 of the decision  the  judge  stated  that  "The
    appeal is against the decision of the Respondent dated  12th  September
    2018 refusing his application for a Permanent Residence Card".  It  was
    said that the decision under challenge was in fact   one  made  by  the
    respondent on 9 April 2018 to refuse admission  to  the  appellant  and
    revoke his residence card.  The second ground of challenge was that the
    judge had wrongly concluded that it was not open to him to consider the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances.

3.   I am grateful to the submissions I heard from  both  Mr  Jafar  and  Mr
    Tufan.

4.   Despite  agreeing  with  the  grounds  that  the  judge  erred  in  two
    respects, I am not persuaded that either was material.

5.   The judge was clearly in  error  in  relation  to  the  decision  under
    challenge.  That decision was one dated 9 April 2018.  In that decision
    the respondent, Border Force, Heathrow Airport, decided to  revoke  the
    appellant's residence card, to  refuse  his  admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom and to give directions for his removal.  In that  decision  the
    respondent stated that the appellant had sought admission on the  basis
    that he was the extended family member of V M a  Latvian  national  but
    that on his own admission he was not joining her in the United  Kingdom
    and she was no longer exercising treaty rights.  It was also  noted  by
    the respondent that the appellant was considered under Regulation 10 of
    the EEA Regulations as to whether or not he had  a  retained  right  of
    residence.  The respondent concluded that he did not because he did not
    meet the requirements of Regulation 10:  "[i]n order to be admitted  on
    this basis you need to show you have been  in  a  durable  relationship
    with V M and that she has been in the United Kingdom exercising  treaty
    rights during that period".  The respondent stated that  the  appellant
    had not shown that he had lived together with the sponsor and  had  not
    provided any documentation or evidence  of  their  life  together,  for
    example joint bills  or  joint  ventures.   It  was  also  stated  that
    although the appellant had reiterated that he had split up in  November
    2017, on arrival in the UK on 7 March of that year he stated  that  the
    relationship between him and V M had ended in March 2017.  He had  also
    told the Immigration Officer that he had started a relationship with  a
    British national in January or February 2017.

6.   It is clear that the appellant's  appeal was against that decision.

7.   It appears that the judge took the view that the decision under  appeal
    was one of September 2018 on the basis that on 12  September  2018  the
    respondent had noted an application made by the appellant  on  6  April
    2018 for a permanent residence card and  that  this  had  been  refused
    because it was considered that he had not resided in the United Kingdom
    as the family member of his sponsor for a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.  However, there is nothing to show that the  appellant  appealed
    against that decision.  Nor is it submitted by Mr Jafar that that was a
    decision which should  have  been  taken  into  account  by  the  judge
    alongside the decision of April 2018.

8.   However, such an error would  only  be  material,  if  on  the  judge's
    findings, it was possible for the appellant to have  succeeded  in  his
    appeal against the April 2018 decision.  For that to be  the  case,  it
    would have to be shown that the appellant continued to  reside  as  the
    extended family member in accordance with the documentation issued. (By
    virtue of  regulation  7(3)  and  8(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  be
    treated as a family member if he continued to meet the requirements  of
    regulation 8(5)).  On  the  appellant's  evidence  he  had  received  a
    residence card dated 19 November 2014 giving  him  a  period  of  three
    years' residence until 19 November 2019, but to resist the decision  to
    revoke his residence card he was required to produce evidence that  the
    couple had continued to be in a subsisting relationship.   However,  on
    the evidence before the judge, the EEA national partner  ceased  living
    together with the appellant in December 2016, at which point they lived
    in separate rooms.  Further, on the appellant's  own  evidence,  before
    then the partner had gone to Singapore in March 2016  to  complete  her
    internship following her degree and by  that  time  the  appellant  (as
    recorded by the judge) "was of the view to terminate the relationship".
      The fact that the appellant and the sponsor  did  not  enter  into  a
    separation  agreement  until  28  November  2017  did   not,   in   the
    circumstances, establish that their relationship remained durable until
    that time.  On the evidence of the appellant, there was no  longer  any
    substance to the relationship from December 2016/January 2017,  if  not
    indeed March 2016.  He had also stated that he had begun a relationship
    proper with a British citizen national, NY, in December  2017  and  did
    not suggest that he maintained any relationship with  the  EEA  sponsor
    once he began this relationship. Hence, I can see no material error  in
    the judge's decision.  The  evidence  before  the  respondent  did  not
    establish that there was a durable relationship between the  couple  at
    the date of decision. Indisputably he had ceased to  be  in  a  durable
    relationship when he sought to be admitted to the UK on 9  April  2018.
    On the basis of this evidence,  I  consider  that  the  respondent  has
    established that the EEA right accorded to the appellant as an extended
    family member no longer existed and that there was a  sufficient  basis
    to revoke the residence card.  The burden of proof for the decision  to
    revoke rested on the respondent, but I am entirely satisfied that  this
    was discharged on the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    respondent at the date of decision.

 9.  I would add two further observations. First,  there was in any event  a
    further difficulty in the way of the appellant being able  to  rely  on
    his durable relationship with an EEA national. In order to be  able  to
    rely on this relationship it would have to be shown  that  the  sponsor
    had been in the  UK  exercising  treaty  rights  except  for  permitted
    periods of absence up to a maximum of six months.  On  the  appellant's
    own account in interview with the Immigration Officer, his sponsor  had
    spent only ten days in the UK since March 2017. Second, to  the  extent
    that the appellant appeared to seek to rely on  regulation  10  on  the
    basis that he was entitled to be treated as a  family  member  for  the
    purposes of retained rights, the relevant requirement  as  set  out  in
    regulation 10 (5)(d)(i) for the marriage/partnership [which would  have
    in this context to be read as simply 'relationship'] is for it to  have
    'lasted for at least three years..." On the evidence before  the  judge
    the relationship with the EEA partner had not lasted for  three  years.
    Hence there could be no retained rights on this basis.

10.  In relation to Ground 2, Mr Tufan  accepted  that  in  April  2018  the
    respondent had made a removal decision.  In that  circumstance  it  was
    clearly wrong  of  the  judge  to  state  at  paragraph  27  that  "the
    appellant's current relationship with his British national wife is  not
    a matter which requires to be taken into consideration when considering
    this appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.   Where  there  is  a  removal
    decision it is incumbent on a judge to consider the appellant's Article
    8 circumstances.  Indeed, in this case the  respondent  had  considered
    the appellant's  Article  8  circumstances.   The  judge's  failure  to
    consider Article 8 was plainly an error of law.

11.  However, in this respect also I am  unpersuaded  that  this  error  was
    material.  On the appellant's own evidence, his relationship  with  the
    EEA national sponsor had broken down prior to the date of decision of 9
    April 2018: even  the  formal  separation  agreement  between  them  as
    unmarried partners was  28  November  2017.   On  the  appellant's  own
    evidence, he had met frequently with NY in January  and  February  2017
    but the relationship did not start until December 2017.They had married
    on 13 February 2018. In relation to that  relationship,  the  appellant
    has made no application to the respondent.  The  decision  of  9  April
    2018 did not constitute an interference in the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights as regards  that  relationship,  whether  considered  under  the
    rubric of private or family life, since he had an available  avenue  to
    seek to stay in the UK on the basis of  that  relationship,  an  avenue
    that he had not yet pursued. The Immigration  Rules  require  that  any
    such application  is  made  in  a  prescribed  form  on  payment  of  a
    prescribed fee.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that, despite two  errors,  the  judge
    did not materially err in law.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2019
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


