
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/03246/2019
                                                             & EA/03247/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2020                      |On 7 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                          P R J TARAYA & N E TARAYA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellants,    Mr Winter, Advocate, instructed by EMLC, Glasgow
For the respondent,    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision issued on 5 June 2020, the UT set aside the  decision  of
    FtT Judge Kempton, promulgated on 16 September  2019,  because  it  was
    common ground that she misunderstood or misapplied MS [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    580.

 2. The UT said at [2], "The real remaining issue is  whether  without  the
    first appellant her mother would be obliged to leave the EEA or whether
    that would be a matter of choice".

 3. The hearing on 29 July 2020 was conducted from a hearing room at George
    House, where I was present.  No members  of  the  public  attended,  in
    person or remotely.  Representatives and the first  appellant  attended
    remotely, by Skype for Business.   There  were  some  interruptions  in
    communications and the quality was at times less than ideal, but in the
    end both sides were satisfied that a fair hearing had been achieved.  I
    am obliged to Mr Winter and Mr Diwyncz  for  their  clear  and  concise
    presentation of the case.

 4. Updating statements from the  witnesses  had  been  filed.   All  their
    statements to date were deemed to have  been  adopted.   There  was  no
    cross-examination.

 5. Having heard the submissions, I indicated that  the  appeals  would  be
    allowed.

 6. The FtT Judge found at [36] that "if the [first] appellant left the UK,
    her mother would inevitably have to leave with  her,  in  order  to  be
    looked after by her."  However, she thought that MS  was  against  her,
    given that finding, and that because "it was clear that  the  appellant
    would take her mother to the Philippines ... to look  after  her  there
    ... the EEA regulations would not be met."

 7. The SSHD has not suggested  that  the  finding  about  the  appellant's
    mother having to leave was not reasonably open to the FtT.

 8. That finding was supported by the evidence before the FtT, as a  whole,
    and most strongly by the Social Work Report.  The evidence  before  the
    UT is similar, or a little stronger.  The legal test is demanding,  but
    it is a matter of lack of practical choice rather than of  literal  and
    absolute impossibility.

 9. The dependence of the first appellant's mother upon her  is  such  that
    she cannot, as a matter of practical choice, remain in the  UK  without
    her.  There is  no  practical  alternative  of  provision  of  care  by
    relatives in Germany.

10. The conclusion which flows from the appellant's  mother  having  to  go
    with her to the Philippines is the contrary of what  the  FtT  thought.
    The terms of the regulations are met.

11. It is common ground that the two appeals stand or fall together.

12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   The
    decision substituted is that the appeals, as originally brought to  the
    FtT, are allowed.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    30 July 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




