
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04076/2016 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2020                 |On 4 November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD NAUMAN KHAN

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS





         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 11  July
         2020  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
         Verghis, promulgated after a long delay on 3 January 2020 following
         a hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 November 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 17  August  1989.  He
         entered the UK as a student in January 2011 and then applied for  a
         residence permit as the extended  family  member  of  his  maternal
         uncle (the sponsor). He appeals against the  respondent's  decision
         of 21 March 2016 to refuse his application under reg. 8(2)  of  the
         EEA Regulations 2016.  the  application  was  refused  because  the
         respondent did not accept that dependency  on  the  sponsor  and/or
         residency with  him  at  any  time  had  been  established  by  the
         evidence. The respondent noted that the appellant had not  referred
         to the sponsor at all in his student applications although  he  now
         claimed dependency upon  him  and  also  found  that  the  low  sum
         allegedly sent to the appellant  over  the  years  could  not  have
         reasonably covered all this expenses as was claimed.

      3. The appellant did not seek an oral  hearing  and  his  appeal  came
         before Judge Verghis  for  determination  on  the  papers.  It  was
         dismissed.

      4. The appellant successfully sought permission  to  appeal.  Although
         this was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  on  6  April
         2020, it was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The appeal would then have normally been listed for hearing but due
         to the pandemic this could not be done and  instead  the  grant  of
         permission, sent out on 10  August  2020,  included  directions  in
         which Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson  expressed  the  view  that  the
         appeal could be decided on the papers. She also indicated that  her
         provisional view was that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh due to errors of law in  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  The parties were invited  to
         put forward any objections they may have within  21  days.  Neither
         party has put forward any objection and I now proceed to  determine
         the matter on the papers.

         Discussion and conclusions

      6. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission and the grant of permission.

      7. The grounds for permission argued that the judge erred  in  law  by
         (i)  finding  that  the  sponsor's  financial  remittances  to  the
         appellant and  his  family  were,  in  respect  of  the  appellant,
         gestures of affection when the appellant's evidence had  been  that
         the family depended on this income as they received no support from
         the appellant's  father;  (ii)  finding  that  there  had  been  no
         dependency in the UK in circumstances where it  was  accepted  that
         the appellant had always lived with the sponsor who  had  paid  for
         all utilities and living  expenses;  and  (iii)  finding  that  the
         appellant had failed to establish a reason for  dependency  on  the
         sponsor by referring to his education, immigration  status,  health
         and ties to Pakistan.

      8. As pointed out by Upper Tribunal Judge  Jackson  in  her  grant  of
         permission, the judge is entirely unclear in her  determination  as
         to what law and requirements were applied to the case and  confuses
         the EEA Regulations with a human rights claim under the Immigration
         Rules and/or the ECHR. In her self direction  at  paragraph  3  she
         refers to paragraph 276B (on long residence)  and  276ADE  (private
         life grounds) as well as to  section  117A-D  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  No  application  was  made  under
         those provisions. It may be that the judge used a previous template
         and omitted to amend the legal requirements. If so,  that  shows  a
         complete  lack  of  care  on  the  part  of  the  judge  which   is
         unacceptable. More worryingly, however, at paragraph 19  the  judge
         refers to and cites  from  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and  at
         paragraphs 25 and 26 she applies the principles therein even though
         they have no bearing on the appeal before  her.  As  Judge  Jackson
         observed, the judge gets into a complete muddle as  to  the  issues
         before her.

      9.  Additionally,  there  is  no  proper  assessment  of  whether  the
         appellant meets the requirements of the Regulations as an  extended
         family member, no findings as to  dependency  by  consideration  of
         relevant factors and no findings on whether the appellant was/is  a
         member of the sponsor's household. Instead, the judge focuses on  a
         variety of  immaterial  and  irrelevant  factors  in  reaching  her
         conclusions and in Judge Jackson's words reaches a "decision (that)
         is almost entirely incomprehensible".

     10. For these reasons, I find that the judge's decision contains errors
         of law which render it  unsustainable.  It  is  set  aside  in  its
         entirety. Neither party has sought to preserve any findings and the
         matter is thus remitted for a de novo  hearing  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.







         Decision

     11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and
         it is set aside. A fresh decision shall be made by another judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal.

         Anonymity

     12. No request has been made at any time for an anonymity order  and  I
         see no reason to make one.

         Directions

     13. Further directions for the hearing shall be issued by the  relevant
         Tribunal in due course and shall take account  of  the  appellant's
         initial request for the appeal to be determined on the papers.




         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 29 October 2020
