
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: EA/04014/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 5th November 2018                      |On: 11th February 2019          |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ALBERT GREZAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Clarke,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Respondent is a national of Albania born in 1981. On  the  23rd
        May 2018 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hussain) allowed his appeal
        with reference to Regulation 10 (5) of  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic Area)  Regulations  2016.   In  short  summary  the  Judge
        accepted that Mr Grezaj  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
        accordance with the Regulations for a period of five  years  before
        his  marriage  came  to  an  end,  and  that  he  continued  to  be
        economically active himself:  he  therefore  retained  a  right  of
        residence under the Regulations.   In making that finding the Judge
        relied, in large measure, on  some  HMRC  records  relating  to  Mr
        Grezaj's employment history. These records had been submitted by Mr
        Grezaj's representatives after the hearing. The Judge  had  decided
        that it was not necessary to invite comment from the  Secretary  of
        State on that evidence, and had proceeded to allow the appeal.

     2. On appeal the Secretary of State, quite understandably in our view,
        takes issue with the  approach  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
        grounds protest that it  is  manifestly  unfair  to  weigh  in  the
        balance evidence that one party has not had the opportunity to  see
        or make submissions on.

     3. Before us Mr Clarke maintained the Secretary of State's  complaint,
        but invited us to allow Mr Grezaj's appeal on alternative  grounds.
         The matter was therefore settled by consent by the parties on  the
        following grounds:


 i) Mr Grejaz was married to his EEA spouse on the 13th June 2009  and  the
    marriage subsisted until the 4th September 2015;


ii) At all material times the couple resided in the United Kingdom;


iii) It is apparent from the material supplied (inter  alia  by  HMRC)  that
    both Mr Grezaj and his wife were economically active for (at  least)  a
    continual five year period between 2010 and 2015;


iv) Mr Clarke indicated that  Mr  Grezaj's  wife  qualified  for  permanent
    residence during the currency of the marriage, and that  consequent  to
    Regulations 15(1)(b) and 10(6)(a) so did Mr Grezaj;


 v) It followed that Mr Grezaj did not need to establish that he 'retained'
    a permanent right of residence upon annulment of his marriage, since he
    had already accrued such  a  permanent  right  of  residence  when  the
    marriage was still subsisting.


Decisions

     4. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed  for  'error
        of law', namely procedural unfairness.

     5. We substitute the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a
        decision allowing Mr Grezaj's appeal by consent.

     6. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           5th November 2018
