
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04578/2016


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2017                |On 18th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Chigozle Peter Ugwunze
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Record Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Ahmad Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Chigozle Peter Ugwunze date of birth 5 July 1984 is a
    citizen of Nigeria.  Having considered all the circumstances, I do  not
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Butler promulgated on the 30th March  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department to refuse  the  appellant  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national,  who  was  exercising
    treaty rights. The appellant  had  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
    of Ms Shayenne Charandra Eiflaar,  a  Netherlands  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. The letter of refusal had given the following reasons for refusing  the
    application that:-

         a) the identity card used to confirm the identity  and  nationality
         of the spouse had been reported stolen and  therefore  it  was  not
         accepted that  the  appellant  was  genuinely  married  to  an  EEA
         national.

         b) given the discrepancies in the accounts of the appellant and his
         partner, it was not accepted that this was a genuine  marriage.  It
         was asserted that this was a marriage of convenience.

         c) as there was no evidence that the EEA sponsor was working in the
         UK, the EEA  national was not in any event a qualified person.

 4. Judge Butler in refusing the appeal made reference to the  requirements
    of Regulation 15 and to the fact that the  evidence  did  not  disclose
    that the sponsor had been working in the UK  for  5  years.  The  judge
    appears to be confusing the requirements for a permanent resident  card
    (Regulation 15 of the 2006  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations)  with  the
    requirements for a residence card (Regulation 17 (1)).

 5. The issues that the judge had to decide were those  identified  in  the
    refusal letter. The judge has made no findings with regard  to  whether
    this was a marriage of convenience. The appellant otherwise to  qualify
    for  a  residence  card,  if  the  marriage  was  not  a  marriage   of
    convenience,  had to show that the sponsor was an EEA national and that
    she was working in the UK. It would have been sufficient to  show  that
    the sponsor was working at the time of the hearing. Again the judge has
    not made a finding with regard to whether the EEA sponsor  was  working
    at the time of the hearing. The judge has made no finding as to whether
    the identity card belonged to the EEA national.

 6. The issues identified mean that the judge has failed to  make  material
    findings.  The  judge  has  also  confused  the  requirements  of   the
    regulations seeking to establish whether the sponsor had  been  working
    for a full five years. That was not a requirement for a residence  card
    under Regulations 2, 6 and 17 (1) of the 2006 Regulations.

 7. There are clear errors of law disclosed in the decision.  The  evidence
    needs to be considered  afresh  with  none  of  the  findings  of  fact
    preserved. The appropriate course is for the case to be remitted to the
    First -tier Tribunal for a rehearing of the case.

Notice of Decision

 8. I allow the appeal to the extent that the appeal is  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be hear afresh.

 9. I do not make an anonymity direction


Signed

Date 12th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

