
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04549/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2020                    |On 22 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                 Mr Raja [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Hayes, Counsel, instructed by Deo Volente
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 20  November  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa which refused  Mr  [K]'s  appeal
    for a residence card under the provisions of Regulation  16(5)  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016   (the   EEA
    Regulations) reflecting his derivative rights as a primary carer.

 2. Mr [K] is a national of Pakistan, born on 19 October 1990.

 3. The appellant entered the UK as a student  on  8  September  2010  with
    leave until 23 October 2011 and was granted further periods  of  leave
    until 9 March 2016.  On 29 December 2014  the  appellant  was  informed
    that his leave to remain would be curtailed as of 3 March 2015.

 4. Following the curtailment notice, on 2 March 2015 the appellant applied
    for an EEA residence card as the partner  of  an  EEA  national.   That
    application was refused on 2 September 2015.   The  appellant  appealed
    but on 20 December 2016 his appeal was refused  and  he  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 11 August 2017.  On 7  September  2017  he  made  a
    second application on the same basis which  was  refused  on  16  April
    2018.

 5. On 14 September  2018  the  appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card
    reflecting his derivative rights as the  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen.  The respondent refused this application on 6  November  2018.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Powell  who  dismissed  it  in  a
    decision issued on 7 February 2019.

 6. The appellant made a further application on the same basis  on  15  May
    2019 but the respondent again refused his application, this time  in  a
    decision issued on 1 August  2019.   The  appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  on  16
    October 2019 at the  Nottingham  Justice  Centre.   The  appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal against that decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 1 April 2020.  Thus the matter comes before me.

 7. The core of the appellant's case is that his brother, [RAK]  ([A])  who
    is  a  British  citizen  and  who  has  been  diagnosed  with  paranoid
    schizophrenia,  has  come  to  depend  on  the   appellant   only   and
    particularly for his personal care and in managing his mental  illness.
    The appellant and his family considered that if the appellant left  the
    UK, his brother would  be  unable  to  access  support  from  statutory
    services because of his particular attachment to the appellant and that
    his relapse would be so serious that his circumstances would mean  that
    he would be compelled to  leave  the  UK  and  join  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa set out the appellant's case  in
    paragraphs 6 to 16 of her decision.  She noted that the  brother's  NHS
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Adekunte, identified in a letter  dated  29
    March 2019 , referring to  the  brother  as  "[R]"  that  "there  is  a
    possible risk of relapse in [R]'s mental health if  his  carer  was  to
    leave the UK, back to Pakistan". The letter confirmed  the  appellant's
    provision of support to [A] with his daily care needs.

 9. The letter of 29 March 2019 also stated that the team would provide:

         "a supporting letter in view of [Raja K]'s carer's role  for  [R].
         As discussed with him, there will be a balanced  opinion  on  [R]'s
         needs and level of care required."

    It may be that a further letter from Dr Adekunte dated  17  April  2019
    was intended to fulfil that commitment. It identifies, again  referring
    to the brother as "[R]", that:

         "[Raja K] has been integral to [R]'s care at home and the level  of
         support he provides is well recognised  by  the  CMHT.  [Raja  K]'s
         involvement had been helpful in stabilising his mental state.  This
         will be further required as we progress  with  re-establishing  his
         medication treatment. The CMHT is determined to continue to provide
         support for [Raja K] as [R]'s main carer even as he  recovers  from
         his illness."

10. The First-tier Tribunal was also provided with a report dated 7 October
    2019 from an independent Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Iankov.  The First-
    tier Tribunal judge  set  out  a  summary  of  Dr  Iankov's  report  in
    paragraphs 31 to 40 of the decision and does not indicate  anywhere  in
    the decision that she does not accept his opinion on the  circumstances
    of the appellant and his brother.  Dr  Iankov  sets  out  that  he  was
    provided with information by [A] and the appellant and  concluded  that
    appellant supported [A] in all aspects of daily living. Dr  Iankov  was
    shown a Carer's Assessment Form  dated  21  November  2018  which  also
    showed that the  appellant  was  providing  "a  substantial  amount  of
    emotional, mental and practical support for  his  brother  on  a  daily
    basis"; see paragraphs 3.50 to 3.54.

11. In paragraph 3.10, Dr Iankov records that that  the  brother  told  him
    that he:

         "... is unable to trust anyone but  his  brother  and  wouldn't  do
         anything at all if his brother is not around."

    The brother also told Dr Iankov that he was not  involved  with  mental
    health services as he did not trust them after  being  sectioned  twice
    and found it "better here with my brother";  paragraph  3.18.  He  also
    told Dr Iankov, set out in paragraph 3.29, that:

         "... he often thinks that if he doesn't have his brother around, he
         will feel unsafe and may become suicidal."

12. The report indicated in paragraph 3.15 that the appellant was  managing
    [A]'s  medication  which  the  family  were  obtaining  privately  from
    Pakistan as [A] would not engage with mental health services in the UK.
    The family considered that "it is very unlikely" that the brother  will
    attend for monitoring of the side effects of the medication.

13. Dr Iankov recorded in paragraph 3.32 that:

         "It was evident that the two brothers get on well. I was left  with
         the impression that Mr [RAK]  was  dependent  on  his  brother  for
         support and reassurance."

14. Dr Iankov concluded in  paragraph  4.2  that  the  appellant's  brother
    "struggled to engage with mental health services, but it is unclear  at
    this point whether he has been formally discharged from  services."  He
    was "satisfied that the appellant "is the main carer for  his  brother"
    (paragraph 4.8) and that [A] "trusts his brother and  is  dependent  on
    him"; paragraph 4.10. Dr Iankov  was  "concerned  that  if  Mr  [RAK]'s
    mental state deteriorates, he will be  very  reluctant  to  seek  help"
    (paragraph 4.12) and that the appellant was  "providing  good  support"
    and could seek statutory support for his brother (paragraph  4.13).  In
    paragraph 4.17, Dr Iankov identified a need for a care  plan  involving
    the appellant and statutory services.

15. Dr Iankov concluded:

         "4.19 In conclusion, Mr [RAK]  provides  a  significant  degree  of
             support   to   his   brother   who   suffers   with   paranoid
             schizophrenia. This degree of support is likely to lead  to  a
             better  prognosis  and  it  is  always  desirable  to  have  a
             collaborative approach between  carers  and  statutory  mental
             health services.

         4.20 If Mr Raja [K]is deported, it is likely that Mr [RAK]'s mental
             state will deteriorate significantly.  In my opinion  he  will
             become more  paranoid  and  is  likely  to  become  unable  to
             maintain his compliance with medication.  I will have concerns
             about his ability to continue living  in  his  sister's  house
             (considering the seriousness of his mental  disorder  and  the
             need for daily support).  It is therefore in Mr  [RAK]'s  best
             interests that he is supported by a dedicated carer  from  his
             own family (Mr  Raja  [K]),  rather  than  relying  on  future
             supported placements being arranged and monitored by the local
             health services."

16. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to identify  the  assessment  that
    had to be made:

         "... will the appellant's brother be unable to reside in the UK  if
         the appellant as required to leave?"

    This statement of the key issue in the  appeal  is  in  line  with  the
    guidance in case law on derivative rights of primary carers,  including
    Patel v SSHD [2019] UKSC 59 and MS (Malaysia) v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    580. In my view, the judge makes the same  uncontentious  statement  of
    the question that she had to answer in paragraph 50  of  the  decision.
    She sets out in paragraph 51, that in her view "[a] vital part of  this
    assessment is of the provision that would be made  by  social  services
    and the NHS". That is consistent with paragraph  42  of  MS  (Malaysia)
    which identifies statutory provision as a  "relevant,  but  not  always
    decisive factor".

17. Judge Gurung-Thapa went on, correctly, to take the findings  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Powell, prepared only some nine months prior to the
    appeal before her, as the starting point.  At paragraph 52  she  refers
    to Judge Powell's findings at paragraph  30  of  the  earlier  decision
    which identified an evidential gap where the provision available to the
    appellant's brother from the  NHS  and  the  local  authority  was  not
    properly covered in the evidence  provided.   Judge  Powell  stated  in
    paragraph 30 of her decision:

         "I do not have sufficient evidence about the services or  the  lack
         of services or the impact of services being provided to him on  his
         wellbeing to conclude that he is likely to be unable to continue to
         live in the United Kingdom, if the appellant  is  removed.   Whilst
         I accept that Fouzia Zamir is unable to provide the same or similar
         care to her brother, the absence of any analysis from  the  NHS  or
         the local authority does not provide me with a basis to  understand
         the interplay between  statutory  services  and  familial  support,
         which may include the brother's other relatives in this  country.".



18. Judge Gurung-Thapa identifies in paragraph 53 of her decision that,  in
    her view, this evidential gap  was  again  not  met.  She  referred  in
    paragraph 54 to the appellant having described private care services as
    able to assist his brother two or three hours a day for  two  or  three
    days a week. His evidence concerning support from statutory services in
    his absence was set out in paragraph 48:

         "In cross-examination the appellant was asked if he has  asked  the
         professionals how they will deal with his  brother's  trust  issues
         and who will care for him. The  appellant  replied  that  this  has
         never been asked."

    Paragraph 49 also records evidence from the appellant on this issue:

         "I asked the appellant if he or his family have tried to  obtain  a
         more up-to-date evidence of the sort of care  the  authorities  can
         provide. He replied when they had the last  care  assessment,  they
         raised this issue and they said that they cannot provide 24/7 care.
         The private agencies cannot guarantee that  it  will  be  the  same
         person to provide the care."

19. In paragraphs 54 and 55, the judge concludes that the appellant was  on
    notice from the decision of Judge Powell  that  information  about  the
    care that could be offered by statutory services  in  his  absence  was
    important in order to assess whether his brother  would  be  forced  to
    leave the UK with him. She found that this undermined  the  appellant's
    credibility, finding in paragraph 55 that his failure  to  provide  the
    evidence on what could be provided by statutory services was likely  to
    be because he knew it would not support his case.

20. The First-tier Tribunal states in paragraph 56:

         "I find this is not a case of considering what level  of  care  can
         reasonably be provided by the state, nor is it case of  considering
         what level of care is acceptable to the brother or  of  benefit  to
         the brother. The brother is known to the local  authority  and  the
         mental health services and there is no documentary evidence  before
         me to suggest that the brother has been  formally  discharged  from
         the mental health services and that he has previously had a carer's
         assessment.  I find that there  is  simply  no  evidence  that  the
         brother would not receive adequate care in the UK, if the appellant
         were to leave the UK."

    The judge continues in paragraph 57:

         "Whilst I accept that the brother is emotionally dependent  on  the
         appellant, I find that there is no satisfactory evidence before  me
         to suggest that the brother's emotional dependency on the appellant
         is such that the brother would be compelled to leave the UK even if
         the relevant agencies provided 24  hour  care  that  addressed  the
         brother's needs."

21. The grounds of appeal maintain that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately
    assess "the character and quality of the  dependency"  of  [A]  on  the
    appellant.  The grounds sought to draw support from paragraph 42 of  MS
    (Malaysia) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 580:

         "The availability of state-funded medical and social care will,  in
         many cases, make it hard for  those  who  provide  care  for  their
         elderly relatives to bring themselves within the  Regulation.   The
         availability of state care is not, however,  to  be  treated  as  a
         trump card in every case, irrespective of the nature and quality of
         the dependency on the carer  which  is  relied  on.   Just  as  the
         availability of an EU citizen parent to be a carer of a minor child
         does not render unnecessary an  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  the
         dependency of the child on her non-EU parent (see  Chavez-Vilchez),
         the availability of state care does not avoid the need  to  enquire
         into the actual dependency of the EU citizen on  her  adult  carer.
         The availability of alternative care is a relevant, but not  always
         decisive factor.

22. The grounds concede that it is self-evident that the state can  provide
    care needed by the brother, but the question for the judge was  whether
    "the quality and nature of the brother's dependency on the appellant is
    such that it would seriously impair the quality  and  standard  of  the
    brother's life such that he would be forced  to  leave  the  EU".   The
    grounds argue that the judge erred in failing to properly  engage  with
    the test set out in Zambrano.  The  grounds  maintain  that  the  "IJ's
    concentration on the absence of evidence of state provision ...  is  an
    'irrelevant matter'".

23. It is convenient to indicate at this point that I refused to admit  new
    grounds contained in paragraph 3 of Mr Hayes' skeleton  argument  dated
    20 August 2020 concerning the burden of proof  and  discrimination.  No
    formal application was made for those grounds to be admitted. No reason
    was given for the new grounds not being argued in the original  grounds
    of appeal. I did not accept that they were so manifestly  "obvious"  or
    otherwise compelling that the grounds had to be varied to  admit  them.
    The appeal therefore proceeded on the basis of  the  grounds  dated  27
    November 2019 on which permission had been granted.

Findings

24. It is easy to have sympathy for  [A]  and  his  family,  including  the
    appellant, given the seriousness of [A]'s mental illness.  As indicated
    by Dr Iankaov in paragraph 4.13 of his report the appellant clearly has
    "good intentions and is providing good  support".   Judge  Gurung-Thapa
    accepted that the appellant is the primary carer for  his  brother  and
    that his brother is dependent on him, needs care and that other  family
    members would have difficulty in providing that care.

25. However, as set out above, the question that the judge  had  to  answer
    here was whether the evidence before her showed  that  the  appellant's
    brother would be compelled to leave the UK were the appellant to leave.
     The judge's concern  was  that  without  evidence  of  what  would  be
    provided to the brother from the state via the NHS and other  statutory
    services, it was not possible for her to  conclude  that  he  would  be
    compelled  to  leave  the  UK.   She  was  astute  to  the  potentially
    complicating factor of a symptom of the  appellant's  illness  being  a
    mistrust of anyone other than the appellant. She raised this  with  the
    appellant at the hearing; see paragraph 48, set out above.

26. In my view, the absence of evidence from the community team as  to  how
    they would address the medical  and  social  care  of  the  appellant's
    brother if the appellant was to leave was a  legitimate  concern  here,
    just as it was for First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell.  Certainly,  there
    was an additional factor in the  claim  here  that  whatever  statutory
    services did, [A] would not engage or be able to receive  that  support
    as he had become so dependent on the appellant.  The  difficulty  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa found herself in was that she could not make an assessment
    of what the outcome would be for [A]  if  the  appellant  left  the  UK
    without knowing how statutory services "will deal  with  his  brother's
    trust issues". This does not mean that she treated the availability  of
    statutory services as a "trump card" but that she could  not  make  the
    assessment without more information.  The  judge  was  not  obliged  to
    accept the appellant's assertion  that  his  brother  would  refuse  to
    engage at all and have to go to Pakistan with him or conclude,  without
    more,  that statutory mental health services would be unable to address
    [A]'s trust issues to the extent that he would be obliged to leave  the
    UK in order to be with the appellant.

27. Further, the letters from Dr  Adekunte  clearly  anticipated  that  the
    community team would continue to offer care. Also, Dr Iankov's does not
    suggest, for example in paragraph 4.20 of his report, that his view  is
    that [A] would disengage and deteriorate so seriously that he would  be
    compelled to  leave  the  UK.  He  envisages  [A]  relying  on  "future
    supported placements being arranged and monitored by the  local  health
    service" although he is clear that this not  to  be  preferred  to  the
    current arrangement. Dr Iankov  identified  a  need  for  a  care  plan
    involving the appellant and statutory  services  and  clearly  did  not
    consider statutory provision to be an "irrelevant" issue  as  suggested
    in the grounds. That is so even though Dr Iankov was clearly  aware  of
    the importance of the appellant in [A]'s care and well-being.

28. It is my conclusion that Judge Gurung-Thapa's approach was  lawful  and
    did offend the ratio of MS (Malaysia). She considered the  evidence  on
    the nature of [A]'s dependency on the  appellant  and,  notwithstanding
    that dependency being real  and  serious,  was  entitled  to  ask  what
    alternative care would be available  if  the  appellant  left  the  UK,
    including how statutory services would deal with [A]'s  lack  of  trust
    and difficulty in engaging. She found that latter part of the  evidence
    lacking and that therefore she did not accept that it  had  been  shown
    that [A] would be compelled to leave the UK. That conclusion  was  open
    to her on the evidence provided.

29. It is therefore my conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  here
    did not err and that her decision should therefore stand.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  S Pitt   Date: 25 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
