
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/04986/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 February 2019                    |     On 8 March 2019                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MAY DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Auxiliadora Domenica Rodrigues
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin instructed by Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Judge  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
    decision to refuse her a permanent right of residence pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016,  in  particular
    Regulation  15(1)(d),  which  deals  with  family  members  of  persons
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  as  a  worker  who  has
    ceased activity.

 2. The  claimant  appeared  in  person  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,
    accompanied by her daughter who acted as her McKenzie friend and  where
    needed, her interpreter as the claimant is a Portuguese speaker.

 3. The claimant, a Brazilian citizen, has lived in the United Kingdom with
    her husband, a Spanish citizen and  therefore  an  EEA  national.   The
    parties married on 9 October 2010 and from  that  date,  the  appellant
    became a family member of the sponsor's family within  the  meaning  of
    Regulation 7(1)(a).  The sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 2009 and
    retired on 22 October 2010, a  little  under  a  fortnight  after  they
    married.

 4. They are still living together and at the date  of  decision  had  been
    doing so for over 7 years.  The Secretary of State refused a  permanent
    right of residence because he considered that  the  sponsor  could  not
    show that he was exercising Treaty rights during any 5-year  period  of
    the marriage, nor that he could bring  himself  within  the  Regulation
    5(2) exception for workers or  self-employed  persons  who  had  ceased
    activity.    If  the  sponsor  could  not  bring  himself  within  that
    exception, then time did not run for the 5-year period  for  his  wife,
    the claimant, and she was not entitled to claim permanent residence.

 5. The claimant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  allowed  her
    appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. The key reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal decision is at [19]-[20]:

         "19. However, although the  [claimant]  has  provided  considerable
         documentation to show residence in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
         sponsor for the last five years she has not  addressed  the  second
         limb of the reason for refusal namely the need to provide  evidence
         of residence of at least three years prior to  the  termination  of
         her sponsor's employment.  A person  is  only  a  worker  or  self-
         employed  person  who  has  ceased  activity  if  Regulation  5  is
         satisfied and in particular Regulation 5(2)(c)."

         20.   That  said  the  [claimant]  is  entitled  to  succeed  under
         Regulation 15(b) because she is a family member of an EEA national.
          She herself is not an EEA national.   She  has  produced  evidence
         which on the balance of probabilities shows that she has resided in
         the  United  Kingdom  with  her  sponsor  in  accordance  with  the
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years."

 7. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had arguably made conflicting findings in [19]  and  [20]  and
    that, if Regulation 5 was not met, the First-tier Judge erred in law in
    finding that Regulation 15 was applicable.

 9. That is the basis on which this appeal came before me.

The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016

10. The claimant's application for a Regulation 17 residence card is  based
    on Regulation 15(d) with Regulation 5(2) of the 2016  Regulations.   So
    far as material, the provisions of those Regulations are as follows:

         "'Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity'

         5.-(1)   In these Regulations, 'worker or self-employed person  who
                  has ceased activity' means an EEA national who satisfies a
                  condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
              (2) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
                  (a)  terminates activity  as  a  worker  or  self-employed
                      person and-
                      (i)  had reached the age of entitlement  to  a  state
                           pension on terminating that activity; or
                      (ii) in the case of a worker, ceases working to  take
                           early retirement;
                  (b)  pursued activity as a worker or self-employed  person
                      in the United Kingdom for at least 12 months prior to
                      the termination; and
                  (c)  resided in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more
                      than three years prior to the termination. ...

         Right of permanent residence

         15.-(1) The following persons acquire the right to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom permanently-...
         (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person who  has
         ceased activity, provided-
             (i)  the person was the family member of the worker  or  self-
             employed person at  the  point  the  worker  or  self-employed
             person ceased activity; and
             (ii) at that point, the  family  member  enjoyed  a  right  to
             reside on the basis of being the family member of that  worker
             or            self-employed            person;            ..."
                                     [Emphasis added]

Analysis

11. On the facts in this appeal, the sponsor cannot qualify  as  a  'worker
    who has ceased activity' pursuant to Regulation 5(2)(c) because he only
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009 and retired in 2010.  He had  not
    resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more  than  three  years
    before terminating his activity.  The First-tier Judge did not  err  in
    so finding at [19] in his decision.

12. However, at [20] the Judge fell into error of law.  If the  sponsor  is
    not a 'worker who has ceased activity' as defined in Regulation 5(2)(c)
    then Regulation 15(d)(i) and (ii) cannot  avail  her.   While  she  was
    indeed his family member when he ceased activity and enjoyed her  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom on that basis, if he  cannot  meet  the
    Regulation 5(2)(c) requirements this exception does not apply, and  the
    appeal cannot succeed.

DECISION

13. For the foregoing reasons, our decision is as follows:
    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    We set  aside  the  previous  decision.   We  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the claimant's appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     5 March 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
