
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/04771/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 May 2021                     |On 28 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                              TEMILADE WILLIAMS

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



For the appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by JA Batula Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Nigeria with date of birth  given  as
   22.1.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 2.2.21  (Judge  Bennett),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 29.8.19, to refuse her application for  an  EEA
   Residence Card as the Extended Family Member (EFM) of her half-brother Mr
   Taofik Alabi Adewale (Mr A), a national  of  Eire  resident  in  the  UK,
   pursuant to Regulations 8 and 18 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
   2016, as amended.

2. In summary, the grounds of application for permission to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal argue first that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
   law in refusing the adjournment application made during the remote appeal
   hearing when the quality of the appellant's video connection was poor  so
   that she was unable to effectively participate in the hearing. The second
   ground complains that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  "too
   long".

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 24.2.21, on ground 1 only, the judge considering it  arguable
   that  the  judge  erred  in  refusing  to  adjourn  given  the  technical
   difficulties outlined at [16] and [17] of the decision. The judge refused
   permission on ground 2, considering that whilst at  38  pages  it  was  a
   lengthy decision in what appeared  to  be  a  simple  case,  it  was  not
   arguable that this factor alone amounted to a procedural error.

4. The Upper Tribunal has received the respondent's  Rule  24  reply,  dated
   11.3.21, and has also  considered  Mr  West's  skeleton  argument,  dated
   22.1.21, evidently prepared for the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing.

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the various submissions and the grounds of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

6. In summary, the grounds argue first that the judge erred in refusing  the
   appellant's representative's adjournment application "as  evidence  could
   not properly be given by the appellant and Sponsor, nor be heard properly
   by the Tribunal, HOPO, and counsel for the appellant." The second  ground
   argues  that  "The  determination  is  arguably  unclear,   not   readily
   comprehensible, and prolix."

7. In relation to the decision to refuse  the  adjournment  application,  it
   can be seen from the decision itself at [16] that there were difficulties
   in taking the appellant's oral evidence. In summary, there was a  lengthy
   delay between questions put to her and the answers given and her  'image'
   regularly froze. Eventually, it was arranged that she telephone in to the
   hearing. Even then there were difficulties with the sound quality.

8. After considering the matter carefully, I am not satisfied that  the  way
   in which the judge addressed  the  difficulties  outlined  above  or  the
   refusal  of   the   adjournment   request   made   by   the   appellant's
   representative, can be said to amount to an error of  law  on  the  basis
   that the hearing was procedurally unfair. The judge outlined that because
   of the difficulties, the appellant's evidence was taken much more  slowly
   and was "not satisfied that those difficulties were such as substantially
   to compromise the fairness of the hearing or that a fair hearing was  not
   possible."

9. The judge also outlined at some length in 7 or 8 paragraphs  reasons  why
   an adjournment of the hearing part-way through the evidence  was  neither
   necessary  nor  appropriate.  In  particular,  the   Tribunal   had   the
   appellant's witness statement which stood as her evidence  in  chief  and
   her representative did not seek to adduce further oral evidence from her.
   The same applied to the evidence of the  supporting  witness.  The  judge
   also pointed out that the respondent's case was substantially that  there
   were deficiencies in the documentary evidence adduced on  behalf  of  the
   appellant. Any remaining issues were addressed in oral evidence which the
   judge states there was no difficulty in  understanding.  The  judge  also
   pointed out that no new issue arose during the  course  of  the  case  in
   respect of which further oral  evidence  might  have  been  necessary  to
   address. As submitted in the Rule 24 reply, the grounds of appeal do  not
   challenge  any  of  the  judge's  detailed  reasons  for   refusing   the
   adjournment application.

10. In the premises, the adjournment application  was  carefully  considered
   and the refusal cogently reasoned. Nothing  in  those  reasons  has  been
   identified as mistaken in fact or law. As Mr Tan pointed out, the grounds
   failed to challenge the conclusions of the judge that  as  the  appellant
   arrived in the UK before the sponsor, the appeal was "doomed to failure",
   or the reasoning set out at [17(e)], [189h)], and [25] of  the  decision.
   It  follows  that  regardless  of  any  alleged  error  relating  to  the
   difficulties in communication, the  appeal  was  bound  to  fail  on  its
   merits. In the premises, no error of law is disclosed by the first ground
   of appeal.

11. In respect of the second ground, whilst this was not pursued  before  me
   by Mr West, making no application to reopen permission on this ground, it
   is nevertheless appropriate to observe that the decision  is  unduly  and
   unnecessarily lengthy at some 38 pages. In  the  grounds,  the  appellant
   relied on dicta by Henry LJ in Flannery v  Halifax  Estate  Agencies  Ltd
   [2000] 1WLR 377 that the duty of a court or Tribunal to  give  clear  and
   adequate reasons is a function of due process, and therefore justice  and
   that fairness requires that the parties - especially the losing  party  -
   should be left in no doubt why they have won or lost.  Lord  Phillips  MR
   made a similar point in English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA
   Civ 605, that a judgement needs to make clear, not only  to  the  parties
   concerned but also to the appellant court, the judge's  reasons  for  his
   conclusions.

12. It follows that such long-winded decisions are to be deprecated as  they
   make it more difficult to identify and understand the precise reasons for
   the findings. It is important for judges to bear in mind that in R (Iran)
   and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, Lord Justice Brook held that there
   was no duty on a judge in giving reasons to deal with every argument  and
   that it was sufficient if what was said demonstrated to the  parties  the
   basis on which the judge had acted. This approach was adopted and applied
   by the Upper Tribunal in Budhathoki (Reasons for  decision)  [2014]  UKUT
   00341, in which it was stated, "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful
   for First-tier Tribunal judgments  to  rehearse  every  detail  or  issue
   raised in a case. This  leads  to  judgments  becoming  overly  long  and
   confused and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
   however, necessary for judges to identify and resolve  key  conflicts  in
   the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so  that
   the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

13. However, the fact that the decision was  so  long  does  not  of  itself
   amount to an error of law and the grounds entirely failed to identify any
   specific prejudice to the appellant caused by the length of the  decision
   that can be properly described as  an  error  of  law.  It  is  not,  for
   example, asserted that the appellant was unable to find or understand the
   reasons for the appeal being dismissed. The ground relies on a  point  of
   principle and a critique of  the  judge's  drafting  style,  rather  than
   identification of an error material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  It
   cannot be said that the decision was either perverse or irrational. It is
   unsurprising both that permission was refused on this ground and that  Mr
   West did not pursue the matter further.

14. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  and  the  appellant's
      appeal remains dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       14 May 2021

