
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04550/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 17 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                             linda dufie gyamfi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  20
    February 1975.  She  appeals  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision of  20
    February 2017 refusing her permanent residence as an EEA family member.



Background

2.   In brief outline the background to this  appeal  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant came to the UK in December 2002 with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  She had been in a relationship  from  2000  with  her  former
    husband, a Norwegian national.  Following her arrival in the UK he came
    to join her from Norway in December 2005.   They  were  married  on  19
    February 2011.  They have three children, a daughter born on  26  April
    2001 in Ghana, a daughter born in London on 20 August 2006  and  a  son
    also born in London on 8 March 2008.

3.   The appellant was granted a residence card on the basis that she was  a
    family member of an EEA national valid from 12 September 2011 until  12
    September 2016.  It is her case that at the time of the application her
    husband was then employed as a refuse truck  driver  and  had  been  in
    employment in the UK since his arrival in 2005 until February 2012 when
    he became permanently incapable of  working  as  he  suffered  a  brain
    haemorrhage.  The appellant left her husband on 8 April 2013 because he
    subjected her to physical and emotional violence.  They  were  divorced
    on 7 February 2017.  The appellant  has  been  working  since  February
    2014.

4.   On 18 October 2016 the appellant applied for permanent residence  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations") but her application was refused on 20 April 2017.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Having considered the evidence  and  submissions,  the  judge  referred
    firstly to reg. 10 of the 2016 Regulations setting out the requirements
    for qualifying for a retained right of residence.  The judge said  that
    the appellant, however, still had to meet the requirements of reg.  15.
    She commented at [6.7] of her decision  that  the  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant had been exercising treaty rights as if she were  an
    EEA national as a worker since February 2014 and also that when she was
    issued with a residence card on 12 September 2011, her spouse was  then
    exercising treaty rights.

6.   She said that this did not cover a five-year period and the  respondent
    asserted that the appellant had not  provided  any  evidence  with  her
    current application to show that  the  period  covered  by  his  treaty
    rights made up the requisite five years.  To show that, she would  have
    to rely on her former husband's exercise of treaty  rights  from  about
    October 2011 to February 2014 but on her own evidence he had  not  been
    in employment since February 2012.

7.   The judge then referred to the respondent's  guidance  document,  "Free
    movement rights: retained rights of residence" addressing the situation
    of applicants who were unable to provide all the evidence  relating  to
    their sponsor due to "difficult circumstances", recognising that  where
    a relationship has broken down due to  domestic  violence  it  may  not
    always be possible to provide all the  necessary  documents  about  the
    sponsor.

8.   On that issue the judge said that the thrust of the policy referred  to
    situations where the evidence was difficult to obtain, but that was not
    the present case as the evidence had not been provided, not because  it
    was difficult to obtain but because it  did  not  exist:  [6.15].   The
    judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.  There was a delay  in  issuing
    the decision: the hearing was on 16 May 2018 and the decision  was  not
    signed until 21 August 2018 and only promulgated on 10 September  2018.
    The judge acknowledged and regretted the delay explaining that  it  had
    arisen for personal/health reasons.

The Grounds of Appeal

9.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge's decision was flawed  by  a
    failure properly to apply the 2016 Regulations to the facts of the case
    as she failed to determine whether the appellant's former  husband  had
    acquired a right of permanent residence due to five continuous years of
    residence in the UK as a worker from 2005 until  2010  or  to  consider
    whether he had acquired a right of permanent residence as a worker  who
    had ceased activity or whether the appellant had acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence as the family member of her former husband.  It  is
    argued that the judge also failed to consider whether the appeal should
    be allowed on the basis the appellant had at the very least acquired  a
    retained right of residence or to determine whether she was residing in
    accordance with the 2016 Regulations at the date of her divorce.

10.  The grounds also argue that the  judge  did  not  properly  assess  the
    failure of the Respondent to apply her own policy in the light  of  the
    evidence that the appellant was a victim of domestic violence  and  had
    failed to focus  on  the  relevant  issues,  her  husband's  employment
    between 2005 and 2012 and the evidence of his permanent  incapacity  to
    work, , whereas she had focused on the  evidence  of  employment  after
    2012 which did not exist because he had not been working.  The  grounds
    then suggest that the judge might have  been  hampered  in  determining
    this appeal due to the passage of time since the hearing and  it  might
    be that her recollection of the submissions and issues was impaired.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge had failed to  make  reasoned
    findings on the evidence, had made other  numerous  failings  and  that
    there was a paucity of reasoning in the decision.  The  judge  granting
    leave commented that he could not understand how the judge had  arrived
    at her conclusions in paras [6.15]-[6.18] when dismissing the appeal.

12.  In his submissions, Mr Jafferji adopted  his  grounds  submitting  that
    there was a lack of factual findings and that the judge had focused  on
    the wrong issues.  She appeared to have accepted that the appellant was
    entitled to a retained right of residence or at least she had not found
    that she was not so entitled.  When considering the issue of  permanent
    residence, the judge had failed to make any relevant findings  of  fact
    when there was evidence that the appellant's former  husband  had  been
    working, even though the appellant may not have been  able  to  provide
    documentary evidence.

13.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had been entitled to  dismiss  the
    appeal as the  fact  remained  that  the  appellant  had  not  produced
    evidence to support her claim that  her  former  husband  had  acquired
    permanent residence.   The  judge  had  referred  to  the  respondent's
    guidance about the circumstances in which it would not be possible  for
    an applicant to provide all the necessary documents  but  he  submitted
    that in the circumstances of this appeal, there had been no onus on the
    respondent to make further enquiries.

Assessment of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

14.  I am satisfied that the judge did err in law in her assessment of  this
    appeal.  The respondent refused the application on the basis  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide  sufficient  evidence  to  support  her
    claim.  At the hearing before the judge, Mr Jafferji had submitted that
    the lack of evidence leading the respondent to refuse  the  application
    could be bridged by applying the guidance set out in  the  respondent's
    own policy.  His initial submission had been that  the  respondent  had
    not followed that policy and following the decision in Greenwood (No 2)
    [2015] UKUT 29 that, although the First-tier Tribunal had no  power  to
    remit her case to the respondent,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  expressly
    recognised  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  conclude  that  the
    respondent's decision was  unlawful.  He  had  submitted  that  as  the
    respondent had failed to take his own policy guidance into account, the
    position was that a lawful decision remained to be made.

15.  The judge did not accept that argument on the basis that  the  evidence
    had not been provided because it was difficult to obtain but because it
    did not exist [6.15].  This must be a reference to the  fact  that  the
    appellant's former husband had not been in work  since  February  2012.
    However, in order to establish permanent residence, the  appellant  was
    seeking to rely on her husband's work from 2005  until  February  2012.
    If he was working during that period and no  documentary  evidence  was
    available to support that contention, the issue  might  then  arise  of
    whether there were serious reasons why that evidence might be difficult
    to obtain.

16.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    focus on the issue  of  whether  the  appellant's  former  husband  had
    acquired a right of permanent residence either as a result of  his  own
    continual residence from 2005 until 2012 as a  worker  or  whether  the
    period from  2012  onwards  could  properly  be  included  due  to  his
    permanent incapacity to work.  I am also satisfied the judge  erred  by
    focusing on the fact that the appellant had  been  working  since  2014
    when the relevance of her work related to the period after the date  of
    divorce. I am also satisfied  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  clear
    findings on whether the appellant was, in any event,  a  family  member
    who had retained the right of residence.

17.  For these reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside. As further findings of fact on the issues identified above  need
    to be made, this is a case which should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing by a different judge.

Decision

18.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing by a different judge.


Signed:       H J E Latter                       Date: 29 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




