
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04982/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2019                           |On 17th April 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 mandeep kaur
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, S Z Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a national of India born  on  28  November  1987.  Her
    appeal against the refusal of a residence card as  an  extended  family
    member was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  28  January
    2019.
 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appealed on  the  ground
    that, having found  the  Appellant  had  adduced  valid  proof  of  her
    identity at the time of her  application,  the  judge  then  needed  to
    consider whether she satisfied  Regulation  8.   The  judge  failed  to
    properly direct herself following Dauhoo  (EEA  Regulations  reg  8(2))
    [2012] UKUT 79. An appellant could satisfy Regulation 8  in  four  ways
    and in the Appellant's case the judge had failed to make a  finding  on
    whether she was a member of the Sponsor's household prior to coming  to
    the UK.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bulpitt
    on 12 February 2019 on the following grounds: "It is arguable that  the
    judge has made a mistake of fact as to whether prior dependency on  the
    extended family member has been conceded by the Respondent. At [11] the
    judge says that dependency has not been raised as an issue. The Reasons
    for Refusal Letter however expressly states  that  no  element  of  the
    application other than whether it was  a  valid  application  had  been
    considered.  It is arguable therefore that  the  judge  has  mistakenly
    treated the issue as conceded when it was not. The judge has  not  made
    an explicit finding with reasons on the issue of prior dependency which
    is a  requirement  of  the  regulations  as  set  out  in  Dauhoo  (EEA
    Regulations reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79.  The only reference to the  issue
    is at [14] where the judge refers to evidence from individuals in India
    about the Appellant and family member living in the same household  but
    does not express a view on that evidence."

4.   In submissions, Ms Jones stated that there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant had submitted a valid  passport  and
    there was no issue in relation to her identity. The issue was solely in
    relation to the application of Dauhoo. The judge failed to identify the
    steps to be taken in the test  of  establishing  either  dependency  or
    membership of the household and failed to give adequate reasons for the
    Appellant's prior connection to the Sponsor.  The judge only dealt with
    the present position.

5.   Mr Chohan submitted that the whole focus of  the  hearing  was  on  the
    validity of the  passport  and  the  Appellant's  relationship  to  the
    Sponsor. At paragraph 11, the judge concluded that, although dependency
    was raised as an issue in other decisions, it  was  not  raised  as  an
    issue in the decision letter under appeal. Accordingly,  there  was  no
    challenge from the Respondent, who was represented at the  hearing,  to
    the test to be applied in Dauhoo. In any event, there was  evidence  of
    prior membership of the household at page 30 of the Appellant's bundle,
    an affidavit from a Numberdar, who stated the Appellant's family  lived
    together with the Sponsor's family in India. The Appellant  lived  with
    the Sponsor and his family in the same household  while  they  were  in
    India.

6.   Having established  the  validity  of  the  passport  and  the  claimed
    relationship there was ample evidence before the judge to show that the
    Appellant lived in the same household as  the  Sponsor,  both  families
    having lived together in India prior to coming to the  UK.   There  was
    also a photograph at page 39 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  showing  the
    Appellant's father, the Appellant's Sponsor and the Appellant when they
    were young and living in India. It is a group photo  of  both  families
    together.

7.   Accordingly, the judge's failure to make a  specific  finding  was  not
    material because there was evidence to support such a finding  and  the
    Home Office representative at the hearing had not suggested  otherwise.
    No argument was made that Regulation 8 was  not  satisfied.  Mr  Chohan
    submitted it was reasonable for the judge to proceed on the basis  that
    prior dependency or membership of a  household  was  accepted.  In  any
    event, it was not a point taken at the hearing and there  was  evidence
    before  the  judge  to  support  prior  membership  of  the   Sponsor's
    household. The judge considered all the evidence and  her  finding  was
    open to her on the evidence before her.


Discussion and Conclusion

8.   The Respondent refused the application for a residence card on 5  March
    2016 on the basis that the Appellant had failed to provide  a  national
    passport of identity or sufficient evidence that  she  was  related  as
    claimed to an EEA national. The First-tier Tribunal considered both  of
    these issues  and  found  in  the  Appellant's  favour.  There  was  no
    challenge by the Respondent to the judge's findings that the  Appellant
    had produced valid evidence of identity and  she  was  related  to  the
    Sponsor as she claimed.

9.   The judge found at paragraph 18:  "The  Appellant  has  provided  other
    consistent evidence including an India Land Revenue certificate showing
    the names of the Appellant's father and the name of  the  Spnsor  [sic]
    father as well as the name of  their  grandfather.   There  are  family
    photos taken when the Appellant was young. There is also ample evidence
    to show that the Appellant has lived  in  the  same  household  as  the
    Sponsor, his wife and son for several years.  I note that they all live
    in a property jointly purchased by the Sponsor and his  son  in  2015."
    It is clear from this paragraph that the judge found the Appellant  was
    a  member  of  the  Sponsor's  household  in  India  and  in  the   UK.
    Accordingly, the Appellant satisfied Regulation 8.

10.  The judge found at paragraph 20 that  the  Appellant  was  an  extended
    family  member  and  recognised  that  issuing  a  residence  card  was
    discretionary. She concluded: "It is now a matter for the Secretary  of
    State to exercise that discretion." She then allowed the  appeal  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. The Tribunal in Ihemedu (OFMs -
    meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) held:

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State.


11.  For the sake of clarity, I set aside the decision to allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and remake it as  follows:
    The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a residence  card  as  an
    extended family member is allowed insofar as the Respondent's  decision
    of 5 March 2016 was not in accordance with the law.

12.  The Appellant satisfies the requirements of Regulation  8.  It  is  for
    the Respondent to consider the exercise of discretion under  Regulation
    17(4) of the 2006 Regulations. No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances


Signed   Date: 15 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
