

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/04402/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London              |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 24th September 2018                    |On 8th October 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                            MR NIKOLOZ BEBOSHVILI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not in attendance nor represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cary promulgated  on  7  June  2018  ("the  Decision").
      Following a consideration of the appeal on the papers (at the  request
      of  the  Appellant),  by  the  Decision,  the  Judge   dismissed   the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated  14  April
      2017 refusing his application for  a  residence  card  confirming  his
      retained right of residence following dissolution of his  marriage  to
      his former Lithuanian spouse, Ms Latakaite.

2.           The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Georgia.   He  married  Ms
      Latakaite on 22 November 2011 and they were  divorced  by  proceedings
      begun on 8 February 2016, culminating in a decree absolute on 18  July
      2016.

3.          Ms Latakaite was in the UK as a student at  the  relevant  date.
      The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on the  basis  that
      there was no evidence that Ms Latakaite was working and,  in  relation
      to her status here as a student, the Appellant had failed  to  provide
      evidence that she had sufficient funds to support herself and that she
      had comprehensive medical insurance for herself and the Appellant  for
      the duration of her studies (see Regulation 4(1)(d) read with 4  (3)).
      The Respondent therefore did  not  accept  that  Ms  Latakaite  was  a
      "qualified person" for the purposes of the relevant regulations (which
      are in this case The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
      2016).

4.          The Judge considered the evidence  before  him  at  [9]  of  the
      Decision before concluding at [13] of the Decision that the  Appellant
      had failed to show that Ms Latakaite was, at the date of  the  divorce
      proceedings, a "qualified person".  He also rejected a claim that  she
      was permanently resident at that time for reasons given at [16] of the
      Decision.

5.          The Appellant challenges the Decision  on  the  basis  that  the
      Judge failed to take into account  evidence  which  should  have  been
      before him, namely a bundle which is stamped  as  received  on  8  May
      2018.   The Judge considered the appeal on the papers on 11  May  2018
      and, according to a note  on  the  file,  returned  his  decision  for
      promulgation on 15 May 2018.  He did not have sight of the  bundle  at
      the time of making the Decision.

6.          Permission to  appeal  was  nonetheless  granted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lambert on 9 August 2018 in the following terms so  far
      as relevant:
                 "....
            2.   The Appellant representative had  asked  for  consideration
           of the appeal on the papers.
            3.   The judge found the evidence  not  to  establish  that  the
           Appellant's former wife was exercising treaty rights at the date
           of divorce and that she had not at that date acquired  permanent
           residence.  The decision is adequately reasoned with  regard  to
           the evidence referred to in the decision.
            4.   The application is based on failure to have regard  to  the
           Appellant's  evidence.   It  is  accompanied  by  a  bundle   of
           documents that appear to  have  been  intended  for  the  appeal
           hearing.  There is a letter from Royal Mail confirming  delivery
           of a mail item to the Tribunal at Taylor House on 8 May.   There
           is no record on the file or  bundle  of  the  date  of  original
           receipt at Taylor House.  However  they  were  stamped  received
           (apparently  back  from  the  Judge)  on  17  May,   after   the
           determination ready for promulgation had  been  sent  to  Taylor
           House.  A note on the bundle appears to  indicate  that  it  was
           placed before the judge after the date of consideration  of  the
           appeal on 11 May.  It is difficult to understand  how  this  can
           have happened, however there  does  in  the  processing  of  the
           Appellant documents appear to have been a  procedural  error  by
           the Tribunal amounting to an error of law.
                 5.    There is therefore an arguable error of law."

7.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

8.    The Appellant did not attend the hearing before me.  At  the  time  of
      the hearing, I had no explanation for non-attendance  by  him  or  his
      representatives which caused the  Tribunal  clerk  to  make  telephone
      enquiries of the Appellant's  representative  for  an  explanation  of
      their and the Appellant's absence.  Those enquiries failed to elicit a
      response.  However, since the appeal hearing, I have  now  received  a
      letter dated 17 September 2018 but only  received  by  e  mail  on  24
      September 2018 (at 1742 hours) asking that the appeal be considered on
      the papers.  Since I did not have that  letter  at  the  time  of  the
      hearing, I received short oral submissions from Mr  Whitwell  for  the
      Respondent but, otherwise, this appeal  has  been  determined  on  the
      papers as requested.

9.    With that brief introduction, I now turn to the merits of  the  appeal
      beginning with whether there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
      Decision.

10.    Notice  of  the  appeal  hearing  before  Judge  Cary   (subsequently
      converted to a determination on the papers) was given as early  as  19
      September 2017.  The notice sent to the parties made  clear  that  all
      evidence should be submitted as soon as possible  and  served  on  the
      other party.  There is no explanation from the  Appellant  for  filing
      the evidence as late as he did.  Even if he had difficulties in making
      contact with Ms Latakaite, her statement in the  bundle  is  dated  27
      April 2018 and no explanation is provided for a delay in sending  that
      evidence for a further week.  The Respondent also takes issue with the
      reliance placed on these documents on  the  basis  that  there  is  no
      record of service on the Respondent.

11.   Be that as it may, the bundle was  date-stamped  as  received  by  the
      Tribunal on 8 May 2018 and there is nothing to show  why  that  bundle
      was not put before the Judge who was considering the appeal some three
      working days later.  I am therefore prepared to accept that there is a
      procedural error made by the Tribunal albeit not by the Judge himself.

12.   As the Respondent points out though, a finding that there is an  error
      of law does not necessarily lead to the setting aside of the  Decision
      under challenge if  the  result  of  the  further  material  does  not
      materially alter the conclusions reached by the Judge.  I therefore go
      on to consider whether the error is material.

13.   In relation to the determinative issue, namely  whether  Ms  Latakaite
      was a "qualified person" at the date of divorce, the Appellant  relies
      on the statement from Ms Latakaite dated 27 April 2018 which reads  as
      follows:
           "I, Karina Latakaite write this witness statement in support  of
           my former spouse Nikoloz Beboshvili's Immigration Appeal.
           I have read my ex-husband's refusal letter dated 15 April  2017,
           the refusal is mainly based on myself and my studies at the time
           we divorced.  I have European Health Insurance (EHIC) which  was
           confirmed to me by the Home Office on the  phone  that  I  don't
           need any private medical insurance if I have this card.
           Me and Nikoloz were very happy together  and  were  married  for
           almost 5 years.  As the relationship between us became difficult
           we decided to sadly divorce and it has been amicable between  us
           and I hope this can continue to be the case.  Our  divorce  came
           through on 18th July 2016.
           I enrolled on a Full Time  English  Course  in  the  UK  at  the
           beginning of January 2016.  I was a full  time  student  at  the
           time of the divorce  and  I  was  financially  dependent  on  Mr
           Nikoloz  Beboshvili,  who  has   been   financially   supporting
           throughout my studies until January 2017.  He has  been  working
           at TSS since 2013 and still works there, I'm proud  of  him  and
           how he has stuck to this job and progressed through the company.
           I have provided my European Health Insurance Card as proof of my
           medical cover in the UK which I obtained in April 2015.  Since I
           came to the UK many years ago up until now I have  exercised  my
           treaty rights here, however I do not intend to live  in  the  UK
           permanently. I always had adequate funds and medical cover while
           I studied.
           I was studying at the time of our divorce  and  I  gave  all  my
           papers for my ex-spouse application, I feel chastised for  being
           a student but this shouldn't be the case as I was not in  breach
           of any rules.
           Please let me know if you require any more information."


14.   Based on the evidence which the Judge had before him at  the  date  of
      the Decision, he found as follows:
           "[13] The Appellant was divorced from his wife on July 18  2016.
           At that date she was a full-time student.  There is no  evidence
           that she had the necessary comprehensive sickness  insurance  in
           place at the date of the divorce.  It must therefore follow  the
           Respondent was right to conclude that the  Appellant  could  not
           establish that his wife was a "qualified person" as a student at
           the time they were  divorced.   The  Appellant  also  failed  to
           produce any evidence that Ms Latakaite had sufficient  resources
           to maintain herself during her studies.  Although  he  suggested
           that she had "savings from employment" in his application he has
           produced no evidence to support that assertion.  I have seen  no
           bank statements or evidence  of  savings.   The  Respondent  was
           therefore also  entitled  to  refuse  the  application  on  that
           ground.
           [14]  The Appellant failed to produce any evidence to show  that
           at the time they  were  divorced  Ms  Latakaite  was  exercising
           treaty rights in some other capacity as a  worker.   Accordingly
           the only way the Appellant can possibly succeed with his  appeal
           is by showing that at the date of the divorce Ms  Latakaite  had
           acquired  permanent  residence.   I  should  add  that  no  such
           assertion was made by the Appellant  in  the  letter  from  Visa
           Direct dated October 26 2016 or his appeal.
           [15]   Under  Article  16  of   EU   Directive   2004/38   ('the
           Directive'), EEA nationals  automatically  acquire  a  right  of
           permanent residence in the UK if they have legally resided  here
           for a continuous period of  five  years.   For  these  purposes,
           'legal' residence includes periods spent as a worker  (including
           part-time work if  it  is  'genuine  and  effective'),  a  self-
           employed person, a student with adequate financial resources and
           comprehensive sickness insurance or a jobseeker.  An  individual
           in one of these categories is described as a 'qualified  person'
           in the UK legislation and  is  also  known  as  someone  who  is
           'exercising  Treaty  rights'.   'Continuous'  residence  is  not
           affected by periods of absence for mandatory military service or
           by absence from the UK for a total of no more than six months in
           any one calendar year.  One absence from the  UK  of  up  to  12
           months is permitted if it is a result  of  an  important  reason
           such as pregnancy and  childbirth,  serious  illness,  study  or
           vocational training or a posting abroad.  An  EEA  national  who
           has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
           2006/2016 Regulations for a continuous period of five years will
           acquire permanent residence - see  regulation  15(1)(a)  of  the
           2016 Regulations.
           [16]   Unless  Ms  Latakaite   was   registered   under   Worker
           Registration Scheme any periods of residence prior to  30  April
           2011 will not count in calculating her entitlement to  permanent
           residence.  There is no evidence  that  Ms  Latakaite  was  ever
           registered under that Scheme.  According to Eynsford College her
           studies started on January 20 2016 less than 5 years  after  the
           registration requirement under the Workers  Registration  Scheme
           came to an end for the purpose of the acquisition  of  permanent
           residence.  Accordingly the Appellant cannot establish  that  Ms
           Latakaite had acquired permanent residence at the  time  of  the
           divorce even if she had been in continuous employment from April
           30 2011 to January 19 2016 as this is a period of  less  than  5
           years. In any event it is unclear from the evidence  whether  Ms
           Latakaite's employment up until the time she began studying  was
           "continuous" for the purposes of the 2006/2016 Regulations.  The
           letter from HM Customs and Excise does not give any start  dates
           or termination dates  for  the  various  periods  of  employment
           referred to in the letter.  I also  note  that  in  2014/15  she
           appears to have been working for at least part of the time on  a
           self-employed basis in that there is reference to the payment of
           class 2 self-employed national insurance contributions.  The pay
           slips the Appellant has produced for Ms Latakaite  for  2015  do
           not help.  They are not  in  her  name.  I  have  not  seen  the
           originals.  The  Appellant  did  not  take  the  opportunity  of
           continuing with his request for an oral hearing  when  he  could
           have given evidence in support of his application.  When I  look
           at all the evidence before  me  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
           Appellant has established that at the date of his divorce he was
           entitled to a retained right of residence."

15.   The Appellant's grounds to appeal the Decision do not engage with  the
      question of what material difference the further evidence makes.   The
      only evidence which could be relevant to the Judge's  findings  is  Ms
      Latakaite's statement which I have set  out  at  [13]  above  and  her
      European Health Insurance Card ("EHIC") which is valid for five  years
      and expires on 27 April 2020.  Ms Latakaite says that she was told  by
      the Home Office that she did not need private medical insurance if she
      had this card.  However, that does not assist the Appellant.  Not only
      is it the case that Ms Latakaite has produced no confirmation from the
      Home Office in this regard but, also, in April 2015 when the card  was
      apparently issued, she is said to have been working in the UK and  not
      studying.

16.   Further and in any event the Judge has with some foresight dealt  with
      this point at [12] of the Decision where he says this:
           "[12] An EEA national purporting to exercising [sic] their  free
           movement rights in the UK as a student must show that they  have
           enough money to meet their  living  expenses  and  so  will  not
           become a burden on the social assistance system of the UK during
           their residence and comprehensive sickness insurance (CSI) cover
           in the UK for  themselves  to  be  recognised  as  a  "qualified
           person"  for  the  purposes  of  the  2016  Regulations  -   see
           regulation 4(d)(ii) and (iii).  The requirement of comprehensive
           sickness insurance cover is not merely a  formality  but  is  an
           integral part of self-sufficiency under the regulations - see FK
           (Kenya) v SSHD (2010) EWCA Civ  1302.   That  condition  is  not
           satisfied by an EEA's citizen's entitlement to  free  healthcare
           under the NHS - see Ahmad v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2017] EWCA Civ 988."


17.   In the case of Ahmad, the Court of Appeal summarised  its  conclusions
      on the issue whether the availability of free NHS treatment in the  UK
      is sufficient to fulfil the  requirement  for  comprehensive  sickness
      insurance in the following way:
           "[70]...If an EEA national enters the UK and is not involved  in
           an economically active activity, for example because  she  is  a
           student, her residence and that of her family members  will  not
           be lawful unless she has CSIC while she is a student in the five
           years following her arrival.   Accordingly  her  family  members
           will not be able to qualify for permanent residency in the UK.
           [71]  So Mrs Ahmad had to have CSIC while  she  was  a  student.
           This condition must be strictly complied with.   The  fact  that
           she would be entitled to treatment under the NHS, and  was  thus
           at all times in substantially the same  position  as  she  would
           have been if she had CSIC, is nothing to the point.  Her failure
           to take out CSIC put the host state at risk of having to pay for
           healthcare at a time when the Ahmads had not then  achieved  the
           status of  permanent  resident  and  she  was  not  economically
           active."


18.   The position of Ms Latakaite and the Appellant  is  analogous.   There
      is nothing in Ms Latakaite's statement which in any way undermines the
      Judge's finding that she did not already have permanent residence when
      she commenced her studies in January  2016.   Although  her  statement
      says that she came to the UK "many years ago", she does not provide  a
      date nor say on what basis she came here first or on  what  basis  she
      has remained since.  She has a EHIC which confirms her entitlement  to
      receive free NHS treatment but, as the Court of Appeal held in  Ahmad,
      that is not enough to fulfil  the  condition  requiring  comprehensive
      sickness insurance.

19.   The Appellant has to show that Ms Latakaite was a  "qualified  person"
      at the relevant date (which I accept following the Court  of  Appeal's
      decision in Baigazieva v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      [2018] EWCA Civ  1088  is  the  date  when  divorce  proceedings  were
      issued).  In this case that date was 8 February 2016 (see [9]  of  the
      Decision).   Ms Latakaite's statement records that she began  a  full-
      time English course at the beginning of January  2016.   There  is  no
      suggestion that she was also working.  As I  have  already  explained,
      there is no evidence to undermine the Judge's findings  that  she  was
      not at that time a permanent resident.

20.   Since Ms Latakaite  did  not  have  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
      cover as at 8 February 2016 (she relies only on the  EHIC  as  meeting
      that requirement), it follows that the Appellant cannot show that  she
      was a "qualified person" at the relevant date. I add for  completeness
      on  this  issue  that  the  requirement  for  comprehensive   sickness
      insurance cover relates not only to treatment for the EEA national but
      also for his/her family members (see Regulation  4(3)(b)).   Even  if,
      contrary to the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Ahmad,  a  EHIC  was
      sufficient to fulfil the  requirement,  it  would  not  show  that  Ms
      Latakaite had comprehensive sickness cover also  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant.

21.   I should also add that, in addition to needing to show  that  she  had
      comprehensive sickness insurance at the relevant  time,  in  order  to
      show that she was a "qualified person", Ms Latakaite  also  needed  to
      show that she had "sufficient resources not to become a burden on  the
      social assistance system of the United Kingdom" (Regulation  4(3)(a)).
      The evidence of Ms Latakaite and the Appellant in the further evidence
      bundle that the Appellant  was  maintaining  Ms  Latakaite  until  she
      finished her studies in January 2017 is contrary  to  the  Appellant's
      evidence recorded at  [9]  of  the  Decision  that  Ms  Latakaite  was
      maintaining herself from "savings from employment".   I  do  not  have
      evidence in support of either assertion.  That is an additional reason
      why the Appellant's appeal fails.

22.   However, the primary reason why the Appellant's appeal cannot  succeed
      based on the further evidence is that set out at [20] above.  Although
      the Judge did not have the further evidence before him  when  he  made
      the Decision, he has referred at [12] of the Decision  to  the  reason
      why the appeal would fail  for  the  same  reason.   Accordingly,  the
      failure to refer to the further evidence, even if a  procedural  error
      of law in circumstances where the evidence was with the  Tribunal  but
      not before the  Judge,  is  not  material  as  the  appeal  fails  for
      essentially the same reasons as those given by the Judge.

23.   For the foregoing reasons, the Appellant has not shown that  there  is
      any material error of law in the  Decision.  I  therefore  uphold  the
      Decision.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision does not involve the making of  a  material
error on a point of law.  I  uphold  the  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cary promulgated  on  7  June  2018  with  the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.
 Signed          [pic] Dated:  1 October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
