
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04463/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2021                     |On 24 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD UMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafferji, Counsel instructed by Lawise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied for a residence card  as
      an extended family  member  under  regulation  8  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations")  on
      the basis of his relationship with his  uncle,  who  is  a  Portuguese
      citizen ("the sponsor"). His application was refused. He  appealed  to
      the First-tier Tribunal, where his case came before Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal ("the judge"). In a decision promulgated  on
      28 October 2019, the judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant is  now
      appealing against that decision.

   2. The judge dismissed the appeal for a single reason, which is that  the
      sponsor did not obtain Portuguese nationality  until  2013,  which  is
      approximately two years after the appellant entered the  UK  in  2011.
      The judge found that regulation 8(2) of the 2016 Regulations  was  not
      satisfied because, although the appellant was dependent on the sponsor
      prior to residing in the UK,  at  the  time  of  this  dependency  the
      sponsor was not an EEA national and therefore prior dependency  on  or
      household membership of an EEA national was not established.

   3. The grounds of appeal make a single argument, which is that  there  is
      no requirement under the 2016 Regulations for the sponsor to have been
      an EEA national prior to the appellant coming to the UK, so long as he
      was an EEA national at the time the application was made. The  grounds
      acknowledge that there is Upper Tribunal  authority  to  the  contrary
      (Moneke [2011] UKUT 341) but argue that (a) the finding on this issue
      in Moneke was obiter and unreasoned; and (b) the  issue  needs  to  be
      considered in the light of the  subsequent  CJEU  judgment  of  Rahman
      [2012] CJEU Case - 83/11.

   4. In his submissions Mr Jafferji argued that Moneke  should  be  treated
      with caution as although a  finding/conclusion  on  the  necessity  of
      being an EEA national at the time of the prior dependency was made, no
      reasons were given for this finding and the focus of the decision  was
      on a different issue.

   5. Relying on Rahman and the Court of Appeal judgment Aladeselu &  Ors  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  144,  Mr
      Jafferji argued that as Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Directive"),  which
      is the Directive which the 2006 Regulations transposes, is  silent  on
      this issue in the operative article (Article  3(2)),  a   teleological
      approach must be taken to interpreting it, having regard to recital  6
      of the Directive, where it is stated:

           "In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense
           and without prejudice to the prohibition  of  discrimination  on
           grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons  who  are
           not included in the definition  of  family  members  under  this
           Directive, and who therefore do not enjoy an automatic right  of
           entry and residence in the host Member State, should be examined
           by the host Member State  on  the  basis  of  its  own  national
           legislation, in order to  decide  whether  entry  and  residence
           could be granted to  such  persons,  taking  into  consideration
           their  relationship  with  the  Union  citizen  or   any   other
           circumstances, such as their financial or physical dependence on
           the Union citizen."

   6. He maintained that the purpose  underpinning  Article  3(2)  would  be
      undermined if it did not apply  in  circumstances  where  an  extended
      family member had been dependent on the EEA national prior  to  coming
      to the UK merely because the EEA national at that time had not been an
      EEA national. He referred to paragraph 49 of Aladeselu,  where  it  is
      stated:

           The possibility of an adverse effect is sufficient when  one  is
           considering whether a particular interpretation of the threshold
           condition in article 3(2) accords with the underlying policy  of
           the Directive.

   7.  Mr  Melvin  argued,  in  summary,  that  Moneke,  a  decision  of   a
      Presidential panel which has not been overturned/superseded in  almost
      a  decade,  remains  good  law,  and  that  there   were   no   policy
      considerations that support the appellant's position.

   8. I agree with Mr Melvin, for the following reasons.

   9. First, Moneke provides clear authority to  support  the  respondent's
      position. The finding at paragraph 40(ii) of Moneke could not be  more
      clear. It states:

           [T]he dependency or membership of the household  must  be  on  a
           person who is  an  EEA  national  at  the  material  time.  Thus
           dependency or  membership  of  a  household  that  preceded  the
           sponsor becoming an EEA national would not be sufficient. It  is
           necessary for the pre entry dependency to be on the EEA national
           and not a person who subsequently became an EEA  national.  Thus
           if a sponsor has  been  financially  supporting  OFMs  who  live
           abroad for many years before he  became  an  EEA  national,  but
           there was  no  such  support  after  the  sponsor  acquired  EEA
           nationality, there would be no evidence of dependency on an  EEA
           national.

  10. Mr Jafferji  is  correct  that  the  panel  in  Moneke  focused  their
      discussion on a different issue and did not set out  reasons  for  the
      conclusion in paragraph 40(ii).  However,  that  does  not  mean  this
      finding was not properly considered, or that it was obiter. One of the
      central issues for determination in Moneke was whether the sponsor  in
      that case had been a German citizen at the time of the  claimed  prior
      dependency and one of the reasons the panel found there to be an error
      of law was that the material before the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      enable a finding to be made  on  when  the  sponsor  became  a  German
      citizen. The finding at paragraph 40(ii) was not, therefore, obiter.

  11. Second, Mr Jafferji has not identified any case, in any  jurisdiction,
      where a different conclusion to that in Moneke was reached. Neither of
      the two cases relied  upon  by  Mr  Jafferji,  Rahman  and  Aladeselu,
      address, even tangentially, the issue in this appeal.

  12. Third, I do not agree with Mr Jafferji that Article 3(2) is silent  on
      whether an EEA national must have been an EEA national at the time  of
      the prior dependency. Article 3(2) provides:

           (2) Without prejudice to any right to free movement and
           residence the persons concerned may have in their own right, the
           host Member State shall, in accordance with its national
           legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the following
           persons:


                 (a) any other family members, irrespective of their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which they have come,
                 are dependants or members of the household of the Union
                 citizen having the primary right of residence ...;
           ...
           The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of
           entry or residence to these people."


  13. Article 3(2) states that the extended family member (referred to as an
      "other family member") must be dependent on or a  member  of  the  EEA
      national's household in the country from which they have come. It  is,
      in my view, implicit in this that at the time of this  dependency  (in
      the country from which they have come) the EEA  national  was  an  EEA
      national. I do not  consider  this  interpretation  to  undermine  the
      effectiveness or objective of the Directive which  is  concerned  with
      the free movement of EEA nationals  and  is  not  concerned  with  the
      circumstances of EEA nationals prior to becoming one.

  14. For these reasons, I find that the judge did err in law as claimed  in
      the grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

  15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and stands.

|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|D. Sheridan                         |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 17 March 2021                |


