
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04773/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 22 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 NAZIR RIAZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Imamovic instructed by Wright Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge M Robertson promulgated on 25 March 2019 in which  the
       Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2016.

Background

    2. The appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 1 January  1939
       who entered the  UK  in  2005  as  a  family  visitor.  A  number  of
       applications for leave to remain have since been made  all  of  which
       have been refused. On 6 January 2018  the  appellant  applied  for  a
       residence card pursuant to regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations  as  a
       family member in the ascending  line  of  Bilal  Qureshi,  a  British
       national who had exercised treaty rights in Ireland.

    3. The Judge sets out her findings from [20]  of  the  decision  on  the
       basis of which it is found at [21]:

           "21.   On  the  evidence,  in  the  round,  on  the  balance  of
                probabilities, I find that the  Irish  authorities  accepted
                that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights on  the  basis
                of documentary evidence provided,  and  issued  a  residence
                permit to the sponsor and  to  the  appellant  as  a  family
                member. There  is  sufficient  evidence  before  me  in  the
                appellants bundle as to work and residence to establish that
                the sponsor did  work  and  live  in  Ireland,  that  family
                members visited him there, rather than him making trips back
                to the UK, and that his move was genuine. I  find  therefore
                that on return to the UK, the sponsor had the same rights as
                an EEA national under the EEA Regs."

    4. The Judge thereafter considered the  question  of  entitlement  to  a
       residence card on the basis the sponsor is a qualified person in  the
       United Kingdom having provided evidence of employment here. The Judge
       notes the appellant is a family  member  in  the  ascending  line  as
       provided for in regulation 7(1)(c), although regulation 7(1)(c)  also
       requires the appellant to establish that she is  a  dependent  direct
       relative of the sponsor.

    5. The Judge was concerned about the evidence given regarding who  lived
       with the appellant which was found to be confused for the reasons set
       out at [24], leading to Judge to make the followings findings at  [25
       - 26]:

           "25.   Much of  the  evidence  seemed  rehearsed;  either  Mr  A
                Qureshi lived with the Sponsor or their mother. The evidence
                was very confused and it is difficult to see why there would
                be such confusion if they visit regularly and  are  involved
                in the care of the Appellant. Either the Sponsor lived  with
                their mother at  [~]  Court  or,  as  his  mother  initially
                stated, he lived next door but  he  came  round  every  day.
                Although I have some correspondence to the  Sponsor  at  [~]
                Court, it is not unknown for people to use postal  addresses
                which are other than the address at which they  reside;  the
                documentary  evidence  alone  would  not  confirm  that  the
                Sponsor lived at  [~]  Court.  There  is  no  evidence  from
                Paradigm Housing Association as to who is the named tenant/s
                was/were of [~] Court, who is permitted to reside in  it  or
                who pays the rent on  it  and  this  is  evidence  that  was
                reasonably available to them (TK  (Burundi)).  Although  all
                witnesses stated that it was the Sponsor that the  Appellant
                was  primarily  dependent  on  financially,  there  was   no
                evidence that he even paid the rent on [~] Court, let  alone
                the other bills, and  again,  this  was  evidence  that  was
                reasonably available to them. It may well be that it is Mr A
                Qureshi that the Appellant lives with, supported by all  the
                family  members.  There  simply  was  insufficient  evidence
                before me from which I could find  that  in  order  for  her
                essential needs to be met, the Appellant needed the material
                support of the Sponsor (Bigia).  I cannot, on  the  evidence
                before  me,  in  the  round,  find  that  the  Appellant  is
                dependent on the sponsor.

           26.    Whilst I accept that it is established that  the  Sponsor
                is to be treated as an EEA national exercising Treaty rights
                in the UK, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed  because  she
                does not meet the dependency test in Reg 7(1)(c)."

    6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, the operative part  of  the
       grant being in the following terms:

           "3.    In a reasoned determination, the Judge  was  entitled  to
                probe the appellant's  residential  circumstances.  She  was
                entitled to question the inconsistencies in the evidence and
                make findings that the evidence appeared rehearsed. She  was
                entitled to consider the financial circumstances and did not
                attach undue weight to whether the appellant  was  receiving
                financial assistance. The Judge acknowledged the appellant's
                status in Ireland, but she was  entitled  to  make  her  own
                findings on the evidence available to her  at  the  hearing.
                However, the witness statements and oral  evidence  do  deal
                with the care the appellant is  given  by  the  sponsor  and
                further comment is made in  the  GP  letter  which  was  not
                referred to in the Judge's decision. The Judge has  arguably
                erred in law by not addressing this evidence and whether  or
                how it affects her assessment  of  dependency.  This  is  an
                arguable error of law."

    7. There is no Rule 24 response filed by the respondent.

Error of law

    8.  A  Rule  15(2A)  application  has  been  filed  by  the  appellant's
       representatives containing a number of additional documents.  It  was
       accepted on the appellant's behalf that such would only  be  relevant
       if an error of law was found and  therefore  this  evidence  was  not
       considered at this stage of the proceedings.

    9. Reliance is placed upon the grounds of challenge  which  are  in  the
       following terms:

           "3.    The Judge has erred in the following ways:

                 a) Failing to take  into  account  a  material  matter:  IJ
                    firstly, placed  significant  reliance  on  whether  the
                    appellant's family members 'other than' the sponsor live
                    with her or not at paragraph 24, the witnesses confirmed
                    that the appellant and the sponsor reside together.  The
                    inconsistent evidence  of  where  other  family  members
                    other  than   Mr   Bilal   Qureshi   reside   does   not
                    automatically reflect on the consistent evidence of  all
                    the witnesses that  he  resides  with  his  mother.  The
                    assessment therefore ignores consistent oral evidence on
                    the material issue of whether or not  she  resides  with
                    her sponsor.

                IJ, secondly, finds at paragraph 25 that the  appellant  has
                not produced evidence of financial assistance. There  is  no
                requirement in the EEA regulations akin to Appendix FM-SE to
                produce specific evidence. Amos v Sec of State for the  Home
                Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552 (12 May 2011) paragraph 38  -
                40. IJ had evidence of the witnesses and the  oral  evidence
                of the appellant and the sponsor. IJ finds  that  they  have
                said  'consistently'  at  court  that   the   appellant   is
                financially supported by the sponsor. There were a number of
                witnesses and their consistent evidence was not given weight
                cumulatively. There is no reason given by the IJ either  why
                their testimony is not accepted on this point in respect  of
                financial assistance.

                 b) Failing to take  into  account  a  material  matter:  IJ
                    places significant weight therefore on  whether  or  not
                    the appellant lives with the sponsor and is  financially
                    assisting  her  to  the  exclusion  of  other   relevant
                    factors. IJ fails  to  properly  assess  the  dependency
                    holistically  and  by  reference   to   the   appellants
                    particular facts including her 'practical and  emotional
                    dependency'.  It is established law that  she  does  not
                    have to be 'wholly or mainly dependent' on  the  sponsor
                    and that 'essential living needs' must  be  assessed  as
                    per  her  particular  'financial,  physical  and  social
                    conditions'. In Reyes v Secretary of State for the  Home
                    Department (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013]  UKUT  314  (19
                    June 2013) the court makes this  clear,  by  summarising
                    the essence of dependency at paragraph 19 in  accordance
                    to the case law of Jia v Migrationsverket C-1/05  [2007]
                    OB 545 at [35]-[37], the following:

                        "19.   From the above, we glean  four  key  things.
                        First, the test of dependency is a  purely  factual
                        test. Second, the Court envisages that questions of
                        dependency  must  not  be   reduced   to   a   bare
                        calculation of financial dependency but  should  be
                        construed broadly to involve a holistic examination
                        of  a  number  of  factors,  including   financial,
                        physical and social conditions, so as to  establish
                        whether there is dependency that  is  genuine.  The
                        essential focus has to be  on  the  nature  of  the
                        relationship concerned and on  whether  it  is  one
                        characterised by a situation of dependency based on
                        an examination of all  the  factual  circumstances,
                        bearing  in  mind  the  underlying   objective   of
                        maintaining the unity of the dependency.  It  seems
                        to us  that  the  need  for  a  wide-ranging  fact-
                        specific approach is indeed enjoined by  the  Court
                        of Appeal in SM (India): see in particular Sullivan
                        LJ's observations that [27]-[28]."

                IJ has failed to give any consideration in her assessment to
                the appellant's physical/practical and emotional dependency.
                This includes the medical condition (at the hearing was in a
                wheelchair and had been for a year), age (80 years  of  age)
                and no employment/no savings or resources financially of her
                own, loss of her husband in 2010. The IJ had  oral  evidence
                that the appellant had been  emotionally  helped  after  her
                husband passed away by her sponsors, the  practical  support
                she gets due to her medical conditions  from  her  son  (the
                sponsor)  and  his   wife   including   cooking,   cleaning,
                washing/bathing, ensuring she attends appointments, give her
                medication, using her wheelchair and getting about.  The  IJ
                had a letter from the appellant's GP at ab page  193  -  194
                which  she  does  not  give  any  consideration  to  in  her
                assessment on dependency.

                There was no proper consideration of dependency  with  those
                factors reflecting  on  her  social/physical  and  emotional
                dependency and the focus was on financial/residence  by  the
                IJ. It fails to  assess  dependency  holistically  and  with
                those relevant aspects being considered and or reasons given
                why they are not accepted.

                Failing to take into account a  material  matter:  IJ  found
                that the appellant had been recognised as a 'family  member'
                while she had been  in  Ireland  at  paragraph  21.  In  her
                assessment under regulation 9 therefore IJ had accepted  the
                evidence of the Irish authorities, both that  the  appellant
                was a 'family member' for the purposes of regulation  9  and
                equally that the residence in Ireland was  genuine.  In  the
                assessment at paragraph 25 IJ however  does  not  take  this
                into consideration. IJ does not take account,  consideration
                or give weight that she had  been  recognised  as  a  family
                member in Ireland at this junction. This is  informative  of
                the current  dependency  assessment  because  the  appellant
                could only be recognised as  a  family  member  if  she  was
                dependent, as IJ identifies  under  regulation  7(1)(c)  EEA
                Regulations 2016,  and  her  personal  circumstances  namely
                medical conditions have not reduced but increased dependency
                to the extent that the appellant is now in a wheelchair. The
                previous dependency in Ireland is informative of the current
                dependency.

           4. The above constitute errors on points of law  and  permission
                to appeal should be granted."

   10. Dealing with this last point  first,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
       appellant is a family member of her EEA national sponsor son, but the
       specific  wording  of  the  regulations  required  the  appellant  to
       establish that she is the dependent family member. Whatever may  have
       been in the position in Ireland the appeal arises as a  result  of  a
       fresh  application  having  been  made  by  the  appellant   to   the
       authorities in the UK seeking a residence card as recognition of  her
       current entitlement to reside in this country. Whatever may have been
       the decision of  the  Irish  authorities  based  upon  the  situation
       appertaining in Ireland it is not determinative of the issues  before
       the Judge. These were matters that were clearly taken into account by
       the Judge in any event.

   11. Any suggestion the Judge failed to consider  the  evidence  that  was
       provided is not made out. It is not legal error for a  judge  not  to
       set out each and every aspect of the evidence made available provided
       the same has been considered. In this appeal the Judge  clearly  took
       into  account  the  medical  evidence  as  the  description  in   the
       determination of the appellant's medical condition  could  only  have
       come from this source.

   12. In Jia Migrationsverket Case C -1/05 the  European  Court  considered
       "dependence" under Article 1(1)(d) of Directive 73/148/EEC  and  said
       this was to be interpreted to the effect  that  "dependent  on  them"
       meant that members of the family of an  EU  national  established  in
       another member state within the meaning  of  Article  43  of  the  EC
       Treaty, needed the material support of that EU national,  or  his  or
       her spouse, in order to meet their essential needs in  the  state  of
       origin of those family members or the state from which they had  come
       at the time when they applied to join the EU national. The Court said
       that Article 6(b) of the Directive was to be interpreted  as  meaning
       that proof of the need for material support might be adduced  by  any
       appropriate means, while a mere undertaking by the EU national or his
       or her spouse to support the family members  concerned  need  not  be
       regarded  as  establishing  the  existence  of  the  family  member's
       situation of real dependence.

   13. In Bigia & Others [2009] EWCA Civ 79, at paragraph 24, Maurice Kay LJ
       said that where the question of whether someone is a "family  member"
       depends on a test of dependency, that test is as per paragraph 43  of
       the ECJ's judgement in Jia.  In essence members of the  family  of  a
       Union citizen needed the material support of that  Union  citizen  or
       his or her spouse in order to meet their essential needs.

   14. In ECO Manilla v Lim [2015] EWCA Civ 1383, a case relied upon  by  Ms
       Fijiwala, the appellant sought entry, as the family member of  an  EU
       national. Applying Reyes v Migrationsverket (Case C- 423/12)  it  was
       held that it was not enough to show that the financial support was in
       fact provided by the EU citizen to a family member; the family member
       must need that support in order to meet her basic needs; there needed
       to exist a situation of real dependence; receipt  of  support  was  a
       necessary condition of dependency, but not  a  sufficient  condition;
       and it  was  necessary  to  determine  that  the  family  member  was
       dependent in the sense of being in need of assistance even though  it
       was irrelevant why she was dependent.

   15. The assertion the Judge failed to adopt a holistic  approach  to  the
       evidence has no arguable merit. The fact the witnesses may have  said
       the same thing, if this is the basis of the claim  of  'consistency',
       does not establish arguable legal error per se. The assertion on  the
       appellant's behalf that because consistent evidence  had  been  given
       the Judge has erred in law is, in reality, a challenge to the  weight
       given by the Judge to the evidence she was able to consider.

   16. The Judge was clearly aware of the proper test to be applied.  Whilst
       it is accepted that a number of witnesses telling the truth  will  be
       consistent the Judge at [25] does  not  accept  this  is  the  likely
       explanation but that much of the evidence had been rehearsed.  It  is
       important to read to paragraph 24 (I-X) in  full  to  understand  the
       concerns in the Judge's mind. This  is  not  a  decision  based  upon
       focusing upon one aspect to the exclusion of other aspects but one in
       which there were aspects that were not made out before the Judge. The
       dependency must be upon the  EEA  national  or  his  spouse  and  the
       Judge's conclusion there was insufficient evidence to  find  that  in
       order for her essential needs to be  met  the  appellant  needed  the
       material support of the sponsor has not been shown to  be  a  finding
       outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge  on  the
       evidence. Such material support may be being provided by other family
       members such as Mr A Qureshi but he is not the EEA national.

   17. Disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings  and  desire  for  a  more
       favourable outcome does not establish legal  error  material  to  the
       Judge's decision. The  evidence  was  considered  including  that  in
       relation to financial, emotional, and physical  dependency,  adequate
       reasons have been given for the findings made, and it  has  not  been
       shown the weight the Judge attributed to the evidence is in  any  way
       irrational or outside the range the Judge was entitled to find on the
       evidence. The Judge had the benefit of both seeing and  hearing  oral
       evidence being given by the witnesses.

   18. In terms of the way forward; it was confirmed  there  is  no  removal
       direction in force in relation  to  the  appellant  and  the  witness
       statements forming part of the rule 15(2A) application deal with what
       is claimed to be the arrangement for the appellant with much  greater
       clarity than did the  evidence  considered  by  the  Judge.   It  may
       therefore be, in all the  circumstances,  that  a  fresh  application
       supported by  better  quality  evidence  explaining  the  appellant's
       position and dependency upon Mr B Qureshi and/or his spouse  to  meet
       the appellant's essential needs may maximise chances of success. That
       is, however, a matter for the appellant.

   19. Having considered the evidence provided, the Judge's decision arrived
       at having had the benefit of seeing and hearing oral  evidence  being
       given, and  the  appellant's  challenge  to  the  same,  I  find  the
       appellant has failed to establish arguable legal  error  material  to
       the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to warrant a  grant  of
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

   20. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 July 2019

