
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/04386/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 July 2017                           | On 24 July 2017                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mrs fatou badji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Badji appeared in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   I  shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of   State
    throughout as such and to Mrs Badji as the claimant to avoid confusion.



 2. The claimant is a citizen of the Gambia  whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    December 1985.  On 21  September  2015  the  claimant  applied  to  the
    Secretary of State for a residence card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) as the spouse of
    Gourenne Guilet Stephane Herve Madou (the sponsor),  a  French  citizen
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  On 16 March  2016  the
    Secretary of State refused her application on the basis that it was not
    accepted either that the marriage was valid or that  the  claimant  and
    the sponsor were in a durable relationship.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     In a decision promulgated on  24  November  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malone allowed the claimant's appeal, albeit to a limited extent.
     The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant failed to  demonstrate
    that she is the  spouse  of  Mr  Madou  for  the  purpose  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, so that her appeal under Regulation 7 of those Regulations
    failed.  The judge then  proceeded  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    claimant had demonstrated that she has been in a  durable  relationship
    with Mr Madou for a period of two years.  The judge found that she  was
    satisfied that the claimant and Mr Madou were in a durable relationship
    in accordance with Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations  and  allowed
    the appeal on that basis to the extent of the finding that they were in
    a durable relationship.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 24  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred in law by failing  to
    have regard to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal) Albania [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)[1] which established that there
    is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State not to grant a residence card to a person claiming  to  be  an
    extended family member.  It is asserted  that  the  judge  should  have
    dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction.  In oral submissions  Mr
    Whitwell indicated  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  honour  the
    findings with regard to a durable  relationship,  notwithstanding  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider that matter.

 6. The claimant  attended  the  hearing  unrepresented.  I  explained  the
    procedure and the legal arguments  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Although the claimant asked for clarification of a number of issues  no
    legal arguments were advanced.



Discussion

 7. The First-tier Tribunal considered the matter on  the  papers.   Having
    found, at paragraph 14, that the claimant had not  satisfied  him  that
    she was the spouse of the sponsor for the purpose  of  the  Regulations
    the judge ought to have  concluded  that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider an appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  under
    Regulation 8.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  durable  relationship
    issue must be set aside because the Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    entertain the claimant's appeal.  As set out in  Sala  extended  family
    members do not have an entitlement to a residence  card  and  therefore
    the rights of appeal do not extend to appeals against a decision not to
    issue a residence  card  to  extended  family  members  falling  within
    Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 9. The claimant had no right of appeal on that  issue  and  therefore  the
    First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal against  the
    refusal to issue a residence card pursuant to Regulation 8.  The First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in entertaining the appeal  on  the  durable
    relationship issue. I set that part of the decision aside  pursuant  to
    section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    ('TCEA').The decision on the validity of the marriage stands.




Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside  in  respect  of  the  decision  on  the  durable
relationship. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  validity  of
the marriage stands.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 23 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw






                           -----------------------
[1] A reference to the Court of Justice has been made pursuant to Article
267 TFEU in case Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT
125 (IAC) including a question of the compatibility of National provisions
which precludes an appeal to a court or tribunal against a decision
refusing to issue a residence card to a person claiming to be an extended
family member. However, the case of Sala remains binding on the First-tier
Tribunal.

