
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04164/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2018                      |On 2 May 2018                        |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          DANUTA KRYSTYNA MIELCARZ
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Senior Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Herself


    1. This is the appeal of Danuta Krystyna Mielcarz, a citizen  of  Poland
       born 3 January 1977, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       of  20  July  2017,  itself  brought  against  the  refusal  of   her
       application for `permanent residence as  an  EEA  national,  dated  5
       April 2017.


    2. The Appellant's application of 17 February  2017  was  based  on  her
       marriage to her spouse Pawel Mielcarz. As she apparently did not rely
       on her  own  exercise  of  Treaty  Rights,  she  accordingly  had  to
       establish that her spouse  was  working  here.  The  application  was
       refused  because  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  insufficient
       evidence had been provided of the marriage. The Appellant appealed to
       the First-tier Tribunal.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal found that the evidence before it  made  good
       the Appellant's  case,  as  she  had  put  forward  her  spouse's  UK
       residence  card  dated  28  March  2017  showing  he  had   permanent
       residence, documentation from the Bahamas  recording  their  marriage
       there on 2  April  2017,  and  proof  of  the  marriage  having  been
       registered under Polish law. Accordingly the Appellant  was  entitled
       to permanent residence. Thus her appeal was allowed.


    4. Although not expressly referenced by the First-tier Tribunal, amongst
       the documents before it was a national insurance  record  of  18  May
       2016 stating that the Appellant had accumulated "13 qualifying  years
       up to 5 April 2016".


    5. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
       that there was apparently no evidence that the Appellant had lived in
       the UK for five years.


    6. Before me Ms Isherwood  briefly  pressed  the  Secretary  of  State's
       grounds of appeal,  though  somewhat  faintly  in  the  light  of  my
       observation that it appeared those grounds had  misled  the  Tribunal
       which granted permission to appeal, for the reasons discussed below.


Findings and reasons


    7. As I indicated to Ms Isherwood at the hearing, the evidence which the
       Secretary of State herself put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       disconcertingly different to that which the Home Office's grounds  of
       appeal asserted had been available to the judge. There  was  patently
       evidence which directly corroborated the Appellant's  claim  to  have
       resided in the UK exercising Treaty Rights for more than five  years.
       Indeed, the evidence from another government department recorded more
       than a decade of contributions to the Exchequer by  way  of  National
       Insurance contributions.


    8. In the circumstances, I consider that the First-tier Tribunal did err
       in its approach. It concentrated only  on  evidence  of  the  parties
       being  married  and  the  grant  of  permanent   residence   of   the
       Respondent's husband, without expressly dealing with the question  of
       whether either the Appellant or her husband, without giving attention
       to whether either was working, or otherwise exercising Treaty Rights.




    9. However, I do not consider, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,
       that that error was a material one. There  was  evidence  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal which the Secretary of State  had  not  gainsaid,
       from  a government department, indicating that the Respondent  had  a
       significant track record of making national insurance contributions.


   10. Ms Isherwood, quite rightly, did not press the Secretary  of  State's
       grounds of appeal once she appreciated that the draftsperson  of  the
       grounds had made an assertion as to the available evidence  that  was
       inaccurate. It was quite wrong  for  the  Home  Office  to  have  put
       evidence on the point before the First-tier Tribunal, and then denied
       that evidence's existence when pursuing the appeal further.


   11. I accordingly find that there was  no  material  error  of  law.  The
       Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. I uphold  the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal.


       Decision:


       The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Ms Mielcarz's appeal
       against the refusal of a  document  certifying  her  as  entitled  to
       permanent residence is upheld.


Signed:     Date: 5 April 2018
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
