
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04454/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House Without a Hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 July 2020                            |On 18 August 2020               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                            DENNIS AISOSA OGBAMO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him a residence card as the dependant of an
    EEA national.

 2. I have decided to decide the appeal without a hearing.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  and  on  22  April  2020
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  issued  a  Note  and  Directions
    suggesting inter alia that the appeal be determined without a  hearing.
    He was concerned about the proper progress of business arising from the
    pressure on the Tribunal's resources  brought  about  by  the  national
    lockdown in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis.

 3. It is timely to remember that the Rules do not require an oral  hearing
    in statutory appeals although  it  is  certainly  the  long-established
    practice of the Tribunal to determine appeals after  an  oral  hearing.
    Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  obliges
    the Tribunal to "have regard to any view  expressed  by  a  party  when
    deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any  matter".   Neither
    party has expressed a view although in response to those directions the
    Secretary of State has produced a helpful and detailed "Rule 24 notice"
    on 4 May 2020 setting out its case.  There has been  no  response  from
    the appellant and the Secretary of State's Rule 24  notice  notes  that
    she had not received any further representations.

 4. The Tribunal has a general obligation to act fairly and  that  includes
    an obligation to act expeditiously.  Given the pressure on hearing room
    space I am satisfied that there would be considerable delay both to the
    hearing of this appeal if it was listed for  an  oral  hearing  and  to
    another appeal or appeals which would themselves  be  delayed  to  make
    space for this one.  The issues seem to me to be raised clearly in  the
    papers and I do not consider an oral hearing necessary for  the  proper
    disposition of the appeal. It follows therefore that I have decided  to
    determine the appeal without a hearing.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by an experienced First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  who  was  concerned  that  there  may   have   been   procedural
    irregularity.

 6. The appellant's complaint is that the nature of the appeal was  changed
    at the hearing.   According  to  the  grounds  the  application  for  a
    residence card was refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  because  the
    appellant had not shown that he was related as claimed to his purported
    brother.  However, the appeal was dismissed because he  had  not  shown
    dependency.

 7. The respondent's Rule  24  notice  includes  an  apt  reminder  of  the
    decision in Kwok On Tong (R v IAT and Another ex  parte  Kwok  On  Tong
    [1981] Imm AR 214) which was affirmed a little more recently but still,
    for this Tribunal, some time ago in RM (Kwok On Tong: HC 395 para  320)
    India [2006] UKAIT 00039.

 8. This makes clear that a Rule-based  appeal  can  only  allowed  if  the
    appellant satisfies the judge that he meets all the requirements of the
    relevant Rules.  The decision is the judge's and whilst a  judge  might
    want to think carefully before raising a point that had not been raised
    by the Secretary of State the appellant  is  not  entitled  to  succeed
    because he has proved some of the disputed facts if he  cannot  satisfy
    all the requirements of a Rule.

 9. I am not aware of any  decision  that  applies  this  directly  to  EEA
    decisions but I see no reason  whatsoever  why  the  ratio  should  not
    apply.

10. Clearly, there is an ever-present possibility that where a judge  takes
    a point that has not been considered an adjournment may be necessary to
    enable the appellant to prepare something that had not been considered.

11. As far as I can see there is no suggestion  that  any  adjournment  was
    ever sought here.  Indeed, it seems to me unlikely that an  application
    for an adjournment would have succeeded.  This is because  the  refusal
    letter dated 9 August 2019 includes the following paragraph:

         "As you have failed to effectively evidence  your  relationship  no
         further consideration has been  given  to  the  other  requirements
         which need to be satisfied under the Regulations including  whether
         your  EEA  national  sponsor  is  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
         qualified person".

12. The refusal letter then continues by pointing out  that  the  appellant
    can make a further application on better evidence if he is so minded.

13. Given that clear statement in the refusal letter  it  would  have  been
    very difficult for the appellant's representatives to have argued  that
    they could not be expected to know that all aspects of the Rule had  to
    be proved.  Be that as it may, no application was made.

14. However, it is clear from the Decision and Reasons at paragraph 7  that
    near the start of the hearing the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  "advised
    the appellant's representative I  was  required  to  consider  all  the
    requirements of the Regulations and not just the  issue  of  the  birth
    certificates.  No application for an adjournment was made"

15. If the appellant's representatives had missed the point there was their
    opportunity to explain.  They did not take it.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also, possibly not entirely wisely but in
    an effort to be fair, gave the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  produce
    evidence after the hearing but nothing useful was served.

17. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 notice does raise matters that concern
    me, not the least being that the Secretary of State's case was that the
    dependency was a live issue at the hearing.

18. However, I see no point in going into that further.   For  the  reasons
    given the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is  unimpeachable  and  the
    grounds essentially are misconceived.

19. It follows that there is no error of  law  and  I  dismiss  the  appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 August 2020                 |





