
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04418/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 May 2019                       |On 4 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               COLLINS SOMIAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Antwi-Boasiako


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born 1 May 1988 is a male citizen of Ghana.
    On 7  June  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for a residence card. The appellant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal which in a decision promulgated on 4 March 2109,  allowed
    the appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. In the refusal letter, the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    appellant  had  failed  to  prove  that  he  had  complied  with  legal
    requirements in Ghana contracting valid proxy marriage. The judge found
    that the appellant  had  proved  to  the  necessary  standard  that  is
    marriage valid and also that the sponsor was exercising  Treaty  Rights
    at all material times.

 3. The Secretary of State complains that the judge  accepted  the  claimed
    identity  and  nationality  the  sponsor  by  reference  only  to  oral
    evidence; that, in the  absence  of  documentary  evidence,  the  judge
    accepted the evidence of the sponsor and her sister that their  parents
    are  Ghanaian  citizens;  that  the  judge  accepted   that   necessary
    formalities of the marriage had been complied with notwithstanding  the
    absence of evidence as to the payment of a dowry;  that  there  was  no
    requirement of a letter from a registrar confirming that  the  marriage
    was  valid;  that  the  appellant's  sponsor,  a  Swiss  citizen,   was
    exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom by working as a cleaner.

 4. I find that a judge has produced a sustainable decision  which  is  not
    flawed by legal error. The judge heard evidence from  the  sponsor  and
    her sister and he was entitled to accept that evidence as accurate  and
    true. Documentary corroborative  evidence  would,  perhaps,  have  been
    desirable but it was not necessary for the appellant to succeed in  his
    appeal was the judge had to determine  the  appeal  and  best  evidence
    before him. The witnesses  who  gave  oral  evidence  were  capable  of
    providing  the  necessary  facts  required  to  satisfy  the  judge  by
    reference to the standard of proof of  the  balance  of  probabilities.
    Further, the judge was entitled  to  conclude,  from  the  evidence  of
    Ghanaian law produced to him appellant's representative, that a  letter
    from a registrar was not required as evidence of a  valid  marriage  in
    addition to a copy of a marriage certificate. Likewise, it was open  to
    the judge to accept oral evidence regarding  sponsors  work  which  was
    corroborated by the production of wage slips.

 5. I accept that another judge confronted with the same evidence may  have
    reached a different conclusion. However, that is not the point. It  was
    open to the judge,  who  had  the  opportunity,  denied  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, to hear oral evidence and to assess its accuracy to reach the
    findings which he has reached. I can identify no error of law  requires
    me to set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 30 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

