
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04580/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2019                    |On 29 August 2019                    |
|Oral judgment                        |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr diouf abdourahmane
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Appellant did not attend and was not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr Abdourahmane who is named as the respondent in this appeal  has  not
    attended the resumed hearing by 11:15.

2.   For the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  14  June  2019  I
    found that there was an error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    in allowing an appeal by Mr  Abdourahmane  against  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card.  That residence card had been refused  on  the  grounds
    that according to Home Office records Mr Abdourahmane had  a  wife  and
    child in Senegal despite having claimed not  to  have  been  previously
    married.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had not taken  a  decision:  he
    neither allowed nor dismissed the appeal and as such I  set  aside  his
    judgment.

3.   At the hearing on 6th June Mr  Abdourahmane  was  legally  represented.
    The Tribunal has received a letter from those  solicitors  saying  that
    they are no longer instructed and  they  would  not  be  attending  the
    hearing today.  The solicitors were clearly aware of the  hearing  date
    and at the time that they were notified of the hearing date  they  were
    instructed by Mr Abdourahmane.  Mr Abdourahmane was also sent a copy of
    the notice of hearing; that notice of hearing has not been returned  to
    the  Tribunal  undelivered.   I  am   therefore   satisfied   that   Mr
    Abdourahmane has received notification of  the  hearing  and  for  some
    unknown reason has chosen not to attend.

4.   It therefore appears that he no longer  wishes  to  pursue  his  appeal
    whether on the grounds that he was in  fact  lawfully  married  to  his
    current partner or, as was agreed at the error of law hearing,  that  a
    new matter could be raised that they are in a durable relationship such
    as to meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations.  Given that he  has
    not attended today I am of the opinion that  he  no  longer  wishes  to
    pursue his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  which
    led to the initial appeal.

5.   The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore successful and  I  dismiss
    Mr Abdourahmane's appeal against the original decision of the Secretary
    of State.


Signed on 19th August 2019

Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
