
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04889/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 2 December 2016                           |On 8 December 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                         SAMUEL ASUAKO KWASI BOANUH
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal was determined on the papers at the appellant's request by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Troup. The complaint made by  the  appellant
      is that although he was given until 30 June 2016 to submit documentary
      evidence in support of  his  appeal,  and  indeed  complied  with  the
      deadline, the appeal was determined prior to that date and his  bundle
      was not therefore before the judge.
   2. Ms Sharma repeated that complaint at the hearing and Me  Melvin  quite
      fairly did not seek to defend the judge's actions if it was  the  case
      that the appellant had the deadline claimed.


   3. The Tribunal file shows that a letter was issued to the appellant  and
      respondent by the Tribunal on 2 June 2016. The letter  confirmed  that
      the appeal was to be determined on the papers  and  that  any  further
      evidence from either side had to be sent to reach the Tribunal  by  30
      June 2016. The appellant's track and trace  evidence  shows  that  the
      bundle was received by the Tribunal on that date. However, the  judge,
      for reasons which are not known to me, prepared his  determination  on
      28 June and the determination was  promulgated  on  7  July  2016.  He
      either overlooked or disregarded the directions of 2 June. Either way,
      as a result, his determination cannot stand as it was prepared without
      sight of the appellant's large bundle of  documents.  There  has  been
      procedural unfairness which  amounts  to  an  error  of  law  and  the
      determination is set aside in its entirety.


   4. I heard discussion on whether the appeal should be disposed of by  the
      Upper Tribunal or the First-tier Tribunal. As I  have  set  aside  the
      determination in its entirety, it is right that the matter  should  be
      re-determined by a First-tier Tribunal Judge. Ms Sharma confirmed that
      the appellant's instructions  were  for  a  paper  determination.  The
      appellant has submitted two bundles of documentary evidence which will
      need to be considered when the decision is re-made. Both parties  will
      have an opportunity to submit  any  further  submissions  or  evidence
      before the matter is determined. Directions shall  be  issued  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   5. Decision


   6. The determination contains errors of  law  and  the  decision  is  set
      aside.


   7. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
      to be made, on all issues, on the papers.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 2 December 2016



