
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: EA/04458/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2020                 |On 10 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                           SYED AQUEEL HAIDER SHAH

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Ms S Sher, instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved
my decisions and reasons, which I now give. The order made is  described  at
the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of birth given  as
    19.7.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 21.1.20, dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 6.8.19, to
    refuse his application made on 26.4.19 for an  EEA  Residence  Card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in  the  UK  as  an  extended  family
    member (EFM) of his sponsoring cousin and brother-in-law, Mr Abbas  Gul
    Syed (AS), a German  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK,
    pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016,  as  amended  (the
    Regulations).

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 29.5.20. However, when the application was renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley granted permission on
    4.8.20, considering it arguable that although the judge  understood and
    identified the correct standard of proof, and accepted as  genuine  the
    money transfer receipts for the period 2005 to 2007, referenced at [11]
    of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal nevertheless erred in law "for
    failing to set out the test for dependency under Regulation  8(2),  and
    has failed to show it had directed itself correctly as to the  standard
    required when considering the evidence of dependency."

 3. The respondent accepted that the sponsor  has  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK, confirmed by the grant of permanent residence  status
    in 2017, and that the appellant is related to the sponsor  as  claimed.
    However, the respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence of dependency on the sponsor since the appellant  entered  the
    UK in 2010. Whilst there was  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been
    living with the sponsor since 2017 and the  sponsor's  bank  statements
    for that year evidence some financial support made  to  the  appellant,
    the statements for 2012-2014 inclusive did not show any such  financial
    support and there was no evidence of support  between  2010  and  2012.
    Whilst some money transfer slips had been provided for the  years  2005
    to 2007, there was no evidence that the appellant received these  funds
    and, more significantly, no evidence of  any  money  transfers  in  the
    three years immediately prior to the appellant entering the UK in 2010.
    In the circumstances, the application was refused for insufficiency  of
    evidence.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. In summary, the grounds as drafted and as advanced in oral  submissions
    by Ms Sher, assert that the sole basis for dismissing  the  appeal  was
    the supposed insufficiency of evidence of dependency by  the  appellant
    on the sponsor (AS). It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    failed to give weight to evidence of money  transfers  to  Pakistan  as
    evidence of dependency  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    requiring a higher degree of dependency than required under  regulation
    8(2). Ms Sher submitted that the acceptance of the 9 money transfers to
    Pakistan were sufficient  to  establish  dependency.  In  essence,  the
    grounds attempt to  rely  on  the  quantity  of  evidence  ('sufficient
    amount"), and suggest that the judge  erroneously  required  a  "higher
    scale of dependency" in order for Regulation 8 to be satisfied.

 6. Reliance is also placed on the respondent's guidance  on  EFMs,  V  7.0
    published on 27.3.19, which states that "the applicant does not need to
    be dependent on the EEA national to meet all or most of their essential
    needs. For example,  an  applicant  is  considered  dependent  if  they
    receive a pension which covers half their  essential  needs  and  money
    from their EEA national sponsor which covers the other half."

 7. Ms Sher submitted that the judge not only applied a heighten  test  for
    'dependency' than was required under the Regulations and case law,  but
    that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  dependency  was   not
    established. She accepted that there was limited  documentary  evidence
    but pointed to the written and oral evidence of the appellant  and  the
    sponsor that the dependency existed prior to the  appellant  coming  to
    the UK and continued thereafter in the UK.

 8. Regulation 8(2) provides as follows:

         "Extended family member"

         8. - (2) The condition in this paragraph is that the person is-

            (a)   a relative of an EEA national; and

            (b)   residing in a country other than the United Kingdom and
            is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of the EEA
            national's household; and either-

                (i)    is accompanying the EEA national to the United
                Kingdom or wants to join the EEA national in the United
                Kingdom; or

                (ii)   has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                continues to be dependent upon the EEA national, or to be a
                member of the EEA national's household."

 9. In Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC), the  Upper
    Tribunal held that a person can succeed in establishing that he or  she
    is an "extended family member" in any one of four different ways,  each
    of which requires proving a relevant connection both prior  to  arrival
    in the UK and in the UK:

      i. prior dependency and present dependency;

     ii. prior membership  of  a  household  and  present  membership  of  a
         household;

    iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;

     iv. prior membership of a household and present dependency.

10. It is not necessary to show prior and present connection  in  the  same
    capacity: i.e. dependency-dependency or household  membership-household
    membership ((i) or (ii) above is sufficient. A person may also  qualify
    if able to show (iii) or (iv). In effect, to qualify  as  an  EFM,  the
    appellant has to demonstrate one of the four permutations set out above
    of prior dependency or household and present dependency or household.

11. It is also important to point out the use of the  word  "continues"  in
    Regulation 8(2). The appellant must continue to be either dependent  or
    a member of the household, as  held  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  recent
    decision in Chowdhury (Extended family members: dependency) [2020] UKUT
    00188 (IAC), "The words "and continues to be dependent"  in  regulation
    8(2)(c) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulation  2006,
    properly characterised, require an applicant to  establish  that  there
    has not been a break in their dependency on the EEA national sponsor."

12. The appellant obtained entry to the UK in February 2010  on  a  Tier  4
    student visa, valid to September 2011. He claims to have lived with the
    sponsor since arriving in the UK and that even before he arrived in the
    UK, the sponsor supported him financially, regularly sending  money  to
    Pakistan for food and education from 2005 onwards. It is  alleged  that
    money was sent by a money transfer service, or  with  friends  visiting
    Pakistan, or in person when the sponsor himself visited Pakistan.

13. Although he came to the UK as a  student,  the  college  the  appellant
    attended was closed by the Home Office some 8 months after his arrival.
    There is no evidence of any further  study  or  the  obtaining  of  any
    qualifications. The obvious inference to be drawn is that the appellant
    had no interest in studying and simply took advantage of being  in  the
    UK as long as he could. An application to renew his  student  leave  in
    2011 was refused and his subsequent appeal dismissed. He remained as an
    illegal overstayer until detained in December 2016, when he applied for
    international protection, a claim later withdrawn.

14. In January 2017, he applied for an EEA Residence Card  as  an  EFM  but
    this was refused and his application for permission to pursue  judicial
    review of that  decision  was  also  refused.  Further  Residence  Card
    applications made in November 2017 and July 2018 were also refused.  In
    all, including the application to which this  appeal  relates,  he  has
    unsuccessfully made six Residence  Card  applications,  apparently  all
    refused for failure to demonstrate dependency on the sponsor.

15. He claims that during this period he  was  "mostly"  staying  with  the
    sponsor in Hornchurch but also at times lived with friends in  Swindon.
    The evidence of his whereabouts and activity has been left rather vague
    but that is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

16. It is clear that at [2] of the decision the judge made a correct  self-
    direction as to the burden and standard of proof; repeated at  [18]  of
    the decision. It is also clear from  the  evidence  summarised  in  the
    decision that the appeal turned on the  issue  of  dependency  and  the
    credibility of the claim to have been and continue to be  dependent  on
    the sponsor. In assessing credibility, the judge considered the various
    explanations for the failure  to  provide  with  the  several  previous
    applications the financial documentation now relied on.

17. At [19] of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge first considered
    the  documentary  evidence  for  the  period  between  2005   and   the
    appellant's arrival in the UK in  2010,  throughout  which  period  the
    sponsor claimed to have supported him. The judge accepted the  validity
    of the  documents  but  concluded  that  the  limited  number  of  such
    transfers  of  relative  modest  amounts  over  the  time  period   was
    insufficient to demonstrate dependency.  I  am  satisfied  that  was  a
    finding open to the judge on  the  evidence.  Weight  to  be  given  to
    evidence is a matter for the judge.  Little  weight  was  appropriately
    given to the various written attestations from friends and  family  who
    did not give evidence. Despite the respondent  having  pointed  in  the
    refusal decision to the three-year gap between the  last  transfer  and
    the appellant's arrival in the UK, it remained the case that there  was
    no satisfactory evidence of financial support during  that  period.  In
    the circumstances, it is hardly surprising that  the  judge  found  the
    appellant failed to prove that he was dependent on the sponsor  between
    2005 and 2010.

18. At [20] of the decision, the judge carefully analysed the  evidence  of
    dependency in the  period  after  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK,
    identifying gaps in the disorganised and incomplete evidence.  At  [21]
    the judge concluded that there was no documentary evidence  to  confirm
    that the sponsor supported the appellant prior to April  2017  or  that
    they even lived together prior to March 2017. There was no evidence  of
    a regular pattern of support with bank payments occasional and variable
    in amounts.

19. Having considered the impugned decision and the way in which the  judge
    carefully assessed the documentary evidence and the explanations of the
    appellant and the sponsor, I am satisfied that the judge  was  entitled
    to  conclude  that  the  evidence  of  dependency  was  incomplete  and
    inadequate, insufficient to discharge the burden of proof. In  reality,
    there was, as Mr Tan pointed out, a 10-year gap in credible evidence of
    dependency on the sponsor, the period between 2007  and  2017.  Mr  Tan
    submitted that in the premises it was impossible for the  appellant  to
    demonstrate prior dependency and that he continued to be  dependent  on
    the sponsor after coming to the UK. I  entirely  agree  with  Mr  Tan's
    submission; I cannot see how continuing dependency can  be  established
    on the evidence sufficient to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  the
    appellant.

20. Whilst the judge has been criticised for failing to set out the test of
    dependency under Regulation 8(2), it is clear that on the facts of this
    case as found by the judge, the appellant could not  have  met  in  any
    event any of the four alternative permutations of  dependency/household
    membership. In this case, as stated above and in Ms Sher's submissions,
    the key issue was dependency prior to entering the UK. Whilst  arguably
    the evidence demonstrated some limited  financial  support  in  earlier
    years, relatively small sums, there was at least a  three-year  gap  in
    the supporting evidence for the period between 2007 and 2010,  so  that
    the appellant could not be said to be dependent on the sponsor  at  the
    point of or for three years prior to entering the UK, even if he  could
    meet the dependency or household membership requirement  since  arrival
    and be said to continue to be dependent on the sponsor; on the facts of
    this case there was nothing to be continued. Further, the  evidence  of
    dependency up and until 2017 was woefully inadequate.

21. It follows that the appeal was doomed to the same fate as the  previous
    five applications and, in essence, for the same reasons. The  appellant
    is not an Extended Family Member because he has failed to discharge the
    burden of demonstrating he was dependent on the sponsor in one  of  the
    ways permitted under Regulation 8.

22. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    5 November 2020



