
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04163/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 13 April 2021                   |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               inderjit sharma
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by FR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face  to  face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant, a national of India born on 12 September 1967, appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
derivative residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), as the primary carer of a  British
citizen.

The appellant claims to have entered the UK on 8  July  2003  clandestinely.
From 31 October 2008 he made  a  number  of  unsuccessful  applications  for
leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life, some  of  which
were based upon his relationship with his wife, Usha Rani, whom  he  met  in
March 2009 and married on 17 January  2017.  On  22  May  2019  he  made  an
application for a derivative residence card under the  EEA  Regulations,  as
the primary carer of his wife, in accordance with the  Zambrano  principles.
The appellant relied upon a  letter  from  Jubilee  Gardens  Medical  Centre
stating that his wife suffered from chronic depression and needed  his  help
on a daily basis and also relied upon  a  letter  from  West  London  Mental
Health Trust.

The respondent refused the application on 30 July 2019  on  the  basis  that
the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence to show that he  was  the
primary carer of Usha Rani, as he  had  provided  insufficient  evidence  to
show that his wife was unable to meet her  own  daily  care  needs  and  had
provided insufficient evidence to show that her care needs could not be  met
through an alternative source such as  another  relative,  the  NHS  or  the
local authority. The requirements of Regulation  16(5)  were  therefore  not
met. With regard to Article 8, the respondent noted that the  appellant  had
not sought to regularise his stay through a relevant application.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bennett on 4 September  2020.  The  Secretary  of  State  was
unrepresented at  the  appeal.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
appellant who stated that his wife, an Indian  national  at  the  time,  had
travelled to South Africa after suffering domestic violence from her  former
husband in India, and had come to the UK in 2008 as a domestic  worker  with
the family for whom she had worked in South Africa. They  had  met  in  2009
and his wife had subsequently become a British citizen.  She  suffered  from
chronic depression and also suffered  from  leg  problems  and  he  was  her
primary carer. He could not  leave  her.  The  appellant's  wife  also  gave
evidence before the judge and she explained about the violence she  suffered
in India at the hands of her ex-husband. She  had  two  children  living  in
India. She started suffering depression  when  the  appellant's  application
was refused and she feared  being  separated  from  him.  She  required  his
assistance  for  all  her  daily  needs  and  could  not  undertake   simple
activities without his assistance. There was no-one else who  could  provide
the same level of support for her. The judge also heard oral  evidence  from
two of the appellant's friends and had  before  him  a  statement  from  the
appellant's wife's daughter in India, a psychiatric report and  GP's  report
for his wife referring to her history  of  attempting  suicide  and  further
medical evidence relating to the appellant's  wife's  mental  health  issues
and documents relating to her divorce in India.

The judge did not accept the claim that the appellant's wife  had  attempted
suicide and did not accept that she had given  a  truthful  account  to  the
medical professionals in that regard. He found the appellant  and  his  wife
to be unreliable  witnesses.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
appellant's wife suffered  from  depression  and  anxiety,  attributable  to
concerns about the appellant's immigration  status  and  potential  removal,
and that she suffered from physical ailments and was therefore a  vulnerable
adult. He accepted that there was a  significant,  genuine  dependence  upon
the appellant and that the appellant was properly categorised as his  wife's
primary  carer,  but  he  also  believed  that  there  was  an  element   of
exaggeration about her condition  and  dependence  upon  the  appellant  and
concluded that the dependence was not sufficient to  meet  the  requirements
in Regulation 16(5). He dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision was  sought  on  three  grounds,  namely:
that  the  judge's   decision   was   arguably   unclear,   incoherent   and
incomprehensible; that there was an arguable failure by the judge  to  apply
the guidance for vulnerable adults; and that there was an  arguable  failure
by the judge to provide clear and adequate reasons for his findings  on  the
documentary evidence.

The First-tier Tribunal refused to admit the application for  permission  as
it had been made out of time. The grounds  were  renewed  before  the  Upper
Tribunal and  it  was  asserted  that  the  application  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal had been made in time.

Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  22  January  2021  on  the
basis that there was a failure to make clear  findings  on  central  issues,
such as the extent to which the appellant's wife's mental  health  condition
and her dependency upon the appellant was accepted  or  rejected,  which  in
turn affected the findings on her vulnerability and the  appellant's  wife's
access to alternative care  in  his  absence.  I  note  that  the  grant  of
permission  did  not  include  any  decision  on  the  timeliness   of   the
application to the First-tier Tribunal and  accordingly,  for  the  sake  of
completeness and formality, I accept the explanation  given  and  admit  the
application.

The matter then came before me. Ms Everett conceded that she was  unable  to
defend the judge's decision and she was content for the decision to  be  set
aside and the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
afresh by another judge.

In light of that helpful concession, and given the merit in  the  challenges
made in the grounds upon which permission  was  granted,  in  particular  in
relation to the judge's unclear findings on  the  extent  of  the  sponsor's
mental health condition and her level of dependency upon  the  appellant,  I
set aside Judge Bennett's decision in its entirety. Despite  the  length  of
the decision and the detail within the decision, it  does  not  seem  to  me
that any of the findings can be preserved, given the lack of clarity in  the
judge's reasoning as a whole. The decision will need to be re-made  de  novo
by a different judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge aside from Judge Bennett.


Signed:   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 13 April
2021
