

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04988/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th January 2019                    |On 31st January 2019             |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                             SHER RAHMAN SAEEDI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Kesar & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The appellant's appeal against the decision by  the  respondent
            to refuse to issue him with a residence card as a family member
            because, the respondent alleged, the appellant had entered into
            a marriage of convenience, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
            Judge N M  K  Lawrence  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
            promulgated on 23rd May 2018.


         2. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on the grounds

             . Prevented oral evidence that was pertinent  to  the  question
               at the heart of the appeal from being given;
             . The judge had incorrectly characterised witness  evidence  as
               'expert' evidence and then discounted it in its totality  for
               that reason;
             . Failed to give adequate reasons for declining to place  'much
               weight' on the appellant's witnesses evidence;
             . Failing to give any or any adequate reasons for  finding  the
               respondent had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  that  the
               marriage was a marriage of convenience;
             . Failed  to  give  reasons  why  he  disregarded  evidence  of
               cohabitation;


         3. The strongest ground was the claimed failure of  the  judge  to
            permit pertinent questions of  witnesses  who  were  called  to
            testify to the couple's relationship.


         4. Ms Everett confirmed that there appeared to  be  a  fundamental
            procedural error by the First-tier Tribunal in curtailing  what
            could be pertinent evidence, particularly when  the  respondent
            was not represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Although
            the other pleaded grounds are not, in  themselves  particularly
            strong identifiers of error, in the context of the appeal as  a
            whole this decision has failed to receive, and address evidence
            as required.

         5. There are errors of law by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  such
            that the decision is set  aside  to  be  re-made.  no  findings
            retained.

         6. The appellant has been deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  and  any
            findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  stand.  The
            scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
            assign the function  of  primary  fact  finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal.


         7. I conclude that in these circumstances the decision  should  be
            remitted to the First-tier judge to determine the appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be  heard  afresh  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.


                                    Date 29th January 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
