
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04932/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2018                           |On 11 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            Mr Adu AMANKWAH Duodo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wilson (the judge), promulgated  on  17  July  2017,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal to issue him with a permanent residence card  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom some years ago and  had
    initially been issued with a residence card as the family member of  an
    EEA national (his father).  This residence card ran  from  20  December
    2011 until 20 December 2016. On 16 November 2016 the Appellant  applied
    for a permanent residence card. This was refused by the  Respondent  on
    the basis that he had failed to provide  sufficient  evidence  to  show
    that he was still dependent upon the EEA national.



The judge's decision

 3. The Appellant, for reasons best known to himself,  opted  to  have  his
    appeal decided without an oral hearing. Thus the matter came before the
    judge as a paper case.  The judge concluded  that  the  Respondent  was
    wrong to have applied the 2016 Regulations to the Appellant's case  and
    should instead have applied the 2006 version.  However, he decided that
    this was immaterial to his consideration of the appeal as a whole.

 4. The  judge  then  considered  whether  the  Appellant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.  With reference  to
    the evidence before him,  in  particular  various  P60s  for  both  the
    Appellant and his father, the judge concluded that at some point in the
    past, probably  2014,  the  Appellant  had  ceased  to  be  financially
    dependent upon his father [10].  At [11] the judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had continued to live with his father  at  the  same  address
    despite the change of financial circumstances.

 5. At [12] the  judge  goes  on  to  consider  what  was  said  to  be  an
    alternative submission set out in  the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument
    which would, it was said, have provided  a  route  to  success  in  the
    appeal.  This alternative argument was put in the following  terms:  it
    was accepted that the Appellant had ceased to be a family member of the
    EEA national. However, the Appellant had then become an extended family
    member and was entitled to rely on this different status  in  order  to
    come within Regulation 7(3) of the  Regulations  and,  in  consequence,
    accrue the necessary five-year  block  of  time  in  order  to  acquire
    permanent residence.

 6. The judge rejected this argument ostensibly  for  two  reasons:  first,
    that  the  Respondent  had  clearly  not  considered  the   Appellant's
    application on this alternative basis (for the simple  fact  that  this
    argument had not been raised as part of that  application,  and  indeed
    there had not been any application as  an  extended  family  family  at
    all); second, that an individual claiming  to  be  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA national did not enjoy a right of appeal in  light  of
    Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) (which was at that
    point in time the authority on this  jurisdiction  or  issue:  this  of
    course was subsequently overturned by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Khan
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755).

 7. In light of the judge's conclusions the Appellant had  not  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence and the appeal was dismissed.

 8. Just for the sake of completeness, the judge's consideration of Article
    8 at paragraphs 14-18 was irrelevant.  This issue was  not  justiciable
    in the appeal.



The grounds of appeal

 9. The alternative argument that had been raised in the skeleton  argument
    before the judge is re-stated in the grounds of appeal.  In essence  it
    is  said  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed  under  this
    alternative route and that the judge had been wrong not to have engaged
    with its merits.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on 10 January 2018.



The hearing before me on 22 March 2018

11. This appeal first came before me in March of this  year.  There  was  a
    discussion as to the ability of the Appellant to have a right of appeal
    in respect of the claim to be an extended family member.  At that point
    the judgment of the CJEU in Banger C-89/17 was keenly awaited.  In view
    of all the circumstances I decided to adjourn the error of law  hearing
    to await a decision in that case.  I issued directions at  that  point,
    asking for skeleton  arguments  from  both  parties  dealing  with  two
    issues: first, did the Appellant have a right of appeal; second  if  he
    did, was he able to rely on the provisions of Regulation 8 of the  2016
    Regulations in order to acquire a permanent right of residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, notwithstanding the fact that he had originally been  a
    "family member".  Following a discussion with the representatives there
    was agreement that the  correct  Regulations  were  in  fact  the  2016
    version, not the 2006 versions as had been  relied  on  by  the  judge.
    However, it was also agreed that this error would not  be  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal in any way.



The hearing before me on 26 November 2018

12. Ms Heybroek had prepared a helpful skeleton argument  in  advance.   Ms
    Everett apologised for the absence of a skeleton from the  Respondent's
    side. In the event this did not create a problem.

13. Following  an  initial  discussion  with  representatives  it  was  re-
    confirmed that we were dealing with the 2016 Regulations and  that  the
    Appellant had in fact had a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
     This was because he  applied  to  the  Respondent  for  the  permanent
    residence card during the currency of the residence card which had been
    issued to him on the basis that he had been a family member of  an  EEA
    national.  The right of appeal  arose  from  the  satisfaction  of  the
    relevant provisions within Regulation 36 of the Regulations.

14. Ms Heybroek relied on her skeleton argument.  In essence, her case  was
    that the Appellant had  been  able  to  "metamorphose"  (her  word)  or
    migrate from being a family member to being an extended family  member.
    This had occurred at some point in the past, probably 2014 or 2015.  Ms
    Heybroek submitted that his  status  changed  and  notwithstanding  his
    failure to make an application to the Respondent as an extended  family
    member, he could rely on that status for the purposes of his  inclusion
    under Regulation 7(3) of the Regulations.  In turn, he  could  continue
    to rely on this new right of residence for the purposes of the  accrual
    of the relevant five years for  the  purposes  of  permanent  residence
    under Regulation 15.

15. Ms Everett submitted  that  that  analysis  was  wrong.   There  was  a
    distinction between family members and extended  family  members,  with
    reference to the Directive and the Regulations.  The former existed  as
    of right: relevant documentation simply confirmed that  right  and  did
    not confer it.  In contrast, an extended family member did not enjoy  a
    right of residence simply by being in such a category of persons.   She
    submitted that the Appellant's failure to make an application  and  the
    absence of any decision from the  Respondent  in  respect  of  his  new
    status was essentially fatal to his argument in this appeal.



Decision on error of law

16. There are errors in the judge's decision but, in light of  the  matters
    which I will set out in some detail below, these are  not  material  to
    the extent that his decision must be set aside under  section  12(2)(a)
    of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

17. The errors relate to the following matters. First, the judge was  wrong
    to have concluded that it was the 2006 Regulations which applied to the
    Appellant's case. With reference to paragraph 4(1)(e) of schedule 6  to
    the 2016 Regulations, it was these which were applicable.  Second,  the
    Appellant did have  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because, as discussed above, he had applied during the currency of  his
    residence card.  Third, the judge had failed to consider the merits  of
    the alternative  argument  put  forward  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument.

18. Turning to the substance of that argument, it is quite clear  from  the
    judge's findings (which were open to him) that the Appellant had ceased
    to be a family member of the EEA national in 2014 (if not before).   It
    is also clearly the case that the Appellant did not make an application
    to the Respondent on the basis  that  he  believed  himself  to  be  an
    extended family member.  As a result of this failure the Respondent has
    never made any decision in respect of the Appellant's "changed" status.



19. In respect of the relevant legal position,  there  is,  I  conclude,  a
    clear and important distinction between  family  members  and  extended
    family members. The former enjoy a right of residence simply  by  being
    within the category of family members: in other words,  a  decision  by
    the Respondent to issue relevant documentation does not confer a  right
    of residence, but simply confirms it.

20. In contrast, extended family members do not enjoy automatic  rights  of
    residence arising out of the Directive or  the  Regulations  simply  by
    virtue of being in that particular category.  In their case a right  of
    residence is conferred upon them following an application made  to  the
    Respondent and a decision made thereon, after a full  consideration  of
    their particular circumstances. With reference to Articles 2 and  3  of
    the Citizens' Directive 2004/38/EC, the Regulations, Rahman C-83/11 at,
    for example [19], YB (EEA reg 17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast
    [2008] UKAIT 00062, Macastena [2018] EWCA  Civ  1558  at  [21-25],  and
    Aladeselu [2013] EWCA Civ 144 at [52], I conclude  that  the  Appellant
    could not simply rely on his change of  factual  circumstances  (namely
    from having been financially dependent to this ceasing to be the  case)
    to then create, as it were, a new automatic right of  residence  on  an
    alternative basis without having made an application to the  Respondent
    (which would of course have entailed an  exercise  of  discretion  that
    only the Respondent can undertake). To conclude otherwise would  be  to
    essentially equate the position of family members with that of extended
    family members and in my view that would be contrary to the  Directive,
    the Regulations, and a line of authority.

21. In turn, I conclude  that  the  Appellant  was  not  able  to  rely  on
    Regulation 7(3) of the Regulations once he had ceased to  be  a  family
    member.  I interpret this particular  provision  as  meaning  that  the
    person (described as "B") is an extended family member if, and only if,
    they have had a right of residence in that category conferred upon them
    following an application to the Respondent, and full  consideration  of
    circumstances, an  exercise  of  discretion,  and  the  issuance  of  a
    residence card.  The conjunctive use  of  the  word  "and"  in  between
    "member" and "has" in Regulation 7(3) is instructive in this regard. If
    this were not the case, then once again the position of family  members
    and extended family members would be rendered equivalent, and  this  is
    simply not the correct position.

22. It follows from what I have just set out that the  Appellant  has  been
    unable to accrue the relevant five years' residence in accordance  with
    the Regulations.  That is because once he ceased to be a family  member
    he did not then simply migrate over and acquire a continuing  right  of
    residence as an extended family member.  Therefore, time spent in  this
    country following the cessation of his family membership does not count
    towards the accrual of the relevant five-year period.

23. In light of this, and notwithstanding  the  failure  of  the  judge  to
    consider the argument in detail, the Appellant's  alternative  argument
    could not have succeeded.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall therefore stand.

25. By way of an additional  observation,  the  reliance  on  the  extended
    family member issue may well in any  event  have  amounted  to  a  "new
    matter" within section 85(6)  of the NIAA 2002., and thus have required
    the consent of the Respondent in order for it to be considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (although the absence  of  an  application  to  the
    Respondent as an extended family  member  was  probably  fatal  to  the
    giving of consent).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 6 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
