
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04002/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                            |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 9th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Abdelaziz Harbil
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent Mr Harbil is a national of Morocco date of birth  26th
       April 1974. On the 12th January 2018 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Andrew Davies) allowed his appeal  under  The  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the Regs').  The  Tribunal  allowed
       the appeal because it accepted that Mr Harbil met the requirements of
       Regulation 15, namely that he had accrued five  continuous  years  of
       residence as the family member  of  an  EEA  national  prior  to  his
       relationship breaking down and therefore  'retained'  his  rights  of
       residence.

    2. Although the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal to this  Tribunal
       were many and varied, permission was granted on one point alone:  for
       the purpose  of  calculating  his  five  year  period  of  continuous
       residence can Mr Harbil rely on time spent in this country before  he
       was issued with a residence permit conferring a right of residence as
       an 'extended family member'?

       Background and Matters in Issue

    3. The facts as found are these:

       23rd December 2008    Mr Harbil given leave to enter the United
                         Kingdom

       8th March 2010  Mr Harbil commences cohabitation with his partner,
                         Polish national 'M'

       8th April 2011  Mr Harbil was granted a residence card on  the  basis
                         that he was the 'extended family member'  (partner
                         in a durable relationship) of M

       27th February 2016    Mr Harbil's relationship with M came to an  end
                         when M left the country

    4. Applying these facts to the requirements in Regulation 15 the  First-
       tier Tribunal found:

             a) That Mr Harbil had been the partner of  M  between  the  8th
                March 2010 and 27th February 2016;

             b) That at all material times  M  had  been  exercising  treaty
                rights;

             c) That for the purpose of the Regulations the five-year period
                of continuous residence could be calculated as 27th February
                2011 to the 27th February 2016;

             d) For the duration of that five-year period Mr Harbil had been
                residing in accordance with the Regulations;

             e) He therefore had a retained right of residence.

       The appeal was thereby allowed.

    5. Whilst the Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  an  'extended  family
       member', once so recognised, is to be treated as a  'family  member',
       he submits that prior to such recognition Mr Harbil cannot be said to
       have been living "in accordance  with"  the  Regulations.  The  clock
       would only start to tick from the point at  which  the  Secretary  of
       State issued his 'extended family member' residence  card.  The  card
       was issued on the 11th April 2011; it follows that when  M  left  the
       country on the 27th February 2016 Mr Harbil was a few weeks short  of
       having accrued his continual period of five years' residence.

       Discussion and Findings

    6. The applicable legal framework is found at Regulation 15:

           Right of permanent residence


           15.-(1)     The following persons acquire the right to reside in
                the United Kingdom permanently-

                (a)    an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period
                of five years;

                (b)    a family member of an EEA national who is not an  EEA
                national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with  the
                EEA national in accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
                continuous period of five years;

                (c)    a worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                activity;

                (d)    the family member of a worker or self-employed person
                who has ceased activity, provided-

                    (i)      the person was the family member of the  worker
                    or self-employed person at the point the worker or self-
                    employed person ceased activity; and

                    (ii)     at that point,  the  family  member  enjoyed  a
                    right to reside on the basis of being the family  member
                    of that worker or self-employed person;

                (e)    a person who was the family member  of  a  worker  or
                self-employed person where-

                    (i)      the worker or self-employed person has died;

                    (ii)     the family member resided with  the  worker  or
                    self-employed person immediately before the death; and

                    (iii)    the worker or self-employed person had  resided
                    continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  two
                    years immediately before dying  or  the  death  was  the
                    result  of  an  accident  at  work  or  an  occupational
                    disease;

                (f)    a person who-

                    (i)      has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance
                    with these Regulations for a continuous period  of  five
                    years; and

                    (ii)     was, at the end of the period, a family  member
                    who has retained the right of residence.

                (2)    Residence in the United Kingdom  as  a  result  of  a
                derivative right to reside does not constitute residence for
                the purpose of this regulation.

                (3)     The  right  of  permanent   residence   under   this
                regulation is lost through absence from the  United  Kingdom
                for a period exceeding two years.

                (4)     A  person  who  satisfies  the  criteria   in   this
                regulation is not entitled to a right to permanent residence
                in the United Kingdom where the Secretary  of  State  or  an
                immigration officer has made  a  decision  under  regulation
                23(6)(b), 24(1), 25(1), 26(3) or 31(1), unless that decision
                is set aside or otherwise no longer has effect.

    7. It will be noted that the  provision  says  nothing  about  'extended
       family members'. It is however accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State
       that Regulation 15 can apply where an  'extended  family  member'  is
       treated as a 'family member' pursuant to Regulation 7 (3):

           7.

                (1)    In  these  Regulations,  "family  member"  means,  in
                relation to a person ("A")-

                    (a)      A's spouse or civil partner;

                    (b)      A's direct descendants, or the direct
                    descendants of A's spouse or civil partner who are
                    either-

                        (i) aged under 21; or

                        (ii)      dependants of A, or of A's spouse or
                        civil partner;

                    (c)      dependent direct relatives in A's ascending
                    line, or in that of A's spouse or civil partner.

                (2)    Where A is a student residing in the  United  Kingdom
                otherwise  than  under  regulation  13  (initial  right   of
                residence), a person is not  a  family  member  of  A  under
                paragraph (1)(b) or (c) unless-

                    (a)      in the case of paragraph (1)(b), the person is
                    the dependent child of A or of A's spouse or civil
                    partner; or

                    (b)      A also falls within one of the other categories
                    of qualified person mentioned in regulation 6(1).

                (3)    A person ("B") who is an extended family  member  and
                has been issued with an EEA family  permit,  a  registration
                certificate or a residence card must be treated as a  family
                member of A, provided-

                    (a)      B continues to satisfy the conditions in
                    regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5); and

                    (b)      the EEA family permit, registration certificate
                    or residence card remains in force.

                (4)    A must be an EEA national unless regulation 9 applies
                (family members of British citizens).

    8. What the Secretary of State does not accept is that  a  person  whose
       right to reside in the United Kingdom has not been recognised by  the
       issuance of a residence card can be classed as a 'family member'  and
       thus meet the requirements of Regulation 15  (b).    As  far  as  the
       Secretary of State is concerned Mr Harbil became a 'family member' on
       the 11th April 2011 when his residence card was issued. He ceased  to
       be a 'family member' on the  26th  February  2016  when  by  his  own
       admission  he  ceased  to  be  an  'extended  family   member',   his
       relationship with M having  come  to  an  end.   As  unattractive  an
       outcome as this argument compels, I conclude that  the  Secretary  of
       State must be correct.

    9. In order to 'retain' a right under Regulation 15(1)(b) Mr Harbil must
       satisfy three requirements. He must show:

             i) that he is a "family member of an EEA national"

            ii) that he is not an EEA national himself

           iii) that he and his EEA family member have resided in the United
                Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous
                period of five years

   10. As an extended family member Mr Harbil will be treated as  a  'family
       member' where these criteria, set out in Regulation 7(3) are met:

           (3)   A person ("B") who is an extended family  member  and  has
           been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,   a   registration
           certificate or a residence card must  be  treated  as  a  family
           member of A, provided-

                (a)    B continues to satisfy the conditions  in  regulation
                8(2), (3), (4) or (5); and

                (b)    the EEA family permit,  registration  certificate  or
                residence card remains in force.

   11. Regulation 7(3) says nothing about  that  status  of  the  individual
       concerned prior to the residence card being issued,  but it is  self-
       evident from 7(3)(b) above that a period  without  a  card  would  be
       excluded. I am satisfied that there is no basis under the Regulations
       to class Mr Harbil as a 'family member' prior to the date upon  which
       his right to reside as an 'extended family  member'  was  recognised.
       It follows that he was approximately 2 weeks short of  the  requisite
       five-year period when his relationship came to an end.  He  may  have
       been in a relationship with M for a far longer period, but  prior  to
       11th April 2011 this was not as a 'family member'.   The Secretary of
       State's  appeal must therefore be allowed, and Mr Harbil's underlying
       appeal dismissed.

       Decision

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law such
       that the decision is set aside.

   13. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

           "the appeal is dismissed".

   14. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         16th September 2018
