
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04242/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant to rule|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|                              |
|Rules 2008                                   |On 9 March 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                MD ABU KAYES
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Grounds of appeal by Westbrook Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    no written representations provided by the
respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 19 March 2020, and the Presidential Guidance Note No  1
         2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic, as amended  on  19
         November 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Andonian ("the judge") who, in a decision promulgated
         on 27 January 2020, dismissed his appeal against a decision by  the
         respondent dated 31  July  2019  refusing  his  application  for  a
         residence card as confirmation of a right of residence in the UK as
         an extended family member of an EEA national exercising EEA  Treaty
         rights.

      3. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, entered the UK on 7  April
         2012 pursuant to a grant of entry clearance as a  student.  He  was
         granted further leave to remain but his leave was  curtailed  on  6
         March 2014 because the college he was attending was  no  longer  on
         the relevant Home Office register. A further application for  leave
         to remain as a student was considered to be  void.  An  application
         for leave to remain on compassionate grounds made on 15 March  2015
         was rejected.

      4. On  4  May  2019  the  appellant  requested  a  residence  card  as
         confirmation of his right to reside  in  the  UK  as  the  extended
         family  member  (nephew)  of  Hafizur  Rahman  ("the  sponsor"),  a
         Portuguese national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK,  with
         reference  to  regulations  8(2)  and  18(4)  of  the   Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. The sponsor, who is  the
         appellant's uncle, went to Portugal in 2004  and  claimed  to  have
         become a  Portuguese  national  in  2006,  although  there  was  no
         independent  evidence  of  the  year  in  which  he  obtained   his
         citizenship before the judge. The sponsor came to the UK  in  2016.
         The appellant claimed he had been a dependent on the sponsor  since
         the appellant's father died in 2001. The sponsor had  provided  the
         appellant with financial support to enable him to  meet  his  basic
         needs and they had lived together in the same  accommodation  since
         March 2018.

      5. The respondent refused to issue the residence card because she  did
         not consider that the appellant had provided sufficient evidence to
         show that he had been dependent on his sponsor, either outside  the
         UK or  since  entering.  The  respondent  acknowledged  some  money
         transfer receipts from the sponsor to the appellant's mother  prior
         to the appellant  entering  the  UK,  and  an  affidavit  from  the
         appellant's  mother.  The  affidavit  was  not  accepted  as  valid
         documentary evidence of dependency and the money transfer  receipts
         were said to be insufficient as evidence of dependency because  the
         appellant had been an adult for several years prior to entering the
         UK (he turned 18 on 1 November 2008) and it  was  not  possible  to
         verify whether the money transferred to the appellant's mother  was
         used to cover his basic living needs. The receipts were  also  said
         to be sparse, with several gaps of over a year. There were  only  2
         money transfer receipts as evidence of dependency between the  time
         the appellant entered the  UK  and  September  2015,  both  in  his
         mother's name, and although there were 2  money  transfer  receipts
         between September 2015 and April 2016 in the appellant's  name  the
         amounts were insufficient to show that the sponsor was covering the
         appellant's basic living needs during  this  period.  Nor  was  the
         respondent satisfied that  there  was  evidence  showing  that  the
         sponsor supported the appellant or that they resided together  from
         the date that the sponsor entered the UK (said to be 21 June  2016)
         until October  2017.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and his hearing occurred on 10 January 2020.


      6. The judge had before him a bundle  of  documents  prepared  by  the
         appellant's representatives that contained, inter-alia,  statements
         from the appellant,  his  sponsor  and  his  mother,  bank  account
         details,  including  those  relating  to  the  appellant's   mother
         (covering the period for January 2004 until 1  February  2012)  and
         evidence of money transfer receipts in respect of funds sent by the
         sponsor to both the appellant and his mother. The judge also  heard
         oral evidence from the appellant and the sponsor.

      7. In his decision the judge summarised the  evidence  from  appellant
         and  the  sponsor  and  referred,  inter-alia,  to  money  transfer
         receipts in the appellant's bundle at pages 80  -  113.  The  judge
         recorded evidence that the sponsor had sent money to the  appellant
         and his mother to support the family and that the sponsor had  also
         sent  money  for  the  appellant's  tuition  fees   and   for   his
         maintenance. The judge noted at [18] that money  transfers  to  the
         appellant and to his mother were not  made  on  a  regular  monthly
         basis and that "no credible explanation was given as to  why  after
         the appellant had become an adult would money  transfers  still  be
         sent to the appellant's mother from time to  time  as  well,  given
         that it was the appellant's  evidence  that  the  only  reason  why
         monies were transferred to his mother  in  the  earlier  years  was
         because he was still a minor."

      8. At [19] the judge stated that there was no evidence as to what  the
         position was in so far as financial support was  concerned  between
         October 2017 and 2018, and that there was no  evidence  as  to  the
         payment for the appellant's accommodation and other  expenses  such
         as utilities before the appellant started  living  with  his  uncle
         from 2018. At [20] the judge said there was no  evidence  that  the
         appellant was being maintained by  his  uncle  until  they  started
         living together in 2018. The judge  noted  the  evidence  from  the
         sponsor that he had not kept receipts  for  any  financial  support
         given to the appellant since the sponsor entered the  UK.  At  [23]
         the judge stated that the receipts were  insufficient  evidence  of
         dependency because the appellant had  been  an  adult  for  several
         years prior to entering the UK in 2012 and because there were money
         transfers sent to the appellant's mother for the appellant even  at
         the time when he was an adult. It could not be  verified  that  the
         money transferred to the appellant's mother when he became an adult
         was used to cover the appellant's basic living needs as  an  adult.
         The judge noted that there were several monthly gaps in the  making
         of money transfers to the appellant. At [26] the judge  found  that
         the appellant had not provided any evidence with his application to
         show that he was financially maintained by  his  sponsor  from  the
         time that the sponsor entered the UK on 21 June 2016 until  October
         2017.


      9. At [28], after referring to the case of Dauhoo (EEA  Regulations  -
         reg 8(2) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC), the judge did not  accept  that  the
         receipts provided by  the  appellant  was  sufficient  evidence  of
         dependency prior to him coming to the UK as he had  been  an  adult
         for several years and it could  not  be  verified  that  the  money
         transfers to his mother were used to cover his basic living  needs.
         The receipts were in any event sparse with several gaps of  over  a
         year and could not be considered sufficient to show dependency.  At
         [29] the judge found there was  no  evidence  of  either  financial
         dependency or dependency  on  the  sponsor's  household  since  the
         appellant came to the UK  in  April  2012  and  since  his  sponsor
         entered the UK in June 2016. There were said to  be  "no  evidence"
         that the uncle was paying for all the appellant's utility expenses,
         rent, and other essentials between 2016 and 2018. The judge was not
         consequently satisfied that the appellant had discharged the burden
         of proving that he was dependent on his sponsor.

     10. At [35] the judge observed that someone had attempted to obliterate
         the date of '31 October 2017' from a letter that was  sent  to  the
         appellant in respect of voter registration at the address where his
         uncle lives. Having noted that the evidence from both the appellant
         and his uncle was that the began to  cohabit  in  March  2018,  the
         judge found that no credible reason had been given as to why  there
         should be a document addressed to the  appellant  at  that  address
         which was dated 31 October 2017. The judge additionally  noted  his
         surprise that utility bills  in  respect  of  that  residence  were
         addressed to the appellant given that he claimed to be  financially
         dependent on his uncle. The judge found that no  credible  evidence
         had  been  given  to  him  concerning  these  issues.   The   judge
         consequently dismissed the appeal.

     11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Owens in a decision dated 23 July 2020 but  sent  on
         17 August 2020. I set out the material elements  of  the  grant  of
         permission:

             "It is arguable that the Judge has failed to take into account
             relevant evidence and failed to give any or  adequate  reasons
             for rejecting evidence. The appellant's case is that after the
             death of his father he and his family  was  supported  at  all
             times by his uncle who moved to Portugal in 2004 and became  a
             Portuguese national in 2008. The evidence of the  sponsor  and
             the appellant is that the appellant continued to be  supported
             by the sponsor both prior and after the appellant came to  the
             UK in 2012 as a student and that  the  sponsor  paid  for  his
             studies. The sponsor continued to support the appellant  after
             he arrived in the UK in 2016  and  they  have  lived  together
             since 2018.


             The judge repeatedly asserts that there was "no  evidence"  of
             financial support of the appellant by his uncle. This is  said
             at [7], [12], [19], [20], [22], [29] and [34]. However this is
             arguably not the case as both the appellant and the sponsor as
             well as the appellant's mother provided witness statements  in
             relation to the dependency, the  appellant  and  sponsor  gave
             oral evidence and there was evidence of remittances as well as
             bank  statements.  Further  the  appellant's  mother  provided
             evidence of large deposits into her account from  the  sponsor
             about the time that the appellant applied for a student visa.


             In the circumstances the judge arguably erred in stating  that
             there was "no evidence". The judge  arguably  failed  to  take
             this evidence into account or  provide  adequate  reasons  for
             rejecting it. The judge also at [18] stated that there was "no
             credible evidence" for why  there  were  gaps  in  remittances
             without arguably putting this issue to the appellant.  Further
             the judge at [35] relied on an alteration  in  a  document  to
             question the appellant's credibility without this issue  being
             raised by the respondent and without the issue being raised at
             the hearing. The appellant was not  given  an  opportunity  to
             address this which is arguably procedurally unfair.


             These errors are arguably manifestly material to  the  outcome
             of the appeal.


             All grounds are arguable.


             My provisional view  is  that  the  decision  is  arguably  so
             vitiated by material errors that the decision  should  be  set
             aside pursuant to section 12 (2) of the Tribunals, Courts  and
             Enforcement Act 2007."

     12. Judge Owens then gave the following directions:

             "Both parties have 7 days from the  date  of  the  sending  of
             these directions in which to make any further  submissions  in
             respect of this issue including any indication that consent is
             given to determine the appeals without any  further  response.
             In the absence of any response, I will infer that both parties
             have consented to the decision being  determined  without  any
             further response pursuant to  rule  22  (C)  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


             Within the same timeframe the parties  should  also  make  any
             submissions on the appropriate  method  of  disposing  of  the
             appeal by way of either re-making or remitting  including  any
             submissions on the issue of whether there is any objection  to
             re-making the decision by way of a remote hearing."


     13.  By  email  sent  on  25  August   2020   the   appellant's   legal
         representatives  indicated  that  they   had   not   received   any
         submissions from the respondent in response to the  directions  and
         reserved their right to respond  should  any  such  submissions  be
         made. The appellant indicated that he was relying on  the  previous
         grounds and the grant of permission and submitted  that,  should  a
         material error be identified and the decision set aside,  then  the
         matter should go back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         hearing. No submissions have been received from the respondent.

     14. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  and  focus  of   the
         appellant's challenge to the judge's decision, and having satisfied
         myself that both parties have been  given  a  fair  opportunity  of
         fully advancing their cases, and having regard to the  judgment  in
         JCWI v President of the Upper Tribunal [2020]  EWHC  3103  (Admin),
         the Upper Tribunal considers it appropriate, in light of the Covid-
         19 pandemic, to determine the questions  (i)  whether  the  judge's
         decision involved the making of an error of law and,  if  so,  (ii)
         whether the  decision  should  be  set  aside,  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008.

Discussion

     15. For the reasons succinctly expressed by  Judge  Owens  in  granting
         permission to appeal, I am persuaded that the judge  has  erred  in
         law by failing take into account the written and oral assertions by
         the appellant and his sponsor that the sponsor provided  'material'
         or 'necessary' financial support to enable the  appellant  to  meet
         his essential needs,  or  by  rejecting  those  assertions  without
         providing adequate reasons. At various paragraphs in  his  decision
         the judge states  that  there  was  "no  evidence"  in  respect  of
         material  financial  support  provided  by  the  sponsor   to   the
         appellant. For example, at [19] the judge  claimed  there  was  "no
         evidence" in respect of financial support between October 2017  and
         2018, and that there was no evidence as  to  the  payment  for  the
         appellant accommodation and other expenses such as utilities  after
         the appellant and his sponsors started living together.  Whilst  it
         is correct that there  was  no  independent  documentary  evidence,
         there was evidence in the form of the written  and  oral  testimony
         from the appellant and his uncle.  In  his  statement  the  sponsor
         indicated that he had provided money to the appellant since he (the
         sponsor) came to the UK and before  they  started  cohabiting,  but
         that he had not kept all of the relevant receipts, and that he also
         gave the appellant  cash.  These  assertions  were  not  inherently
         implausible,  and  the  judge  was  obliged  to  engage  with   the
         assertions even if they were not supported by independent evidence.
         There has however been little or any  reasoned  assessment  by  the
         judge of the assertions, and no satisfactory  reasoned  explanation
         for rejecting the truthfulness of the assertions.


     16. I am additionally and independently satisfied that the decision was
         made through a procedurally unfair manner as the judge's conclusion
         at [18] that "no credible explanation" had been provided as to  why
         the sponsor continued to send money to the appellant's mother after
         he turned 18 without the appellant being given  an  opportunity  to
         provide an explanation. I'm further additionally and  independently
         satisfied that the concerns expressed  by  the  judge  at  [35]  in
         respect of the attempted obliteration of the date '31 October 2017'
         in respect of a letter  sent  to  the  appellant  concerning  voter
         registration and the fact that the appellant was the  addressee  in
         respect of utility bills for the same address were  not  raised  by
         the respondent and were not identified by the judge  as  issues  of
         concern  at  the  hearing.  The  appellant  has  consequently  been
         deprived of a fair opportunity of providing an explanation for  the
         concerns raised by the judge for the 1st time in his decision.

     17. I find for the reasons given that the decision contains mistakes on
         points of law that require it to be set aside.

     18. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 a case may be remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

      1. I have determined that the judge failed to assess material evidence
         and make sustainable credibility findings in respect of the factual
         assertions of both the appellant and his sponsor. The  appeal  will
         be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that a  new  fact-finding
         exercise can be undertaken. It will be for the First-tier  Tribunal
         to determine the most appropriate mode of hearing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian.



D.Blum                 2 March 2021

Signed                     Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
