
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/04380/2018
                                                               EA/04883/2018
                                                               EA/03887/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2019                   |On 17th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                             mr solomon amponsah
                            mr michael osei antwi
                             mr david osei antwi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Murphy instructed by Krishmorgan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana born in May  1980,  November  1989
    and August  1991.  They  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S J Clarke  dated  13  November  2018  dismissing  their
    appeals against the refusal  of  residence  cards  as  confirmation  of
    rights of  residence  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.

 2. The Appellants appealed on the basis  that  they  satisfied  Regulation
    8(2). The judge found that they lived with the Sponsor in  Italy  prior
    to coming to the UK and they shared a house in the UK.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer on  27  January  2019
    for the following reasons: "It is arguable that in light of the judge's
    findings at [19, 20] of household membership both in  Italy  and  here,
    that Regulation 8(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016  (sic),
    the appeal should have been allowed.

3.   The Appellants  made  applications  under  Regulation  7  of  the  2016
    Regulations as family members who, although over the  age  of  21  were
    still dependent on their father, the Sponsor. It was accepted he is  an
    Italian national exercising Treaty rights. The application was  refused
    on the ground that the Appellants had failed to  show  that  they  were
    dependent.  The  Appellants'  previous  application  was  refused   and
    dismissed on appeal.

4.   The judge considered the earlier decision and  the  evidence  currently
    available and stated at paragraph 5: "At the beginning of  the  hearing
    Mr Murphy confirmed that the only issue before me  in  respect  of  all
    three Appellants was dependency pursuant to Regulation 7(1)(b)  of  the
    Regulations.  The Appellants claim they are dependent  on  the  Sponsor
    and that they are entitled to a residence card  pursuant  to  the  2016
    Regulations." The judge concluded that  they  were  not  dependent  and
    dismissed the appeals.

5.   Permission to appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
    grounds that the judge failed to consider Article  8.  This  was  quite
    rightly  refused  following  Amirteymour  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  353.   The
    application for permission was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Mr
    Murphy on the following grounds:

         "8.  The Judge stated that Counsel who appeared before her and  who
             is drafting these grounds stated that the only  issue  in  the
             appeal was in relation to regulation 7.

         9.   However, Counsel did not intend to shut  out  the  Appellants'
             rights under  regulation  8,  and  specifically  referred  and
             relied upon the below mentioned authority of Dahou (sic) which
             of course goes to Regulation 8.

         10.  Therefore, focusing on Regulation 8,  the  judge  acknowledged
             the evidence of the Appellants that they  all  lived  together
             with their father in Italy from 2008 to  2016.  See  paragraph
             12.

         11.  The judge acknowledged the evidence that the  Appellants  came
             to the UK with their father on 8 February 2016. See  paragraph
             16.

         12.  The judge found that the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
             had been exercising  treaty  rights  whilst  in  the  UK,  see
             paragraph 16.

         13.  At paragraph 19, the judge was satisfied that the family lived
             together in Italy at the same  address  and  that  they  lived
             there for 10 years.

         14.  At paragraph 20, the judge accepted that the Appellants  lived
             together with the Sponsor at an address in Derby,  since  they
             came to the UK.

         15.  Beyond these findings the judge merely concentrated on whether
             the Appellants were financially dependent  upon  their  father
             whilst in the UK, see for example paragraph 31

         16.  At  paragraph  32,  the  Judge  considered  the  case  law  on
             dependency.

         17.  At paragraph 33,  the  Judge  directed  himself  that  on  the
             balance of probabilities the Appellant were not  dependent  on
             upon their Sponsor.

         18.  Having done so, she dismissed the appeal.

         19.  However, for the Appellants to eb  successful,  they  did  not
             have to show dependency, but that they were part of  the  same
             household, and that they had been part of the  same  household
             whilst in Italy.

         20.  The  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  if  the
             Appellants  could  succeed   under   Regulation   8(2)   which
             states....

         21.  The Judge having accepted that the Appellants were part of the
             same household in Italy and in the United Kingdom, should have
             allowed the appeal, see Dauhoo (EEA Regulations  -  reg  8(2))
             [2012] UKUT 00079 (IAC).



Submissions

6.   Mr Murphy relied  on  Dauhoo  and  submitted  it  was  a  case  dealing
    specifically and only with Regulation 8(2). He submitted that this case
    was before the judge and therefore it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    deal with Regulation 8. It was relied  on  by  the  Appellant  even  if
    submissions were not made in relation to Regulation 8.  The  point  was
    Robinson obvious. It was Mr Murphy's  case  that,  although  the  judge
    stated that the issue was Regulation 7, it was not the case that he was
    not relying on Regulation 8 and somehow, he and the judge had got their
    wires crossed.

7.   Mr Murphy submitted it was not relevant that the application  had  been
    made under Regulation 7. If the Appellant had a right to  reside  under
    Regulation 8 then the judge was seized of the matter and  had  to  deal
    with that issue. The judge accepted the Appellants lived together  with
    the Sponsor in Italy and they lived together in the UK in Derby.  On  a
    proper application of Dauhoo, the  Appellants'  appeals  succeed  under
    Regulation 8.

8.   Ms Jones submitted that there was no error of law  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to dismiss the appeal  under  Regulation  7.  The  only  issue
    before her was Regulation 7(1)(b).  Although paragraph 8 of the grounds
    state that Counsel representing the Appellant did not  intend  to  shut
    out rights under Regulation 8 that did not suggest  that  Regulation  8
    was specifically argued before the  judge.   Submitting  a  case  which
    dealt with Regulation 8 was not enough. It was  possible  to  submit  a
    case and not rely on relevant argument therein.

9.   There was no error of law in the judge's decision  because  the  appeal
    had been argued only under Regulation 7 and any error was the fault  of
    Counsel for failing to argue Regulation 8. Since the matter was not put
    forward under Regulation 8 either on application or  before  the  judge
    then the case could not be argued  on  that  basis.  Ms  Jones  had  no
    submissions to make on  the  Robinson  obvious  point.   There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's findings and the Appellants' appeals should be
    dismissed.

10.  Mr Murphy submitted that this was not a case where there were  numerous
    authorities before the judge which were then not properly argued. There
    was no challenge to the judge's findings.  There  were  clear  findings
    that the Appellants lived with the Sponsor in  Italy  and  in  the  UK.
    There were no reasons for the Respondent to resist this appeal  because
    on the  facts  the  Appellants  satisfied  Regulation  8.  The  appeals
    succeeded on that basis.



Discussion and Conclusions

11.  The Appellants applied for residence cards as  confirmation  of  rights
    of residence as family members of  the  Sponsor,  their  father,  under
    Regulation 7. They appealed the  refusal  of  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 7. There was no mention of Regulation 8 in  the  grounds  of
    appeal before the judge. The Appellants' skeleton  argument  which  was
    submitted for the  appeal  hearing  made  no  reference  to  Dauhoo  or
    Regulation 8 and there appears to have been an agreement at  the  start
    of the hearing that the only  issue  was  dependency  under  Regulation
    7(1)(b).

12.  It was submitted by Mr Murphy that, notwithstanding what was agreed  at
    the beginning of the hearing, he  relied  on  the  case  of  Dauhoo  in
    submissions and therefore he had not intended to prevent the Appellants
    succeeding  under  Regulation  8(2).  It  was   irrelevant   that   the
    application was not made under Regulation  8  and  that  permission  to
    appeal against the decision was not initially sought on that ground. Mr
    Murphy had not made the earlier application for permission to appeal.

13.  The record of proceedings  states  at  the  very  beginning  "issue  is
    dependency 7(1)(b)".  The judge then deals with the  evidence,  all  of
    which relates to the issue of dependency under Regulation 7(1)(b).  The
    record of proceedings refers to the Appellants' skeleton  argument  and
    the case of Dauhoo referring to "four  ways  can  get  home  prior  ...
    [illegible] ... prior member and present mem.  No finding by  judge  on
    ... [illegible] ... [illegible] ... not challenged by  HO.  Subs  allow
    the appeal."

14.  The record of proceedings does demonstrate that the case of Dauhoo  was
    relied on by Mr Murphy in  his  submissions  and  it  acknowledges  the
    content of the decision which deals with the  four  ways  in  which  an
    applicant can satisfy Regulation 8. It is understandable that the judge
    failed to deal with Dauhoo or Regulation 8 in her decision, given that,
    at the start  of  the  hearing,  it  was  agreed  that  the  issue  was
    Regulation 7(1)(b). The judge dismissed the appeal on that issue. There
    was no error of law  in  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Regulation 7.

15.  In the circumstances, it is very difficult to  see  what  was  actually
    argued before the judge. Mr Murphy assures me that he referred  to  his
    note of proceedings when drafting the grounds of  appeal,  although  he
    had not thought to submit his note in relation to this appeal  hearing.



16.  However, on the evidence that I have, it is  clear  that  the  case  of
    Dauhoo was  put  before  the  judge  and  that  case  deals  only  with
    Regulation 8. As such I am satisfied that it was a  live  issue  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and one which the judge should have dealt with.
    The factual situation confers rights on the  Appellants  regardless  of
    whether those rights are evidenced by residence cards. The judge  found
    at paragraph 30:

         "There is evidence before me, which I accept, that  the  Appellants
         and Sponsor lived together in Italy  and  they  share  a  house  in
         Derby.  However, it was equally clear that the Appellants are adult
         young men who are forging their own independent lives and are  able
         to do so."

17.  There was no challenge to the finding of prior membership and  previous
    membership of  the  household  and  therefore  the  Appellants  satisfy
    Regulation 8. Given that the grant of a residence card to  an  extended
    member is a matter of discretion for the  Secretary  of  State  and  an
    application was not made under Regulation 8, then the appeal  can  only
    be allowed insofar as the Appellants satisfy Regulation 8 and it  is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State whether to exercise discretion  under
    Regulation 17(5) of the 2016 Regulations.

18.  Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in law in failing  to  address
    the issue of Regulation 8.  I set aside her decision and remake it. The
    appeal is dismissed under Regulation 7. I allow the appeal  insofar  as
    the Appellants satisfy Regulation 8. No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the Appellants have not succeeded in their appeal  under  Regulation
7. Regulation 8 was raised only on appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  it  was
not clear whether it was fully or  properly  argued  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
