
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04960/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 LIA SURJANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:                Mr. A. Malik, Direct Access counsel
For the Respondent:                Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Indonesia.  She  married  her  husband,
    JPG, on 25 September 2016 in Indonesia.   He is an Irish  national.  On
    10 May 2017 she was granted entry clearance as the family member of  an
    EEA National and she entered the United Kingdom in this capacity  on  7
    June 2017.

2.   On 16 October 2017 the Appellant applied for a residence  card  as  the
    partner of an EEA national. Her application was refused    She  made  a
    further application on the same basis  on  24  March  2018,  which  was
    rejected   She then made another application on 13  April  2018,  which
    was refused on 2 July 2018, on the basis that her husband  was  also  a
    British citizen by reason of his birth in the  United  Kingdom.    This
    was the first time that the  Respondent  had  raised  this  reason  for
    refusing           her           a           residence            card.



3.   The Appellant appealed but  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith in a decision promulgated on  21  February
    2019. The Appellant appealed against this decision and on 30 May  2019,
    Designated Judge Shaerf, a deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge,  granted  her
    permission to appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on a Rule 24 Reply, dated  27
    June 2019, and counsel for the Appellant relied on a skeleton  argument
    of the same date. They also both made additional oral submissions and I
    have taken these into account when reaching my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In paragraph 13 of the skeleton argument relied upon by counsel for
    the Appellant at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith, it
    had been submitted that "the Appellant had a legitimate expectation of
    being granted [a] residence card on the basis that she was granted [a]
    family permit and her previous three refusal [s] failed to take any
    issue with the Sponsor's nationality".

6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been granted on the
    basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith had failed to engage with
    this issue.

7.   I have reminded myself that in paragraph 90 of R (Iran) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982, Lord Justice Brooke
    held:

         "3)  A decision should not be set aside for inadequacy of reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and record the matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues, in such a
         way that the IAT was unable to understand why he reached that
         decision".

8.   It is clear that First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith had failed to engage
    with the submission that by granting the Appellant a family permit to
    enter the United Kingdom, as a family member of an EEA national, the
    Respondent had given her a legitimate expectation that she would be
    able to reside here in that capacity. Therefore, a potential error of
    law had occurred in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

9.   However, I had also to consider whether the error was material and
    note that, in paragraph 90 of R (Iran) Lord Justice Brook also found:

         "1)  Before the IAT could set aside a decision of an adjudicator on
         the grounds of error of law, it had to be satisfied that the
         correction of the error would have made a material difference to
         the outcome of, or to the fairness of the proceedings...".

10.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the decision in Mehmood
    (legitimate expectation) [2014] UKUT 00469 (IAC) where the Upper
    Tribunal found:

         "The first question in every case concerning an alleged legitimate
         expectation is whether the public authority concerned made an
         unambiguous representation, promise or assurance devoid of any
         relevant qualification".

11.   It is the case that she was granted a family permit by an authorized
    officer in the form of an Entry Clearance Officer. However, the Entry
    Clearance Officer did not have the power to grant her a residence card
    once she was here. Neither did he explicitly state that she would be
    granted such a card. As a consequence, the nature of the representation
    made by the Entry Clearance Officer was limited to the grant of a
    family permit.

12.  It is also the case that a legitimate expectation does not arise when
    it is made in breach of the decision-maker's statutory powers, that is,
    when he or she lacked legal power to make the representation, as
    "expectations" cannot be said to be "legitimate" when they would
    require a public body to act in breach of its statutory duties and its
    own.

13.  The Appellant's husband does not fall within the definition of an "EEA
    national" as he is also a British citizen by reason of his birth in the
    United Kingdom in 1968 and the exceptions contained in Regulation 2 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations ("the 2016
    Regulations") do not apply to him.

14.  As a consequence, the Appellant is not a family member of an EEA
    national and cannot benefit from Regulation 14 of the 2016 Regulations
    which states:

         "(1) A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
             for as long as that person remains a qualified person.


         (2)  A person ("P") who is a family member of  a  qualified  person
             residing in the United Kingdom under paragraph (1)  or  of  an
             EEA  national  with  a  right  of  permanent  residence  under
             regulation 15 is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom  for
             so long as P remains the family member of that person  or  EEA
             national".

15.  In addition, even if the Appellant's husband was an EEA national for
    the purposes of the 2016 Regulations, he would still have to show that
    he was a "qualified person" and, as First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith
    found, the fact that he was a full-time carer for his mother did not
    bring him within the definition of a "qualified person". This had been
    confirmed in the decision of JR v SSWP (IS) (European Union law; free
    movement) [2014] UKUT 154 (AAC), in which Upper Tribunal Judge Gray
    found:

         "19. As my view therefore, looking at the factual position and the
         nature of what is being done, is that the person providing care
         does not perform services in return for which he receives
         remuneration, that is sufficient to defeat the claimant's claim,
         whether it is put on the basis of having been a worker or having
         been self-employed".

16.  The Appellant also had to show that she had relied on a representation
    made by the Respondent and that by doing so she had acted to her own
    detriment. The Appellant's witness statement noted that she had moved
    to the United Kingdom and obtained employment here and formed a family
    life here. But she did not refer to any detriment that this had caused
    her in relation to her life here or in Indonesia. Therefore, she was
    also not able to show that this requirement of legitimate expectation
    was met.

17.  For all of these reasons, I find that, although First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Smith had omitted to consider the issue of whether the Appellant
    had acquired a legitimate expectation, this did not amount to a
    material error of law as no legitimate expectation had arisen.

Decision

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith is maintained.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


