
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04326/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2019                         |On 4th February 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                              Karim Boumerdassi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr F Junior
For the respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria.  On 12  April  2014  he  was
    refused a residence certificate as the husband of a Hungarian national.
     He filed notice of appeal against that decision on 26 April giving  an
    address at [~] Stowford Road, Oxford, where he has remained  throughout
    these proceedings. The first notice of hearing  for  Birmingham  on  21
    September was clearly received because it resulted  in  requests  first
    for transfer to London which was refused and then for  an  adjournment,
    which was also refused.

2.   There was a second request for an adjournment and on 19  September  the
    appellant's solicitors withdrew for the time being; but they  were  not
    removed from the record, and a further notice of hearing  was  sent  in
    October for February 2018.  Unfortunately the hearing then  had  to  be
    adjourned, and on 22 February a third notice of hearing was sent for 15
    June, when the appellant failed to appear and Judge Parkes, having made
    inquiries with the solicitors and got no reply,  went  ahead  with  the
    case and decided it.

4.   The only ground of appeal is that the appellant had not  received  that
    final notice of hearing, and nor had his solicitors.  Mr Junior for the
    appellant was unable to cast any light  on  how  the  Tribunal  got  no
    answer to the phone call directed by Judge Parkes; but  they  at  least
    had got no record of it.  Curiously the Home Office do not seem to have
    the notice of hearing for 15 June on their file either,  although  this
    may not be conclusive.

5.   Given the  appellant's  previous  record  in  reacting  to  notices  of
    hearing and Mr Junior's appearance for him today, I  am  satisfied  his
    non-appearance on the last occasion may have  been  the  result  of  an
    error in sending out that notice, and the result  is  that  there  will
    have to be  a  fresh  hearing  in  the  first-tier  tribunal  before  a
    different judge.  It will be a fresh hearing at Birmingham  not  before
    Judge Parkes.

Appeal :: decision set aside

Fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at  Birmingham,  not  before  Judge
    Parkes
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)


