
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/04588/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 June 2019                         | On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                        miss drutiben himatbhai kapdi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Qureshi, Counsel instructed by West Brook Law
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Farmer promulgated on 21 January 2019 in which  her
    appeal against the respondent's  decision  dated  15  January  2018  to
    revoke her EEA residence card as a spouse of an EEA national exercising
    treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   Thereafter  there  followed  a
    Section 10 removal decision by the Respondent pursuant  to  Regulations
    23 and 32 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.
     The respondent's decision was on the basis that the  marriage  was  no
    longer subsisting, the appellant having divorced from her  husband  and
    that  prior  to  divorce,  the  marriage  had  not  subsisted   for   a
    sufficiently long period of time for her to be entitled to any retained
    right of residence.

 2.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceedings,  the   appellant   was
    represented by a firm of solicitors who contacted the Tribunal  shortly
    before the listing to state that the client's recent instructions  were
    that she would like to pursue this appeal only on the papers and  added
    that a witness statement would follow in due course.

 3. As at the date of  the  hearing  on  14  January  2019,  there  was  no
    representation for either party and the Judge noted that the letter  of
    11 January (referred to above) indicated that the appellant  wished  to
    have the matter considered on the papers.  The Judge noted that by  the
    time of leaving the Tribunal on 3pm of  the  day  of  the  hearing,  no
    witness statement had been received.  The documents  before  the  Judge
    were incredibly limited,  detailing  only  the  date  of  marriage  and
    divorce and the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.   There  were  no  further
    documents of any form from the appellant relied upon, nor was there any
    written statement.

 4. In these circumstances, the Judge found  that  the  appeal  had  to  be
    dismissed, essentially as there was a lack of evidence  before  him  to
    show that there was any retained  right  of  residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that in fact she
    did meet the requirements for a retained  right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, primarily based on domestic violence  from  her  spouse
    and that  she  had  been  not  only  inadequately  but  inappropriately
    represented by her previous solicitors.  The appellant stated that  she
    did provide documentary evidence of domestic  violence  to  her  former
    solicitor but these were not passed on to  the  Tribunal.   She  states
    that she was assured that they would prepare a  witness  statement  for
    her to explain all of this and provide the evidence, but this  was  not
    done.  She was aware that the  solicitors  had  informed  the  Tribunal
    without her consent to consider the appeal on the papers as opposed  to
    an oral hearing.  The grounds of appeal state  that  the  appellant  is
    currently pursuing a complaint against her previous solicitors with the
    Legal Ombudsman for  their  failure  and  negligence  and  requests  an
    opportunity for a fair hearing in this case.

 6. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission to appeal on 10 May  2019
    on the basis that consideration could be given to whether  this  was  a
    case which fell within MM (unfairness E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105
    (IAC).  In that case it is  noted  that  a  successful  appeal  is  not
    dependent on the demonstration of some failing on the part of the First-
    tier Tribunal, thus an error of law may be found to  have  occurred  in
    circumstances where some material evidence, through  no  fault  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, was  not  considered  with  resulting  unfairness.
    This is of course  a  case  in  which  the  Judge  made  a  proper  and
    appropriate decision on the basis of the very limited  evidence  before
    him.  No criticism can be made of the Tribunal or of the Judge in  this
    particular case for the decision made in these circumstances.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce also noted in the grant of  permission  that
    the appellant may wish  to  consider  whether  a  more  straightforward
    solution would be to make a  fresh  application  to  the  Home  Office,
    properly supported by all of the relevant evidence and if she is unable
    to evidence her ex-husband's economic activity  (which   she  would  be
    required to do under the Regulations for a retained right of residence)
    she should make a statement explaining why and  what  efforts  she  has
    made to secure such evidence and request that the Home  Office  conduct
    its own checks with HMRC.

 8. Prior to the grant of permission, it transpires that the appellant  did
    make a further application for an EEA residence card on the basis of  a
    retained right of residence on 25 March 2019 and which was  refused  by
    the respondent on 1 May 2019.  The application was refused on the basis
    that there was a lack of adequate evidence to show  that  the  marriage
    had lasted for at least  three  years,  that  there  were  difficulties
    within the marriage and that their residence was in accordance with the
    Regulation for a continuous period.  The refusal  was  largely  on  the
    basis that an application was not accompanied by the evidence  referred
    to and was therefore refused.  There are other fuller reasons  for  the
    refusal which were not relevant to the current appeal.

 9. The appellant has proceeded with this  appeal  to  the  hearing  today,
    submitting a bundle of documents shortly before.  The bundle includes a
    witness statement dated 7 June 2019  which  sets  out  her  immigration
    history, details in relation to her marriage and attaches documents  in
    relation to domestic violence in particular.  The last  few  paragraphs
    of that written statement deal with the situation surrounding the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing, although I am told by Counsel that  the  written
    statement is wrong and no formal correction has been made to it.  I did
    not invite Counsel to make formal corrections on  the  basis  of  other
    matters in this case which made that unnecessary.

10. The further  documents  submitted  within  that  bundle  include  those
    referenced in the witness statement in relation to  domestic  violence,
    but  do  not  address  the  other  matters  required  to  satisfy   the
    requirements in Regulation 10 of the EEA  Regulations  for  a  retained
    right of residence.  In particular, there remains a lack of evidence in
    relation to the duration of the marriage and  the  exercise  of  treaty
    rights by the EEA national and then by the appellant.  That is  despite
    the clear indication from Judge Bruce that these are  relevant  matters
    for the appellant to establish.

11. Counsel submitted that it was hoped that an error of law would be found
    by the Upper Tribunal, following which the matter would be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and therefore there would be an opportunity  to
    provide those further documents which are  in  fact  available  to  the
    appellant.  That is contrary to the directions which were given in this
    case which clearly indicate that if an error of law is found the  Upper
    Tribunal would proceed, if at all possible, to re-determine the  appeal
    afresh and parties should proceed on that basis.

12. There is also one further significant absence from the  bundle  to  the
    appeal hearing which is any evidence of an actual complaint against the
    previous solicitors or in fact any detail as to what  happened,  as  to
    instructions and preparation and so on.  I am told that  the  appellant
    was aware of the hearing date but later advised not to attend as it was
    not  necessary  for  her  to  give  oral  evidence  and  that  she  was
    essentially poorly advised and wrongly advised.  Although it  was  said
    in her grounds of appeal that a complaint to the Legal Ombudsman was in
    process no complaint has in fact  yet  been  made  about  the  previous
    representatives.  It is not clear if any complaint has even  been  made
    directly to them and there is certainly no evidence  of  correspondence
    or  a  response  from  them.   It  is  said   that   there   has   been
    miscommunication between the appellant and her current solicitors as to
    who was going to make the complaint.  That does not  assist  anyone  in
    this case.  The impression given by the grounds of appeal  was  that  a
    complaint had been made and was in progress.

13. In these circumstances, I do not find an error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  To find an extraneous reason why the First-
    tier Tribunal proceedings were not conducted fairly, there is real need
    for  evidence  about  what  instructions  were  given  to  the   former
    solicitors and complaints made against them.  That is  clear  from  the
    case of BT (Nepal) (former solicitors' alleged misconduct) [2004] UKIAT
    00311.  If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations  about
    the conduct of former representatives there must be evidence that those
    allegations have been put to the former representative and the Tribunal
    must be shown either the response  or  correspondence  indicating  that
    there has been no response.  In the present appeal, there  is  no  such
    evidence and it is not even clear that any complaint has been made.

14. Despite what is said in the appellant's written statement  and  in  her
    grounds of appeal, this is not a case which falls within the  ambit  of
    MM or establishes that there can be an error of law in the  proceedings
    to the First-tier Tribunal by not considering material  which  was  not
    before it.  The Judge properly considered  the  very  limited  evidence
    before him and there  was  no  error  of  law  in  doing  so  in  these
    circumstances.

15. This conclusion is also reinforced on the basis that  any  error  could
    not possibly be material where there remains a lack of  evidence  about
    the marriage subsisting for the required period of time and a  lack  of
    any evidence at all about  the  EEA  national's  economic  activity  or
    exercise of treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

16. This is clearly a case where the appellant is not prejudiced because it
    is entirely open to her to make  an  application  to  the  Home  Office
    accompanied by the required evidence to establish her claim to retained
    right of residence.  It is the most appropriate course for  her  to  do
    that rather than take up the Upper Tribunal's time with an inadequately
    prepared appeal.

17. For all of these reasons there is no error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]                  Date         21st June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
