
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04516/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2018                         |On 13th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                                   MARIUS DANIEL PRODANESE
                       (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Trevelyan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Housego), who in a determination promulgated
    on the 17th August 2018 dismissed his appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to remove the Appellant  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016, having been served with  a  form  IS151A  (EEA)
    informing him of his status under the regulations and of his  liability
    to removal. The decision had been taken to  remove  him  in  accordance
    with section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (which  applied
    by virtue of regulations 23 (6) (a) /23(6) (c) pursuant  to  regulation
    26(3) and 32 (2) of the EEA Regulations. The date  of  the  immigration
    decision was 19 June 2018.

 2. Prior to that there was a letter of 7 June 2018  setting  out  why  the
    decision had been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom which set
    out that the Appellant had not demonstrated a  right  to  reside  under
    regulation 6 of the Regulations as either a job seeker,  worker,  self-
    employed, self-sufficient or having comprehensive medical insurance.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Romania born  on  9  September  1992  who
    arrived in the UK on 1 March 2014. During the period of  his  residence
    it is asserted that he undertook forms of employment.

 4. On 3 May 2018 he was convicted of three counts of shoplifting  and  was
    sentenced to 12 weeks imprisonment.

 5. On 21 May 2018 the Appellant was  served  with  a  "minded  to  remove"
    letter  and  filled  in  a  questionnaire  as  to  his  employment  and
    resources.

 6. He completed his prison sentence on 13 June 2018 and was then  detained
    under the immigration powers.

 7. Prior to that there was a letter of 7 June 2018  setting  out  why  the
    decision had been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom which set
    out that the Appellant had not demonstrated a  right  to  reside  under
    regulation six of the regulations is either a job seeker, worker, self-
    employed, self-sufficient or stewed comprehensive medical insurance.

 8. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal that  decision  and  appeal
    grounds were filed  on  26  June  2018.  He  was  served  with  removal
    directions on 27 June 2018. The appeal was allowed out  of  time  on  2
    July 2018.

 9. In those appeal grounds he set out that he was waiting for  appointment
    to see the duty solicitor for advice.

10. He made an application for bail which was refused on 3 July 2018 and on
    the same day his appeal hearing date was set for 24 July 2018.

11. He was seen by solicitors at a legal advice surgery on 5 July 2018  and
    the  applicant's  solicitors  applied  for   an   adjournment   because
    exceptional case funding was required. This  was  refused  on  10  July
    2018. However a second letter was sent by his  solicitors  on  12  July
    2018 requesting an adjournment. The adjournment was in fact granted  on
    13 July 2018; the Appellant was released on bail on 20 July 2018 and  a
    new hearing date was set for 7 August 2018. On 6 August  2018  a  third
    request for an adjournment was made requesting a hearing date after the
    2 September 2018 as the legal aid agency said they would  take  another
    10 working days to deal with the application. It does not  appear  that
    that application was dealt with because on the hearing date on 7 August
    2018 the judge  proceeded  with  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant or any legal representatives.

12. In the determination promulgated on 17th of August 2018 he set out  his
    reasons as to why he was proceeding  in  the  Appellant's  absence.  He
    noted that the appeal had been listed on 7 August 2018, five days after
    the date requested by the solicitor in the second  application  of  the
    adjournment. He noted that the Appellant was absent and that  a  reason
    for refusing bail was that he was at risk of absconding. It  was  noted
    that he has been reported as having resources  to  buy  an  ticket  and
    therefore was not precluded by poverty from attending the hearing.  The
    judge considered that the Appellant knew of  the  hearing  because  his
    solicitor had applied for an adjournment and as the issue  was  whether
    or not the Appellant was exercising treaty rights which could be proved
    by paperwork the Appellant provided none other than one  document,  the
    judge reached the overall conclusion that he had  voluntarily  absented
    himself from the hearing.

13. The judge then considered the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  material
    before him and reach the overall conclusion that he was not  exercising
    treaty rights.

14. Shortly after the hearing  the  Appellant  did  in  fact  obtain  legal
    representation as it been indicated in the earlier letters when seeking
    an adjournment. There then  followed  grounds  of  appeal  based  on  a
    procedural irregularity namely the failure to adjourn  and  proceed  in
    the absence of the Appellant. Permission was granted by  Judge  Osborne
    on 25 October 2018.

15. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant was  represented
    by Mr Trevelyan of Counsel and he had  helpfully  provided  a  skeleton
    argument setting out his submissions. The issue raised  in  the  appeal
    was whether the refusal to accede to the request for an adjournment  of
    the hearing listed on 7 August 2018 was a material error of law.

16. It is submitted that the judge failed to apply the procedure rules  all
    the principles in the decision of Nwaige either expressly or  impliedly
    when reaching his decision at paragraph 3 to proceed in the absence  of
    the Appellant.

17. It is also asserted that the judge failed to take into account relevant
    matters; that he would be deprived of his right  to  fair  hearing,  he
    previously been granted an adjournment for identical  reasons  and  the
    delay in securing funding was due to the LAA requiring additional  time
    and was not the fault of the Appellant or his representatives  and  the
    failure to file and  serve  documents  in  support  of  his  claim  was
    inexplicable because the basis for the request to adjourn  was  because
    he had no legal assistance and that there was no relative prejudice the
    parties in proceeding or adjourning. It was submitted that in this case
    was no suggestion of representatives unreasonably delaying  the  matter
    or acting improperly and the previous adjournment  requested  confirmed
    that in the solicitor's assessment the  Appellant  did  not  understand
    legal issues or how to prepare the relevant evidence and it is not  his
    first language.

18. At paragraph 6 of the skeleton argument he sets out other factors  that
    the judge took into account which were immaterial to the  decision.  Mr
    Trevelyan therefore submitted that the judge did not  consider  whether
    to adjourn the proceedings would be fair.  He  invited  me  to  find  a
    material error of law and  a  paragraph  9  of  his  skeleton  argument
    submitted the matter should be remitted to the first-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the practice statement.

19. Mr McVeety, senior presenting officer confirmed that there was no  Rule
    24 response. The only point he relied upon was that this did not appear
    to be a case of any complexity and that the only issue related  to  the
    Appellant exercising treaty rights. However  Mr  Trevelyan  by  way  of
    response that submitted that the reason for the  adjournment  had  been
    made clear in the correspondence that in fact he needed  advice  as  to
    what he should provide and that the  solicitors  could  not  give  that
    advice until they had received the appropriate funding.

20. Having had the opportunity of considering the respective submissions  I
    am satisfied that the judge erred in law as set  out  in  the  grounds.
    When reaching a decision to proceed in the absence  of  the  Appellant,
    the judge did not apply other relevant parts of the relevant  Procedure
    Rules.

21. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3) (h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn
    a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules
    which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to"  when  exercising  any
    power under the Rules. It follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
    considered on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The  overriding
    objective is deal with cases fairly and  justly.  This  is  defined  as
    including "(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to
    the  importance  of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
    anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

22. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was  held
    that If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in most  cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged  on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the
    test to be applied is that of fairness: was there  any  deprivation  of
    the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

23.  The  judge  did  not  expressly  or  impliedly  consider  whether   an
    adjournment should be granted in accordance with the rule  I  have  set
    out above or in accordance with the case law.

24. Even if it could be said that at paragraph 3 by considering  the  rules
    that relate to proceeding in the absence of  Appellant  that  what  the
    judge effectively was doing was considering whether adjournment  should
    be granted, I am satisfied that submissions made by  Mr  Trevelyan  are
    correct in that the judge did not take into account all of the relevant
    and material considerations; some of them are set out in  the  decision
    of  Nwaige  and  others  come  from  the  procedural   background.   In
    particular, there was no consideration of a right to a fair hearing but
    I think more importantly the reason for the adjournment was  to  secure
    funding due to the LAA requiring additional time and as an  adjournment
    had been granted previously for an identical reason that would indicate
    that the further application had merit. There was no indication  either
    in the decision that the failure to secure funding  and  the  delay  in
    such was down to  the  Appellant  or  his  representatives.  It  was  a
    relevant consideration to address the issues that were  raised  in  the
    appeal as the judge did state, namely whether the Appellant was or  was
    not exercising treaty rights. However  that  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of the Appellant's application for  an  adjournment  which  was
    based on seeking legal representation and that any failure to file  and
    serve documents was because he was awaiting that legal advice. This was
    not a case as Mr Trevelyan submits of the representatives delaying  the
    matter and the previous adjournment  request  which  had  been  granted
    confirmed that the assessment made by the legal representatives at that
    time was that the Appellant did not and understand legal issues or  how
    to prepare the evidence.

25. I have therefore reached the conclusion that I am satisfied that  there
    was a procedural unfairness, for the reasons set out above.

26. As to the remaking of the decision, the Appellant was  not  present  at
    court. Mr Trevelyan had set out in his skeleton  argument  and  in  his
    oral submissions that he was instructed that the Appellant was awaiting
    further documentation from the HMRC regarding  his  employment  history
    and in the circumstances the correct course to adopt would be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's status in the light of his
    oral evidence and the documents he would wish  to  provide;  some  were
    said to be awaited. Mr McVeety confirmed that there was some  questions
    surrounding the documentation and that if  there  were  to  be  further
    documents provided that the remittal of the application  was  therefore
    the correct course.

27. In the light of those submissions, and as  both  advocates  agree  that
    that is the correct course to take, I set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is hereby set aside; it shall be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.





Signed[pic]                             Date: 11/12/2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
