
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04103/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 August 2017                      |On 16 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TARIK OKUR

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V. Brankovic, Counsel instructed by Panacea
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born in 1979.  On 18 May 2015  he
    made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with a Swedish national.

 3. The facts of his case are rather unusual in that he was married to  his
    partner in July 2009 but they divorced in November 2011.  Nevertheless,
    it appears that he  and  his  partner  continued  living  together  and
    continued their relationship, albeit that they were no longer  married.
    They have a daughter born in May 2016.

 4. The respondent refused the application because she  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant qualified for a residence card on  the  basis  of  a
    retained right of residence as  a  former  spouse,  that  he  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights, or that he and his partner were in a  durable
    relationship.

 5. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision came before  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge ("FtJ") at a hearing on  1  March  2017.  She
    allowed the appeal with reference to the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended)  ("the  EEA  Regulations"),  having
    found  that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  were   in   a   genuine
    relationship, i.e. a durable relationship within the EEA Regulations.

 6. At [31] she said that because they are in a  durable  relationship  and
    because the appellant previously had a residence card, "he is a  family
    member for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations".

 7. The grounds of appeal upon which permission was  granted  rely  on  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC),  to
    the effect that the appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision in terms of his  being  an  extended  family  member  (durable
    relationship) and that the fact that he previously had a residence card
    does not mean that he is a family member within reg 7.

 8. In submissions, Mr Mills conceded that in fact, on the basis of reg  7,
    the FtJ was entitled to conclude as she  did  and  thus  to  allow  the
    appeal, accepting that the Sala point did not apply in  this  case.  It
    was accepted therefore, that there was no error of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision. In the circumstances, Ms  Brankovic  had  no  submissions  to
    make.

 9. I agree with the view taken by Mr Mills. Reg 7(3) provides as follows:

           "(3) Subject to paragraph (4),  a  person  who  is  an  extended
           family member and has been issued with an EEA family  permit,  a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4)
           or (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the  permit,
           certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."

10. The FtJ decided that the appellant is an extended family member. He had
    (previously) been issued with  a  family  permit  (or  residence  card)
    according to his application, a matter not disputed on  behalf  of  the
    respondent. The conditions in  reg  8(5)  continue  to  apply  (durable
    relationship),  according  to  the  FtJ's  findings,  which   are   not
    challenged as to the facts.

11. Reg 7 provides that the appellant  in  these  circumstances  is  to  be
    'treated' as a family member. Accordingly, the restriction on the right
    of appeal explained in Sala does not apply. There was thus no error  of
    law on the part of the FtJ in allowing the appeal.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            9/08/17



