
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04502/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 5 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ARISH MEHRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. FtT  Judge  Lever  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 November 2019.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds  of  (1)
    no consideration of the explanation for dependency and (2)  failure  to
    put matters to the witnesses for explanation.

 3. On 7 April 202, FtT Judge Swaney granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    UT, on the view that Judge Lever arguably erred by failing to treat the
    requirements of regulation 8 (2) (b)  as  alternative  rather  than  as
    cumulative, on the authority of Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79. (The  point  did
    not perhaps arise very clearly  from  the  grounds,  but  that  is  now
    incidental.)

 4. On 18 May 2020, the UT  issued  directions  with  a  view  to  deciding
    without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether  its
    decision should be set aside.  Parties were also given the  opportunity
    to submit on whether there should be a hearing.

 5. On 1 June 2020, the appellant filed submissions in  response,  pursuing
    the original grounds and the point raised in the grant of permission.

 6. On 12 June 2020, the appellant filed "supporting documents".   He  does
    not explain why these should be considered by  the  UT,  and  does  not
    apply for their admission, as required by the rules and by  directions.
    They appear to have nothing to do with error of law by the FtT  on  the
    case before it.

 7. The appellant has made no submission  on  whether  there  should  be  a
    hearing.  He asks for the appeal "to be allowed", but does not say what
    further procedure might be appropriate.

 8. Records having been  checked  up  to  28  July  2020,  no  response  to
    directions has been received from the SSHD.

 9. It is now appropriate, in terms of rules 2 and 34, to decide without  a
    hearing on error of law and on setting aside.

10. Taking the grounds and the grant of permission together, the FtT failed
    to consider whether  the  requirements  of  the  regulation  should  be
    considered  alternatively,  and,  if  so,  whether  the  evidence   was
    sufficient to qualify the appellant as an extended family member.

11. The error is material, so the decision of the FtT  is  set  aside,  and
    stands only as a record of what was said at the hearing.

12. The appellant seeks to improve his position by further  evidence.   Its
    admission and relevance are matters to be considered in the remaking of
    the decision.

13. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature  of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

14. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Lever.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

16. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
               28 July 2020


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





