
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-BW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05088/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2020               |On 11 December 2020                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          mr safiyanu giza abubakar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of birth is 2 February
    1989.   He  made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  under   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  His application
    was refused on 9 September 2019.  He  appealed  against  the  decision.
    His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal G Solly in
    a decision promulgated on 31 December 2019.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Kebede on 3 September 2020.  Judge Kebede  issued  COVID-19  directions
    following the grant of permission which were issued by the Tribunal  on
    8 September 2020.

 3. In response to those directions  Stephen  Whitwell  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State emailed the Upper  Tribunal  on  23  September  2020
    stating as follows:

         "Given the comments of UTJ confirming that the Appellant's  bundle,
         including most  pertinently  the  skeleton  argument  and  original
         marriage documentation were received by the IAC on 12 December 2019
         (date stamped) and not referred to in the decision of  FtTJ  Solly,
         which was made on the papers, it is conceded there  is  a  material
         error of law based on procedural fairness.

         In the circumstances it is not proposed to provide  formal  written
         submissions in line with direction  2(ii)  dated  8  September  nor
         provide further comments about disposal  in  light  of  the  fourth
         direction, save that a further paper hearing before the FtT appears
         the appropriate course of action".

 4. Mr Whitwell agrees that the matter can be dealt with in the absence  of
    an oral hearing.  The Appellant has not made any communication  to  the
    Tribunal since the sending of Judge Kebede's  directions.  However,  in
    the light of the concession made by the Secretary of State  I  exercise
    jurisdiction under Rule 34 of the 2008 Rules and determine the error of
    law issue  without  the  need  for  a  hearing.   There  is  procedural
    irregularity arising  from  the  failure  by  the  judge  to  determine
    evidence that had been served on the Tribunal.

 5. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Joanna McWilliam    Date 30 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

