
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05252/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2018                            |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             doreen bassey udah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwn, Solicitor from Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State refusing her a residence card to confirm her right  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom.

 2. The Secretary of State was frustrated because the appellant  failed  on
    two occasions to attend to be interviewed about her application and  on
    20 May 2017,  in  reliance  on  paragraph  20B(4)  of  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  decided,  because   the
    applicant had failed without good reason on at least two  occasions  to
    attend an interview, to draw inferences from the failure and  concluded
    that the appellant's was not a genuine marriage.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  provided  a  substantial
    bundle of documents running to some 214 pages.  They were not  produced
    until immediately  before  the  hearing  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused to consider them.  This approach is criticised in  the  grounds
    and I am entirely satisfied that it was a wrong  approach.   The  judge
    thought about the decision and noted, correctly, that  this  is  not  a
    protection case where anxious scrutiny was required and there was not a
    removal decision so a fresh application was possible.  Nevertheless  it
    is trite law that cases should be determined on their merits and not on
    procedural technicalities and it is hard to see why the Tribunal  could
    not have received and considered the evidence at the hearing.  Most  of
    the documents illustrate claims made in short witness statements.

 4. I acknowledge Mr Duffy's point that it seems that the appellant did not
    ask for an adjournment and the position may have been different if that
    application had been made but even so it was,  in  my  judgment,  quite
    wrong to exclude evidence of such potential significance in a  case  of
    real importance to the parties simply by  reason  of  late  disclosure.
    There were other ways of achieving fairness.   In  this  case  a  short
    break  for  the  Respondent's  representative  to  have  consider   the
    statements would probably have sufficed.

 5. Having excluded the evidence on which the appellant sought to rely  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge then reviewed the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State.  This was the wrong approach.  His function was to decide the
    appeal on the  evidence  and  particularly  to  see  if  the  necessary
    allegations had been proved.  Not only was the judge's  approach  wrong
    but he misdirected himself when executing it.  He considered, I  think,
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2016   and
    particularly Regulation 22(4).  This provides:

         "If without good reason A or B (as the case may be) -

         (a)  [irrelevant];

         (b)  on at least two occasions, fails to attend an interview if  so
         invited;

         the Secretary of State may draw any factual  inferences  about  A's
         entitlement to a right to  reside  as  appear  appropriate  in  the
         circumstances."

 6. It is perfectly plain to me, despite Mr Duffy's  energetic  submissions
    to the contrary, that the words "without  good  reason"  apply  to  "at
    least two occasions".  This is highly relevant in this case.  There  is
    evidence that the appellant failed to attend two interviews  but  there
    is very clear evidence that there was a good reason for  not  attending
    one of the interviews.  The appellant maintained that she was suffering
    from gastroenteritis as a consequence of a badly prepared Chinese  meal
    and she was not fit to be interviewed the day following the meal  which
    was the day  appointed  for  the  interview.   The  appellant  provided
    medical evidence to confirm this and it seems the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted it.  Indeed it is hard to see why the Secretary of State would
    not accept it or how it  could  be  rejected  rationally.   It  follows
    therefore that the Secretary of State had not shown that the  appellant
    had on at least two occasions failed to  attend  an  interview  without
    good reason.

 7. In a sense this is irrelevant.  This Rule and its  predecessor  in  the
    2006 Regulations enables the Secretary of State to make a decision when
    a person appears to be uncooperative.  It does not apply to decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal which hears appeals against decisions that have
    been made. It might be that the  Secretary  of  State's  approach  here
    could have been criticised in the event of judicial review but that  is
    not what happened.  There was an appeal and the appeal should have been
    decided on the evidence and submissions relied upon by the parties.

 8. It  follows  therefore  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    application of the law as well as its refusal to admit new evidence.  I
    set aside its decision.

 9. Mr Nwaekwn argued that I should allow the appeal.  With  respect,  this
    was an ambitious and misconceived submission.  He  seemed  to  have  in
    mind the approach to be taken in a criminal case where the  prosecution
    failed to produce any evidence capable of supporting  a  conviction  so
    that the case is dismissed.  It is not a helpful analogy.   The  proper
    approach was to make an assessment of the  evidence  as  a  whole  even
    though any question of a marriage of convenience had to  be  proved  by
    the Secretary of State.

10. I have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I  direct
    the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I do acknowledge that the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  a  second
    interview had been arranged properly and refused for no good reason.  I
    accept Mr Nwaekwn's submission that this might not be a sound  finding.
    It could be that the appellant's husband was speaking with the  benefit
    of hindsight when he gave evidence appearing to  acknowledge  awareness
    of the second interview.  It is safer that this finding does not  stand
    although it may be that on a proper consideration of the  evidence  the
    same conclusion will be reached again.

    Decision

12. In short, I allow the appellant's appeal. I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and direct the case be heard again in the First-
    tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 November 2018                |







