
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05632/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 November 2018                       |On 23 November 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                CHARLE TAKEM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe instructed by trp Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing on 18 April 2018 the Upper  Tribunal  found  an
        error of law in the decision of the First-tier  which  allowed  the
        appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to  issue  a
        residence card in recognition of a right to permanently  reside  in
        the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  regulation  15(1)(b)   of   the
        Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
     2. The reasons for finding legal error are set out in  that  decision,
        including  directions  handed  down   in   light   of   information
        subsequently received from Mr Mills.
     3. On 1 August 2018 Mr  Mills  sent  a  further  email  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal, updating it of the current situation in  accordance  with
        directions. The text of that email is as follows:


             Dear Sir,


             Further to my email below, and your directions of May 22nd,  I
             write to inform you of further developments.


             While the Court of Appeal  have  not  yet  handed  down  their
             judgement in JA (Liberia), they  have  recently  answered  the
             outstanding question the Tribunal has  to  decide  in  another
             decision - Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558.


             Circumstances in which a durable  relationship  can  be  taken
             into account for purposes of acquiring a  permanent  right  of
             residence
             It may well be that, if Mr  Macastena  had  applied  for  (and
             received) a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family  member
             pursuant to regulations 17(4) and (5) of the 2006  regulations
             on the basis of his durable relationship with Ms L,  the  time
             of  that  durable  relationship   could   count   towards   an
             acquisition of permanent right  of  residence,  just  as  time
             spent with a retained right of residence after his divorce did
             so count. But Mr Macastena never made such an application...
             Mr Macastena now argues that the Secretary of  State  knew  of
             his durable relationship with Ms L  and  has  never  contested
             that it existed for some time before his marriage. That, it is
             said, is enough for that durable relationship to be  added  to
             his time as a spouse for the purpose of acquiring a  permanent
             right of residence.
             That cannot be right. An extended family member  can  only  be
             issued with a residence card  on  the  basis  of  his  durable
             relationship with an EEA national if the  Secretary  of  State
             has undertaken  "an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
             circumstances of the applicant". That has never  happened  and
             can only happen after an application for a residence  card  is
             made. Merely notifying the Secretary of State that one is in a
             durable  relationship  is  nowhere  near  enough   either   to
             constitute such  extensive  examination  or  to  require  such
             examination to be undertaken. FTT Judge Clark was with respect
             wrong to think that time spent in a durable relationship  with
             Ms L could just be added to time spent as her spouse, provided
             that the First Tier Tribunal itself was satisfied  that  there
             had been a durable relationship before the marriage.
             In the circumstances, I would invite the Tribunal  to  dismiss
             the appeal of Mr Takem.
             I would suggest that this outcome is now  inevitable,  and  so
             the disposal of the appeal could simply be done on the papers.
             However, given that the appellant is unrepresented,  I  accept
             that fairness may dictate  a  further  oral  hearing  for  the
             situation to be explained and for him to have  an  opportunity
             to respond.


             Regards,


             David Mills
             Senior Presenting Officer


     4. The matter comes back before the Upper Tribunal today for a Resumed
        hearing after which a decision shall be substituted to either allow
        or dismiss the appeal.







Submissions



     5. In his written skeleton argument dated 14  November  2018  Mr  Pipe
        argued the appellant's case is distinguishable  from  Macastena  as
        the appellant has applied for, and received, residence card  as  an
        extended family member. Mr Pipe refers  to  [1]  of  Longmore  LJ's
        judgement, set out below, and argues that this is a case where  the
        'or  perhaps  ought  to  have'  applies  to  the  conduct  of   the
        respondent.
     6. Mr Pipe submits  the  respondent  has  repeatedly  issued  unlawful
        decisions and delayed unlawfully  whilst  the  appellant  has  been
        exercising treaty rights and that the Secretary of State should not
        benefit from his unlawful  conduct  in  the  matter  and  that  the
        appellant should not be penalised. Mr  Pipe  argues  that  repeated
        unlawful  decision  making,  and  delay,  should  not  prevent  the
        appellant  from  accruing  the  necessary  residence  in  order  to
        demonstrate a Permanent Right of Residence.
     7. It is not disputed the appellant was issued a Residence Card  on  1
        May 2014 which, as Mr Pipe notes, is 2 years and 6  months  and  20
        days after he applied for it.  The appellant claims he should  have
        been issued with a residence card much earlier and would  therefore
        have acquired the necessary 5-year period entitling him to a  grant
        of permanent residence.
     8. Mr Pipe  argues  the  respondent's  decision  runs  contrary  to  a
        teleological approach to EU law and is disproportionate.
     9. Mr Pipe argues the appellant, in particular circumstances  of  this
        case, is entitled to a right of permanent residence.



Discussion


    10. Whilst judgment in AJ (Algeria) has not yet been  handed  down,  on
        July 2018 the Court of appeal handed down its decision in Macastena
        v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558, referred to above.
    11.  Lord  Justice  Longmore  who  gave  the  lead  judgment,  in   his
        introduction,  writes:


        1. This appeal raises the question whether time spent by a man in a
           durable relationship with a woman who is an EEA national with  a
           permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom can be  added
           to subsequent time as a spouse to  meet  the  requirement  of  5
           years continuous lawful residence before  the  man  can  himself
           acquire a permanent right of residence. The answer is that  time
           so spent cannot be added unless the Secretary of State  for  the
           Home Department has (or perhaps ought to have)  issued  the  man
           with a residence card as an "extended family  member",  pursuant
           to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
           ("the  2006  Regulations").  The  answer  to  this  question  is
           important  for  foreign  criminals  with  ordinary   rights   of
           residence who can only be deported "on grounds of public  policy
           or security"; if,  however,  they  have  a  permanent  right  of
           residence they can only  be  deported  on  "serious  grounds  of
           public policy or security".


    12. The Court of Appeal did not give definitive guidance in relation to
        the type of cases they considered are those in which the respondent
        'ought to have' issued  a  person  with  a  residence  card  as  an
        extended  family  member  although  it  is  accepted  that  if  the
        appellant  established  that  the  conduct  of  the  respondent  in
        delaying the issue of the  card  was  unlawful,  the  test  may  be
        satisfied.
    13. It is important to consider,  therefore,  the  chronology  of  this
        matter as the Upper Tribunal were invited to do by  Mr  Pipe.  That
        set out in his skeleton argument reads as follows:


                i. On 11 October 2011  the  Appellant  applied  for  an  EEA
                   Residence Card as an unmarried partner.
               ii. On 10 January 2012 the Respondent refused the application
                   on the ground it would not be  conducive  to  the  public
                   good  to  issue  the  Appellant  a  Residence  Card.  The
                   Appellant appealed against this decision.
              iii. On 14 May 2012 Judge  Cox  held,  with  the  Respondent's
                   agreement, that the decision dated 10  January  2012  was
                   not in accordance with  the  law.  This  is  because  the
                   Respondent had failed to carry out the duty  required  by
                   Regulation 17(5) to justify  the  decision  following  an
                   extensive examination.  The  Respondent  also  failed  to
                   consider the decision in line with Regulations 20 and 21.
               iv. On 20 September 2012 the Respondent  once  again  refused
                   the application and the  Appellant  once  again  appealed
                   this decision.
                v. On 7 December 2012 Judge Prickett held, at the suggestion
                   of the Respondent, that the decision dated  20  September
                   2012 was not in accordance with the law.  The  Respondent
                   had once again failed  to  carry  out  the  consideration
                   identified by Judge Cox.
               vi. On 25 October 2013 the Appellant issued  judicial  review
                   proceedings  to  challenge  the  unlawful  delay  by  the
                   Respondent. The judicial  review  was  later  settled  by
                   consent with the Respondent paying the Appellant's costs.
              vii. On 11 December 2013 the Respondent once again refused the
                   application. The Respondent contended that the  Appellant
                   was not an extended family member under  Regulation  8(5)
                   and also refuse the application under  Regulation  17(4).
                   The Appellant appealed this decision.
             viii. On 5  March  2014  Judge  Obhi  allowed  the  Appellant's
                   appeal. She found that the Appellant and his partner  had
                   a  durable   relationship   and   that   there   was   no
                   justification under Regulations 20(1) or 21 for  refusing
                   to issue the Appellant with a residence card.
               ix. On 1 May 2014 the Appellant was issued with  a  residence
                   card.


    14.  A  further  aspect  of  the  chronology  is  revealed   from   the
        respondent's bundle before the First-Tier Tribunal, dated 3 January
        2017, which has within it a copy of a decision  promulgated  on  30
        May 2007 by Immigration Judge Atkinson and Dr A U  Chaudhury  (Non-
        Legal Member) (the Panel) who heard the appellant's appeal  against
        an order for his deportation from the United Kingdom following  his
        being sentenced on 3 November 2006 at the Coventry Crown Court to a
        12 month term of imprisonment, having pleaded to possessing a false
        passport.  The  Sentencing  Judge  recommended  the  appellant  for
        deportation. The Panel referred to  an  earlier  decision  dated  5
        March  2003  which  dismissed  a  claim  for  asylum  made  by  the
        appellant, which was upheld on appeal to the Immigration  Appellant
        Tribunal. (IAT). It was not found the appellant faced a  real  risk
        on return to Cameroon and did not find evidence  submitted  by  the
        appellant to be reliable. The Panel also dismissed  the  appeal  on
        human rights grounds.
    15. On 18 June 2007 the appellant was served with  a  sign  Deportation
        Order. The appellant could not  be  removed  as  a  result  of  his
        disruptive behaviour and refusal to leave the Detention Centre. The
        appellant lodged a  High  Court  Judicial  Review  application  and
        removal directions were cancelled and the appellant given temporary
        lease to pursue a fresh application for asylum and on human  rights
        grounds. On 8 September 2008 the High Court refused the appellant's
        application for permission to apply for Judicial Review.
    16. On 16 September 2008 the appellant absconded and did not adhere  to
        reporting conditions. On 23 March 2009 the appellant  was  detained
        at Campsfield House Immigration  Detention  Centre  from  where  he
        submitted further representations which were refused on 21 May 2009
        and removal direction set for 9 July  2009.  These  were  cancelled
        when an application for Judicial Review was lodged.
    17. On 19 October 2009 the  appellant  applied  under  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  which  was  rejected  as
        invalid on 18 November 2009. Further  submissions  then  made  were
        treated as an application to revoke  the  Deportation  Order  which
        were  refused.   On  18  February  2010  the  appellant  was  given
        temporary  release  from  detention  with  twice-weekly   reporting
        conditions and on  11  October  2011  made  an  application  for  a
        Residence Card as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national
        exercising treaty rights in the UK. The application was refused  on
        10 January 2012 with a full right of  appeal  which  the  appellant
        exercised. It was this appeal which came before Judge Cox.
    18. The decision of Judge Cox promulgated on 14 May 2012 considered the
        refusal of an application for  a  residence  card  as  an  extended
        family member of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the
        United Kingdom. The Judge Cox notes at [1]  of  that  decision  the
        following ".... On 10 January  2012  the  Respondent  refused  that
        application by reference to Regulation 17(4)(b), it  not  appearing
        appropriate to her to issue a residence card. That was  because  in
        2006 the Appellant had been convicted  of  possession  of  a  false
        passport, for which offence he received a 12 month prison  sentence
        with a recommendation for deportation. The Appellant  has  appealed
        under Regulation 26 against that decision".
    19. Judge Cox records at [2]:


            2.    The appeal was listed for substantive hearing  before  me
                  today. The Appellant and his partner attended. However, at
                  the outset of the hearing Ms Mepstead  and  Ms  Rutherford
                  put forward to me their common  position  on  the  matter,
                  namely that the Respondent's decision as it stood was  not
                  in accordance with the law and that my proper  course  was
                  to allow the appeal to that extent and remit the matter to
                  the Secretary of State from whom the Appellant would await
                  a  lawful  decision.  Their  common  position   was   well
                  justified and amounted in essence to this. There had  been
                  a failure to engage with Regulation 17(5)  which  requires
                  the  Secretary  of  State  to   undertake   an   extensive
                  examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant
                  and, if the application is to  be  refused,  give  reasons
                  justifying the refusal unless that were  contrary  to  the
                  interests of national  security  (of  which  there  is  no
                  suggestion here). Secondly, Regulation 17  is  subject  to
                  Regulation 20(1), the effect of which is that any  refusal
                  of (inter alia) a residence card has to  be  justified  on
                  grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
                  health. This in turn leads onto the consideration set  out
                  at Regulation 21, which I need not rehearse here. The fact
                  of the matter was that  no  consideration  had  apparently
                  been given to any of these matters and thus  it  was  that
                  the decision was not in accordance with the law. As I have
                  already indicated, I found myself  in  complete  agreement
                  with those submissions.


    20. The respondent made a further decision on 20 September  2012  which
        was the subject of the appeal before Judge  Prickett  when  it  was
        accepted by the respondent that  the  matter  had  still  not  been
        considered under the 2006 Regulations and would have to be remitted
        again. The decision was re-made on 11 December 2013  against  which
        the appellant appealed. It is that appeal that came  before  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Obhi who sets out findings of fact from  [23  -
        28] in the following terms:


             23   The issue then arises as to whether the appellant  is  an
                  extended family member of the EEA national. The respondent
                  does not accept that he is for the reasons which  are  set
                  out in the 20 September 2012 refusal letter. Those reasons
                  amount to this;  that  the  EEA  national  had  previously
                  supported a Non-EEA nationals application for a  Residence
                  Card through the marriage route; that she appeared  to  be
                  married, as did the  appellant;  that  the  appellant  had
                  claimed that he was married when he first came to  the  UK
                  and that he had a child in Cameroon. The fact that Ms  Ndo
                  did not want to marry him in the UK and wanted  a  wedding
                  in France was considered to shed doubt upon her commitment
                  to the relationship.  It  was  also  noted  that  for  the
                  majority of the time that they had been in a  relationship
                  the appellant had been in prison. The Secretary  of  State
                  was not  satisfied  that  the  documents  which  had  been
                  provided to show cohabitation at  the  same  address  were
                  reliable,  as  most  were  photocopies.  However,  it  was
                  accepted that whilst the appellant was at Campsfield House
                  IRC Ms Ndo had visited him 8 times. It was considered that
                  this was more  in  furtherance  of  a  friendship  than  a
                  relationship. The Secretary of State did not  accept  that
                  there was a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5). If
                  that is the  case,  then  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
                  Secretary of State needs to consider regulation  17(5)  as
                  the 'application' which is referred to in Regulation 17(4)
                  is the application of 'an extended family member' - if the
                  appellant is not an extended family member then Regulation
                  17(4) does not  apply,  nor  does  the  remainder  of  the
                  Regulation, or the  EEA  Regulations  generally,  and  the
                  application  will  be  properly   considered   under   the
                  Immigration Rules, but the application made under the 2006
                  Regulations cannot be refused under the Immigration  Rules
                  - it can only be refused under  the  2006  Regulations.  I
                  accept Mr Pipe's submission on this point.


             24.  If on the other  hand,  the  applicant  is  an  'extended
                  family member' then  Regulation  17(4)  applies,  and  any
                  refusal is  subject  Regulation  17(5)  which  requires  a
                  consideration  of  Regulation   20(1)   and   consequently
                  Regulation  21  of  the   2006   Regulations.   In   those
                  circumstances the Secretary  of  State  cannot  refuse  to
                  issue a Residence Card unless  she  has  carried  out  the
                  proper enquiries, which under Regulation 17(5) require the
                  Secretary of State to undertake an undertake an  extensive
                  examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant
                  and if he  refuses  the  application  shall  give  reasons
                  justifying the refusal unless  this  is  contrary  to  the
                  interests of national security.


             25.  The issue for me to determine therefore is whether  there
                  is a durable relationship between the  appellant  and  the
                  EEA national. I  have  been  provided  with  a  wealth  of
                  material,  which  should  have  been  considered  by   the
                  respondent and a decision made  on  whether  there  was  a
                  durable relationship. If the decision was that there is no
                  durable relationship then the application should have been
                  refused under the EEA Regulations on the  basis  that  the
                  appellant is not an extended  family  member.  That  would
                  have left the Deportation Order, and the  appellant  could
                  have made an application to set that aside giving rise  to
                  Article 8 considerations.  The  skeleton  argument  of  Ms
                  Rutherford in  relation  to  the  20th  September  Refusal
                  states that 'it therefore appears that  the  SSHD  accepts
                  that he is in a  durable  relationship  with  a  qualified
                  person'. That is not however the case, as the refusal  did
                  not  accept  that  the  appellant   was   in   a   durable
                  relationship. It seems to me that at every hearing it  has
                  been assumed that the respondent has accepted  that  there
                  is a durable relationship, when that is not the case.  The
                  most recent refusal and Mr Box's  representations  confirm
                  that to  be  the  position  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
                  Unfortunately, I did not hear any evidence and therefore I
                  am left to consider whether this is a genuine relationship
                  based on the documentary evidence which  has  been  filed,
                  now over a longer period of time.


             26.  The appellant went into custody following his  conviction
                  for an offence of using  false  ID.  He  has  provided  an
                  explanation for that offence. It  attracted  an  automatic
                  deportation. The appellant has not been in  trouble  since
                  he was released. When the deportation order  was  properly
                  made, and an appeal against that order  was  dismissed  by
                  the Tribunal. Since the making of that order the appellant
                  claims that he has been in  a  relationship  with  an  EEA
                  national. The evidence of that relationship is the  visits
                  that have been undertaken to see him whilst he has been in
                  prison, there is documentary evidence of utility bills  in
                  the names of both parties at the same address, I have also
                  seen the joint tenancy agreement in relation to the  first
                  appeal hearing. I have considered the  statements  of  the
                  parties, and the photographs  which  have  been  provided.
                  While I accept that in September 2012, there was a  viable
                  issue  about  whether  there  is  a  durable  relationship
                  between  the  parties,  that   that   issue   has   become
                  increasingly resolved by the passage of time, and the fact
                  that the couple  have  remained  together.  Based  on  the
                  written  material  before  me,  and  the  fact  that   the
                  respondent chose not  to  challenge  this  information  by
                  cross-examination, I find, on the balance of probabilities
                  that there is a durable relationship between the appellant
                  and the EEA national. Therefore Regulation 17(4)  applies,
                  this is subject to Regulation 17(5) which means  that  the
                  Secretary of State must issue  a  Residence  Card  to  the
                  appellant, and can only refused to do so  after  extensive
                  examination of the appellant circumstances, and then  only
                  for the reasons set  out  in  paragraph  20  (1)  (defined
                  further in Regulation 21).


             27.  The test under Regulation 21 is very high.  There  is  no
                  evidence to support refusal under any of the  grounds  set
                  out in Regulation 21. Whilst I appreciate that there is an
                  outstanding Deportation Order, that became subject to  the
                  provisions of the 2006 Regulations and should be  reviewed
                  in light of those provisions. It is  for  not  for  me  to
                  comment further in relation to the Deportation  Order,  as
                  that is not before me.


             28.   I intend to allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


    21. Following the above decision the appellant was issued  a  residence
        card.
    22. It is important to note the finding of  Judge  Obhi  in  [26]  that
        there was a 'viable  issue'  about  whether  there  was  a  durable
        relationship between the parties which was  only  resolved  by  the
        passage of time and the physical evidence of the parties continuing
        live to live together.  It  is  the  finding  of  Judge  Obhi  that
        resolved this issue in the appellant's favour on the basis  of  the
        material provided.
    23. The refusal of 11 December 2013, following Judge Cox's decision and
        25 October 2013 judicial review application, was made on the  basis
        Judge Cox was incorrect in his assessment that persons who are  not
        considered to qualify as family members (or extended family members
        which  have  not  previously  been  accepted  as  such  under   the
        Regulations), are subject to Regulation 20(1) and 21. The  position
        of the respondent at that stage was always that the  appellant  was
        not in a durable relationship.
    24. A party to an application is entitled  to  state  their  case.  The
        respondent's position,  based  on  cogent  evidence,  is  that  the
        appellant was not in  a  durable  relationship.  It  has  not  been
        established this is a decision that amounted to an abuse of process
        or was in any way arguably unlawful. The respondent was entitled to
        continue to refuse to issue a residence card after the decision  of
        Judge Cox had been made, if the basis on which Judge Cox  made  his
        finding was itself arguably tainted by legal error, notwithstanding
        it appears that the position adopted was agreed by the advocates.
    25. The appellant was entitled to issue the judicial review proceedings
        on 25 October 2013 alleging unlawful delay, but  the  decision  was
        made shortly thereafter, and the judicial review  proceedings  were
        settled by way of a consent order. This likely to have been on  the
        basis that at that stage the proceedings  were  arguably  academic.
        There is no evidence the respondent accepted  that  any  delay  was
        unlawful or any finding from the High Court or  Upper  Tribunal  to
        this effect. It is not made out that delay for the period  referred
        to in Mr Pipe's submissions would of itself warrant a  finding  the
        respondent's actions were unlawful.
    26. Whilst the respondent did not agree with the decision of Judge Obhi
        the Specialist Appeals Team Minute Note, dated 2  April  2014,  did
        not identify any material error of law and that there  was  nothing
        in the case to show the Judge had reached findings to which she was
        not entitled. As no onward appeal was  lodged  the  respondent  was
        arguably required to issue the appellant  with  a  Residence  Card,
        which he did on 1 May 2014.
    27. Whilst the appellant may have been frustrated by the actions of the
        Secretary of State I do not find it made out when the facts of this
        matter are considered as a whole that the appellant  has  made  out
        that this is a case in which the respondent ought to have issued  a
        residence card in recognition of a right to reside  in  the  United
        Kingdom as an extended family member any sooner than he did.
    28. There is no absolute right to  an  extended  family  member  to  be
        issued with a residence card even if they prove  their  status,  in
        the same way that a family member has.
    29. Mr Pipe's submission that, notwithstanding that 5 years having  not
        passed since the issuing  of  the  residence  card,  the  appellant
        should succeed by reference to a  teleological  approach  has  been
        considered but does not arguably assist him on the  facts  of  this
        matter. Such submission is  based  upon  a  need  to  consider  the
        provisions  of  the  Regulations  involving  the   explanation   of
        phenomena in terms of the purpose they serve  rather  than  of  the
        cause by which they arise. Paragraph  17  of  the  recital  to  the
        Directive states:


             (17)     Enjoyment of permanent residence  by  Union  citizens
                  who have chosen to settle long term  in  the  host  Member
                  State would strengthen the feeling  of  Union  citizenship
                  and is a key element in promoting social  cohesion,  which
                  is one of the fundamental objectives of the Union. A right
                  of permanent residence should therefore be laid  down  for
                  all Union citizens  and  their  family  members  who  have
                  resided in the host Member State in  compliance  with  the
                  conditions laid down in this Directive during a continuous
                  period of  five  years  without  becoming  subject  to  an
                  expulsion measure.


    30. It has not been made out that the appellant has resided in  the  UK
        in compliance with the conditions laid down in  the  Directive  for
        the requisite period. The appellant is also  subject  to  expulsion
        measures.
    31. Giving the phrase 'or perhaps ought to have' it's normal meaning it
        is a term used to indicate 'duty or correctness', something that is
        'probable'.  The material relied upon by Mr Pipe does  not  support
        the claim of unlawful decision  making.  The  respondent's  actions
        have not been shown to be disproportionate under  European  law  or
        contrary to the Regulations.
    32. As noted above,  the  appellant  will  be  entitled  to  apply  for
        permanent residence on basis of accepted facts in  spring  2019  in
        any event.
    33. No arguable legal error is made out in the respondent's decision to
        refuse to issue the appellant a residence card in recognition of  a
        right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom on the facts  of
        this matter and application of the law as it  currently  stands  at
        the date of this decision.


Decision

    34. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed


   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 November 2018












