
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05335/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 3rd July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                               VICTOR SAM BREW
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha of Carl Martin solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. On 13 June 2012, Mr Brew entered into  a  proxy  marriage  with  Ms
         Sewaa, a citizen  of  the  Netherlands.  Divorce  proceedings  were
         commenced on 29th November 2015 and the marriage was  dissolved  on
         15th January 2016. On 19 April 2018, Mr Brew  made  an  application
         for a Residence Card as a former family member in  accordance  with
         regulation 10  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2016. The paragraphs relevant to this appeal are as follows:

             (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
             right of residence" means, subject to paragraphs (8) and  (9),
             a person who satisfies a condition in paragraph (2), (3),  (4)
             or (5).

             (2)  ...

             (3)  ...

             (4)  ...

             (5)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-



                  (a)  ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or
                  an EEA national with a right of permanent residence on the
                  termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;

                  (b)  was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these Regulations at the date of the termination;

                  (c)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

                  (d)  either-

                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                      the  termination  of  the  marriage  or   the   civil
                      partnership, the marriage or  civil  partnership  had
                      lasted for at least three years and  the  parties  to
                      the marriage or civil partnership had resided in  the
                      United Kingdom for  at  least  one  year  during  its
                      duration;

                      (ii) ...

                      (iii)    ...

                      (iv) ...

             (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if the person  were
                  an EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a
                  self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                  (b)  ...

      2. There is no change in this Regulation to that which was in the 2006
         Regulations. The application was refused by the respondent  on  the
         grounds that the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  proxy
         marriage was valid, that Mr Brew had  failed  to  provide  evidence
         that  Ms  Sewaa  was  exercising  Treaty  Rights  at  the  date  of
         termination of the marriage  or  that  Mr  Brew  had  continued  to
         exercise Treaty Rights since the termination of the marriage.

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge L K Gibbs found that the  proxy  marriage
         was genuine and properly performed, that the couple's marriage  had
         lasted for at least three years, they had resided in the UK for  at
         least one year during its duration and that Ms Sewaa was exercising
         Treaty Rights on the date the divorce proceedings were  instituted.
         She thus found that Mr Brew was a family member as  defined  within
         regulation 7 and that he satisfied  regulation  10(5)(a),  (b)  and
         (d)(i). The respondent did not seek permission to challenge  either
         of these findings.

      4. Mr Brew has not worked since 2012. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         found that he did not therefore  meet  regulation  10(6)  and  thus
         because he did not meet regulation 10 as  required,  she  dismissed
         his appeal.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
         arguable the judge failed  to  consider  HS  (EEA:  revocation  and
         retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 which, it  was  submitted,
         concluded that the EU directive did not require the non-EU national
         to show economic activity following divorce.

         Error of Law

      6. The headnote of HS reads as follows:

             "1   Where the Secretary of State  revokes  a  residence  card
                  before the expiry of its  validity  it  falls  on  her  to
                  justify such revocation.

             2    Regulation  10  of  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
                  requires the applicant  to  demonstrate  that:  a  genuine
                  marriage has lasted three years and the couple have  spent
                  one year together in the United Kingdom and that  the  EEA
                  national spouse was exercising treaty rights at  the  time
                  he ceased to be a family member."

         Mr Ngwuocha referred in particular to the following paragraphs:

             "39. Regulation 10 (5) and (6) of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
             transposes these provisions into national law. It requires  an
             applicant who has divorced to satisfy 10 (5)(a), (b), (c)  and
             (d). Two of these provisions require particular attention:

                   a. Regulation 10(5)(b) requires the  applicant  to  show
                      "he was residing in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                      with these Regulations at the date  of  termination".
                      In simple terms this means that at the  date  of  the
                      termination of the marriage he was residing in the UK
                      as the spouse of an EU national who  was  working  at
                      that date.  This correctly identifies  the  focus  as
                      being on the spouse's status as a worker at the  date
                      of the divorce.

                   b.  Regulation  10(5)  (c)  requires  the  applicant  to
                      satisfy regulation 10(6).  Regulation  10(6)  imposes
                      two conditions either one of which should be met: the
                      10(6)(a) requirement is that  the  non  EEA  national
                      would be a worker, self employed or a self sufficient
                      person if he were an EEA national.   The  alternative
                      requirement is 10(6)(b) that the person is the family
                      member of  a person within paragraph (a).

             40.  If construed literally regulation 10(6) may give rise  to
             problems. On divorce, a person ceases to be a family member by
             reason of marriage. That does not cause the right of residence
             to cease however as regulation 10(5)(a) makes  plain.   Family
             member with a retained right of residence in regulation 10 and
             regulation 14 (3) must be a term of art and mean a person  who
             comes within regulation 10(2) to (5). Further a non EEA family
             member does not have to  be  economically  active  during  the
             marriage and nor is there any indication in Article 13 of  the
             Directive that they have to be economically  active  on  their
             own account on termination of the marriage.

             41.  In Article 13  second  paragraph  of  the  Directive  the
             reference to "the person concerned" is  to  the  EEA  national
             whose exercise of Treaty rights  gives  rise  to  a  right  of
             residence of the former  family  member  and  not  the  family
             members themselves.  It is doubtful whether regulation 10  (6)
             adds to regulation 10 (5)(b) as we have construed it, as it is
             sufficient to be the former family member of a person who  was
             working at the time of the divorce."

         Mr Ngwuocha's essential submission was  that  HS  made  plain  that
         there was no requirement for Mr Brew to have been  working  at  the
         termination of his marriage; his application was not for  permanent
         residence and that, contrary to Mr Kotas' submission,  Amos  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 552, was of no relevance to the decision to  be  taken  in
         this appeal; Amos was concerned with an application  for  permanent
         residence.

      7. HS' application was for a  further  residence  card;  according  to
         paragraph 5 of HS,  HS  "believed  he  was  entitled  to  permanent
         residence". The  application  was  refused  by  the  SSHD  and  the
         residence card revoked because he did "not  qualify  for  permanent
         residence under retained right of residence."  The  Upper  Tribunal
         determined that the question to be decided by them was "whether the
         appellant had a retained right of residence following his  divorce"
         ([13] of HS) as well as the appeal against  the  revocation  of  an
         existing residence card  and  a  first  application  for  permanent
         residence ([15] of HS).

      8. Paragraphs [33] to [47] of HS consider the issue of retained rights
         of residence. Of particular relevance are the following paragraphs:

             "34. In this case, the primary qualifying  condition  is  that
             set out in Article 13(2)(a):

                  "prior to the initiation of the divorce .... the  marriage
                  .... has lasted three years, including  one  year  in  the
                  host Member State".

             ...

             35.  The second sub paragraph of Article 13 of  the  Directive
             provides:
             "Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the  right
             of residence of the person concerned shall remain  subject  to
             the requirement that they are  able  to  show  that  they  are
             workers or self-employed  persons  or......or  that  they  are
             members of the family, already constituted in the host  Member
             State, of a  person  satisfying  these  requirements......Such
             family  members  shall  retain  their   right   of   residence
             exclusively on personal basis". (Our emphasis)

             36.  This language is quite compressed. Although it refers  to
             "permanent residence" it must be discussing the retained right
             of residence rather than making an advance  reference  to  the
             right of permanent residence addressed in Article  16  of  the
             Directive. It may well be that the duration of what  we  shall
             call "indefinite residence"  is  permanent  depending  on  the
             circumstances of  its  acquisition.  Duration  of  Article  13
             rights is, however, specifically addressed by Article 14,  and
             entitlement to a permanent residence document on the basis  of
             Article 13 (2) is considered in Article 18 (see paragraph  [3]
             below[1]).

             37.  When considering whether a retained  right  of  residence
             exists the person concerned must be the  spouse  of  a  former
             spouse who exercised the relevant Treaty  right.  The  overall
             sense of this seems to be that in the case of a family  member
             seeking to acquire a  retained  right  of  residence,  such  a
             person must show that the EU national remains a worker etc  at
             the time that the right of  residence  is  claimed  to  accrue
             (here the time of the divorce) and if  so  the  family  member
             (and in the case of death or divorce, former  family  members)
             has a personal right of retained residence.

             38.  Strictly, whether the wife was a worker is not  the  same
             as whether the wife was working at that time,  as  exemplified
             by Article 7 (3) of the  Directive  which  provides  that  the
             status of a worker is retained if any temporary  inability  to
             work was through illness, accident, involuntary employment  or
             relevant  vocational  training.  This  is   not   a   relevant
             consideration in the present case,  but  it  demonstrates  the
             dangers of drawing inferences from gaps in wage slips alone.

             39.  Regulation 10 (5) and (6) of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
             transposes these provisions into national law. It requires  an
             applicant who has divorced to satisfy 10 (5)(a), (b), (c)  and
             (d). Two of these provisions require particular attention:

                  a.   Regulation 10(5)(b) requires the  applicant  to  show
                      "he was residing in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                      with these Regulations at the date  of  termination".
                      In simple terms this means that at the  date  of  the
                      termination of the marriage he was residing in the UK
                      as the spouse of an EU national who  was  working  at
                      that date. This correctly  identifies  the  focus  as
                      being on the spouse's status as a worker at the  date
                      of the divorce.

                  b.    Regulation  10(5)  (c)  requires  the  applicant  to
                      satisfy regulation 10(6).  Regulation  10(6)  imposes
                      two conditions either one of which should be met: the
                      10(6)(a) requirement is that  the  non  EEA  national
                      would be a worker, self employed or a self sufficient
                      person if he were an EEA  national.  The  alternative
                      requirement is 10(6)(b) that the person is the family
                      member of a person within paragraph (a).

             40.  If construed literally regulation 10(6) may give rise  to
             problems. On divorce, a person ceases to be a family member by
             reason of marriage. That does not cause the right of residence
             to cease however as regulation 10(5)(a)  makes  plain.  Family
             member with a retained right of residence in regulation 10 and
             regulation 14 (3) must be a term of art and mean a person  who
             comes within regulation 10(2) to (5). Further a non EEA family
             member does not have to  be  economically  active  during  the
             marriage and nor is there any indication in Article 13 of  the
             Directive that they have to be economically  active  on  their
             own account on termination of the marriage.

             41.  In Article 13  second  paragraph  of  the  Directive  the
             reference to "the person concerned" is  to  the  EEA  national
             whose exercise of Treaty rights  gives  rise  to  a  right  of
             residence of the former  family  member  and  not  the  family
             members themselves. It is doubtful whether regulation  10  (6)
             adds to regulation 10 (5)(b) as we have construed it, as it is
             sufficient to be the former family member of a person who  was
             working at the time of the divorce.

             42.  ...

             43.  ...

             44.  ...

             45.  ...

             46.  Third, it [the SSHD] sought evidence of  the  appellant's
             exercise of Treaty rights from the date of divorce to the date
             of the application.  If  this  meant  evidence  of  continuous
             employment we cannot see how such a requirement is  consistent
             with EU law. If the appellant obtained  a  retained  right  of
             residence on divorce because of the duration of  his  marriage
             and his  wife's  status  as  a  worker  he  did  not  lose  it
             subsequently  because  he  ceased  to  be  employed  or  self-
             employed.

             47.  In brief, if  the  Secretary  of  State  was  asking  for
             documents that it was not necessary to produce to  demonstrate
             the retained right of residence and  was  imposing  conditions
             that the appellant was not required to meet  it  cannot  be  a
             lawful conclusion that the appellant did not have the retained
             right of residence by reason of his  failure  to  satisfy  the
             Secretary of State. The appellant was required to  demonstrate
             that he satisfied the requirements of regulation 10 to  obtain
             such a right of residence and this he had done. ..."

      9. I was also referred, very briefly, to Gauswami (retained  right  of
         residence: jobseekers) India [2018] UKUT 275 (IAC). In  this  case,
         Ms Gauswami was not, it appears, employed at the date of initiation
         of the divorce proceedings but registered as a job seeker five days
         prior to the pronouncement of the decree absolute.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge in that case found that she had not  discharged  the
         burden of proof that as at the date of dissolution of her  marriage
         she would fall within  the  terms  of  regulation  6  of  the  2006
         Regulations.

     10. Gauswami considered the relevance of the date of  divorce  and  the
         initiation of divorce proceedings  in  so  far  as  it  relates  to
         retained rights of residence. Paragraphs 28 to 35 are relevant:

             "28.  In  Baigazieva  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088, Singh LJ  observed  that,  in
             the light of the CJEU's judgment in NA v  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2017]  QB  109,  the  respondent  now
             accepts that, in order to meet  the  condition  in  regulation
             10(2)(a) to have been the family member of a qualified  person
             (within the meaning of regulation 6), it  was  sufficient  for
             the person asserting the retained right of residence  to  show
             that the EEA national spouse/partner was a qualified person as
             at the date of the initiation of divorce  proceedings,  rather
             than at the date of  decree  absolute.  The  Court  of  Appeal
             accordingly granted permission to appeal in the case before it
             and allowed the appeal by consent, since  the  Upper  Tribunal
             had found that the date of decree absolute was  the  operative
             date for this purpose.

             29.  We are entirely satisfied that this development does  not
             in any way affect the fact  that  the  issue  is  whether  the
             appellant retained a right of residence at the date of  decree
             absolute. That is the point at which it becomes  necessary  to
             determine whether a right has been  retained  for  the  simple
             reason that it is at this  point  that  the  person  concerned
             ceases to be a family member and so ceases to be able to  rely
             on the EU spouse or partner for his or  her  right  to  reside
             under Articles 7 and 8  of  the  2004  Directive.  Unless  the
             former family member retains a  right  of  residence  at  that
             point under Article 13, he or she will have  no  rights  under
             the Directive/Regulations.

             30.  Indeed, in Baigazieva, the date of  decree  absolute  was
             acknowledged to be the point at which it became  necessary  to
             decide the issue. Plainly, it could not  be  earlier.  As  the
             Court noted, there is, however, a difference between  the  day
             by reference to which it is  necessary  to  decide  whether  a
             right has been retained and the day or days  by  reference  to
             which certain requirements must be met, in order to make  that
             decision (paragraphs 14 and 15 of the judgment).

             31.  We are also satisfied that there is nothing in Baigazieva
             or the related CJEU judgment of NA to require us  to  conclude
             that the date for determining whether the  appellant  complied
             with the requirement to be a worker must be the date on  which
             divorce proceedings were commenced. As we shall see, it  would
             be very unfair on the appellant and others in her position  if
             that were the position.

             32.   The  tenses  used  in  regulation  10(5)  and  (6)   are
             significant. Regulation 10(5)(a)  and  (b)  are  in  the  past
             tense, whereas regulation 10(6) and regulation 10(5)(c), which
             introduces sub-paragraph (6), are in the present tense.

             33.  In order to understand  the  significance  of  this,  one
             needs to refer to the text of Article 14.  Article  14.2  (a),
             (b), (c) and (d) set out requirements to be met  in  order  to
             retain  the  right  of  residence.  These   requirements   are
             essentially backward-looking in nature.  So  too,  as  we  now
             know, is the requirement regarding the status of the qualified
             person.

             34.  By contrast, the paragraph that follows sub-paragraph (d)
             ("Before acquiring the right of permanent residence  ...")  is
             of a present or ongoing nature. This is because a  person  who
             retains the right  of  residence  has  to  be  a  worker/self-
             employed/self-sufficient  and  insured  person  (or  a  family
             member of such a person) at all times up to the point that  he
             or she acquires the right of permanent residence; that  is  to
             say, acquires a right  that  is  no  longer  retained  from  a
             previous relationship with a relevant EU  citizen.  In  short,
             the meaning of the words "Before acquiring ..." would  perhaps
             be better conveyed in English by saying "Until  the  right  of
             permanent residence has been acquired ...".

             35.  Regulation 10(6) is how the United Kingdom has decided to
             give domestic legislative effect to that paragraph in  Article
             14. As will be seen, we conclude that  regulation  10(6)  does
             not give proper or at least sufficiently clear effect to  that
             Article, so far as concerns what is meant by being a "worker".
             But, so far as its temporal aspect  is  concerned,  regulation
             10(6) is entirely right. So far as the appellant is concerned,
             the requirements of that provision must be satisfied  both  on
             and after the date of the decree absolute."

     11. Mr Kotas submitted that Amos was a complete answer to Mr Ngwuocha's
         submissions. The relevant paragraphs relied upon were as follows:

             "25. Article 13 provides for the "retention of  the  right  of
             residence" on divorce. Although it does not  expressly  confer
             an independent right of residence, the same language  is  used
             in Article 12. Article 12 envisages that a  widow  or  widower
             may acquire the right of permanent residence, provided she  or
             he is a worker, etc. It is obvious that the  Directive  cannot
             be interpreted as requiring the widow or widower, in order  to
             retain the right  of  residence,  to  show  that  her  or  his
             deceased spouse continues to work.  The  same  must  apply  to
             Article 13. Indeed, I read Mr Eicke as having  accepted  this,
             in paragraph 29 of his skeleton. It  follows  that  I  do  not
             agree that the appellants were required  to  show  that  their
             former spouses were working for a continuous period of 5 years
             prior  to  their  applications  for  the  right  of  permanent
             residence. In  my  judgment,  therefore, OA was  incorrectly
             decided.

             26.  If,  immediately  before  divorce,  the  requirements  of
             Article 7.2 are satisfied, the non-national must then  satisfy
             the requirements of Article 13.2. The relevant requirements in
             the present cases are, first, that:

                  "prior  to  initiation  of  the   divorce   or   annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host Member State."

             27.  The right of permanent residence sought by the appellants
             is subject to  the  further  requirement  of  the  penultimate
             paragraph of Article 13.2:

                  "Before acquiring the right of  permanent  residence,  the
                  right of residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain
                  subject to the requirement that they are able to show that
                  they are workers or self-employed  persons  or  that  they
                  have sufficient resources for themselves and their  family
                  members not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance
                  system of the host Member State  during  their  period  of
                  residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover
                  in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the
                  family, already constituted in the host Member State, of a
                  person   satisfying   these   requirements.    "Sufficient
                  resources" shall be as defined in Article 8(4)."

             28.  Article 18 is also  pertinent.  It  confers  a  right  of
             permanent  residence  on  a  divorced  non-national,  to  whom
             Article  12(2)  or  13(2)  applies,  after  5   years'   legal
             residence. It does not require the non-national to have  lived
             "with" the EEA national during that period.  (Again,  this  is
             obvious in an Article 12(2) case, since  the  national  spouse
             has died.)

             29.  Thus the requirements of the Directive applicable to  the
             appellants were as follows:

                  (1)  At all times while residing  in  this  country  until
                      their divorce, their spouse must have been  a  worker
                      or  self-employed   (or   otherwise   satisfied   the
                      requirements of Article 7.1).

                  (2)  Their marriages had to have  lasted  at  least  three
                      years, including one year in this country.

                  (3)  They must be able to show that they  are  workers  or
                      self-employed  persons  or  otherwise   satisfy   the
                      requirements of the penultimate paragraph of  Article
                      13.2.

             30.  The Regulations are consistent with  these  propositions.
             Regulation 10(5)  provides  that  a  "family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence" must in a case  such  as  the
             present appeals satisfy the following conditions:

                  (a)  His or her divorce from the EEA national.

                  (b)  He or she was residing in the UK in  accordance  with
                      the Regulations at the date of the divorce. He or she
                      will have been so residing if regulation 14  applied,
                      i.e. if the EEA  national  spouse  was  a  "qualified
                      person", i.e., for present purposes, a worker or self-
                      employed person (as to which see the  definitions  in
                      regulations 2 and 6).

                  (c)  He or she is a worker or  self-employed  person,  and
                      therefore satisfies paragraph (6).

                  (d)  3 years' marriage,  including  at  least  one  year's
                      residence in the UK.

             31.  Provided these conditions continue to be satisfied, after
             5 years' continuous residence in the  UK  a  non-EEA  national
             will be entitled to  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
             regulation 15(1)(f)."

         Discussion

     12. It is  correct  that  Amos  was  concerned  with  applications  for
         permanent residence. The Court of Appeal found that,  in  Mr  Amos'
         case, the focus of the Upper Tribunal had been on whether Mr  Amos'
         former wife had worked for a continuous period of five years before
         his application for permanent  residence,  and  did  not  make  the
         necessary findings of fact as to  whether  Mr  Amos  satisfied  the
         conditions referred to in paragraph 30 of Amos. The decision in his
         case was set aside and remitted for a fresh hearing (paragraph 33).



     13. The case of Ms Theophilius did not  raise  that  issue  but  rather
         procedural matters which are not relevant in this appeal.

     14. The Court of Appeal heard Amos on 31st March 2011and  judgment  was
         handed down on 12th May 2011. HS was determined on 13th April 2011;
         it does not appear that Amos, whilst pending, was  brought  to  the
         attention of the Upper Tribunal. It does not appear that either  HS
         or Amos were brought to the attention  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Gauswami.

     15. HS and Amos  were  decided  before  it  was  established  that  the
         relevant date in determining retained rights of residence  was  the
         date of initiation of divorce proceedings, not the date of divorce.
         The  nuanced  and  detailed  approach  in  Gauswami  examining  the
         language used in the  Regulations,  and  in  particular  regulation
         10(6), as reflective of the Directive was not undertaken in HS  and
         Amos and was not, in those cases necessary.

     16. In this case,  Mr  Brew  is  not  and  has  not  worked  or  sought
         employment, it seems, whilst he has been in  the  UK.  His  initial
         application for a residence card was  refused  in  accordance  with
         Kareem (Proxy marriages: EU law) [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC).  In  Awuku
         [2017] EWCA Civ 178 (judgment on 23 March 2017) the Court of Appeal
         determined that Kareem had  been  wrongly  decided.  By  this  time
         however Mr Brew's marriage had broken down and he was divorced.

     17. In the instant appeal, the First-tier Tribunal judge found that  Mr
         Brew met the criteria in regulation 10 as having a  retained  right
         of residence save for regulation 10(6). Mr Brew  was  not  applying
         for permanent residence and does not submit that he is so  entitled
         - he has not been and is not  a  worker  such  as  would  meet  the
         definition in regulation 6, if he were an EU national.

     18. Mr Brew was divorced on 15th January 2016. It is on that date  that
         it becomes necessary to determine whether a right has been retained
         for the simple reason that it is at that point that he ceased to be
         a family member and so ceases to be able to rely on the  EU  spouse
         for his right to reside - see [29] and [30] of Gauswami  above.  Mr
         Kotas submitted that there was a tension between Amos and HS.   But
         neither HS nor Amos specifically addressed this issue, it not being
         submitted in either of those cases that the initiation  of  divorce
         proceedings was the relevant date under which regulation (10)(5)(d)
         should be considered.

     19. The analysis to determine whether a person who is lawfully  married
         or in a civil partnership  has a retained right of residence  under
         regulation 10(5) Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2016 such as to entitle them to the issue of a residence card is  a
         two stage process: firstly to consider whether the individual meets
         the  criteria,  other  than  regulation  10(6),  on  the  date   of
         initiation of divorce proceedings and then, on the date of  divorce
         at which point he ceases to be a family member,  whether  he  meets
         the criteria in regulation 10(6).

     20. Although Mr Brew, it seems, did not work, or seek work, because  of
         an incorrect interpretation of the Regulations as regards his proxy
         marriage, he is in the unfortunate position that as at the relevant
         date, the date of his divorce, he did not meet the requirements  of
         regulation 10(6) of the 2016  Regulations  which  properly  reflect
         Article 13 of the Directive.

     21. It follows that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  Mr
         Brew did not meet the criteria in the Regulations  was  correct.  I
         find there is no error of law in the  decision  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge such that the decision is to  be  set  aside  to  be
         remade.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.


     Date 2nd July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] This must be a typographical error and should refer to [52]

