
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/05265/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 May 2021                      |On 18 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                FATMATA JOSIE

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr O Atuegbe, of R & A Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated my decision but reserved my  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Sierra Leone, with  date  of  birth
    given as 10.2.65, has appealed with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  22.12.20
    (Judge Jepson), dismissing  on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  6.9.19,  to  refuse  her
    application for an EEA Entry Permit to join her sponsoring EEA national
    daughter  resident  in  the  UK,  pursuant  to  Regulation  7  of   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, as amended.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant was not  dependent
    on the EEA sponsor as claimed  and  as  required  by  the  Regulations.
    Whilst the judge  accepted  the  mother-daughter  relationship  between
    appellant and sponsor and that monies had been sent to the appellant on
    a regular basis since November 2017, and that this  outlay  was  within
    the sponsor's  financial  grasp,  the  judge  was  concerned  that  the
    evidence appeared to be that the appellant  under  some  constraint  to
    support her other children, the sponsor's three half-brothers, from the
    monies received from the sponsor. Two of them were unemployed  and  the
    evidence suggested that they declined to work.  In  her  statement  the
    appellant said that "the pressure is too much having to  still  support
    my sons from the support I get from my daughter. They are old enough to
    look after themselves and I am hope they do so soon." At  [66]  of  the
    decision, the judge concluded that "Any dependency which exists in this
    case arises from a desire on the appellant's part to support her  sons.
    It does not relate to a situation of real dependency."

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 29.1.21,
    the judge considering it arguable that "in view of the  consistency  in
    which the Sponsor has sent money over the years that the  Applicant  is
    dependent on the Sponsor as a matter of necessity and whatever is given
    to the children does not detract from that dependency."

 4. For some unexplained reason, the grounds refer to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Papajorgi (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012]. This has no bearing on the  issues  in  the  present  case.  In
    summary, the remainder of the grounds argue that  the  documentary  and
    oral evidence was sufficient to demonstrate dependency.

 5. The brief Rule 24 reply, dated 5.2.21, submits that  "the  grounds  are
    simply a disagreement. The FTT Judge did  not,  as  claimed,  expect  a
    breakdown of income and expenditure. The findings on dependence related
    to difficulties with the evidence given by the sponsor which were found
    to have altered in order to fill an evidential difficulty."

 6. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The grounds overlook and ignore the inconsistency in  the  evidence  as
    highlighted by the First-tier Tribunal. This, and  the  observation  in
    the Rule 24 reply about evidential difficulty in the appellant's  case,
    relates to the judge's findings at [60], that the appellant's case  was
    hampered by a lack of detail, "something the sponsor could only  remedy
    in part through her verbal evidence." At [61]  the  judge  stated  that
    "any verbal evidence given maked  (sic)  an  attempt  to  shore  up  an
    obvious, evidential hole." However, the judge made clear at  [61]  that
    "the greater problem comes from the inconsistency between  the  witness
    statements and what I was told in court. I am inclined to conclude that
    said in the former is the true position."

 8. Reading the decision as a whole,  the  inconsistencies  and  change  in
    evidence is amply demonstrated by the judge. At [53] the judge referred
    to the inherent inconsistency between the sponsor's oral evidence  that
    her brothers were unable to find work, whereas  her  witness  statement
    was that "my brothers have refused to do anything meaningful with their
    lives and have continued to live there  (the  appellant's  home)".  The
    judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  sponsor's  brothers  were
    unwilling to work, and that this inconsistency undermined the claim  to
    dependency. As  analysed  by  the  judge,  the  appellant  only  needed
    financial assistance from the sponsor because she had  to  support  her
    non-working children.

 9. Whilst evidence of money transfers from the sponsor  to  the  appellant
    over a considerable  time  is  support  of  the  appellant's  claim  to
    dependency, it is not determinative. In Lim (EEA -  dependency)  [2013]
    UKUT 00437 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal pointed out that the jurisprudence
    of  the  Court  of  Justice  "clearly  emphasises  that  assessment  of
    dependency must  take  into  account  the  personal  situation  of  the
    applicant, which might be thought  to  entail  that  dependency  cannot
    simply be deduced from the mere fact of receipt of financial support by
    an EEA national or spouse. This aspect of the  jurisprudence  might  be
    said to be reinforced by the formulation given by the Court of  Justice
    in Jia when it says (in the  context  of  predecessor  EU  legislation,
    Directive 73/148) that dependency "... must be interpreted  as  meaning
    that proof of the need for material support"  is  required:  see  [37],
    [43] and [44(2)] (emphasis added)." It was the absence of proof of  the
    need for material support that concerned the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



10. The evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant was inadequate and, the
    judge concluded, insufficient to support the claim  of  dependency.  In
    particular, it is clear from [51] and [52] of  the  decision  that  the
    judge was left in the dark as to what the appellant  had  to  pay  out,
    although the sponsor tried to fill this  evidential  gap  by  her  oral
    evidence. It was open to the judge on the limited evidence to  conclude
    that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that she was dependent  on
    the sponsor, rather than sponsor supporting the wider household. As the
    judge pointed out at  [56]  at  no  point  in  her  statement  did  the
    appellant claim she was unable to support herself, "Rather,  the  above
    suggests the issue here is having to support sons  who  will  not  find
    work."

11. At [57] the judge asked the correct question,  "whether  the  appellant
    has a real dependency on her daughter, such that support is  needed  to
    provide essential support." Unfortunately, the  poor,  inadequate,  and
    inconsistent evidence adduced on behalf  of  the  appellant  failed  to
    demonstrate that such support was in fact needed. I accept Mr Atuegbe's
    point that even though the appellant supports her sons, that  does  not
    necessarily mean she does not need support herself. However, it was for
    the appellant to prove her case and that she clearly failed  to  do  on
    the evidence. In Lim, the Upper  Tribunal  held  that  even  though  it
    seemed clear that not all of the money sent in remittances was for  the
    claimant (some was intended to help support her mother and the 10  year
    old grandchild), "for dependency to arise it is not  necessary  that  a
    person be wholly  or  even  mainly  dependent.  If  a  person  requires
    material support for essential needs in part, that is sufficient."

12. It was the absence of adequate evidence that the appellant needed  such
    material support for herself that led to the failure of the appeal.  At
    [58] the judge stated that "given the absence of any clear assertion by
    the appellant she is unable to support  herself,  I  am  drawn  to  the
    conclusion any financial shortfall is  caused  through  supporting  her
    sons rather than anything else." I am satisfied that was  a  conclusion
    entirely open to the judge on the evidence and for the  cogent  reasons
    outlined in the decision. No error of law is disclosed by the grounds.

13. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed:     DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 May 2021

