
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05814/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 7 October 2020                    |On 13 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 ULYANA [I]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman instructed by Sterling & Law Associates
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson promulgated on 2 August 2019 in  which  the
       Judge found the respondent had discharged the burden  of  proof  upon
       her to establish that the marriage between appellant and her  sponsor
       is one of convenience and that, accordingly, the appellant was not  a
       family member of her sponsor for the purposes of the EEA Regulations,
       leading the appeal to be dismissed.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  another  judge  the  First-tier
       Tribunal the operative part of  the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "Arguably, at the core of the appeal is the question of  whether
           the Judge properly applied the guidance to be found in  Sadovska
           [2017] UKSC  54.  He  referred  to  it  [48]  but  arguably,  as
           identified in the grounds, it is arguable that the text  of  the
           decision shows that he did not properly  apply  it  [68  &  73].
           Moreover, as identified in the grounds, it is arguable that  the
           Judge erred in his approach to the evidence served late  by  the
           Respondent, and to the question of whether he should allow  that
           evidence to be relied upon  without  giving  the  Appellant  the
           opportunity to respond.  Since he identified  this  evidence  as
           relevant and a key part of his reasoning  [61]  it  is  arguable
           that  he  failed  to  conduct  a  fair  hearing.  The  Appellant
           challenged the accuracy of the translation relied upon, and  has
           arguably demonstrated that she was right to do so. I would  note
           also, that it is arguable that the Judge erred in dismissing  in
           their entirety the written evidence of the witnesses who did not
           attend the hearing, without further analysis as  to  the  weight
           that could be attached to it. The absence of evidence  from  the
           witnesses to the marriage is arguably of little relevance, since
           the fact that a marriage ceremony had been performed was not  in
           issue [69]."

Background

    3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Ukraine  born  on  24  May  1990  who
       appealed against the respondent's decision of the 10 August  2018  to
       remove her from the United Kingdom.

    4. The Judge noted that  the  appellants  immigration  history  and  the
       factual matrix relied upon by both the appellant and the  respondent.
       The Judges findings are set out from [49] the decision.

Error of law

    5. In Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 it was said that the  objective  to
       obtain the right of entry  and  residence  must  be  the  predominant
       purpose for the marriage to be one  of  convenience  and  a  marriage
       could not be considered  to  be  a  marriage  of  convenience  simply
       because it brought an immigration advantage.   "Should  the  tribunal
       conclude that Mr Malik was delighted to find an EU national with whom
       he could form a relationship and who was willing to marry  him,  that
       does not necessarily mean that their  marriage  was  a  "marriage  of
       convenience" still less that Ms Sadovska was abusing  her  rights  in
       entering into it".

    6. The Judge specifically refers to the case at [48] stating that he has
       taken the  findings  and  observations  of  the  Supreme  Court  into
       account.

    7. At [73] the Judge writes:

           "73.   Having taken into  account  the  totality  of  the  above
           evidence, some of which I accept, is potentially  supportive  of
           the appellant's case, but much of which is not, and applying the
           balance  of  probability  test  to  the  available  evidence,  I
           conclude that the appellant and the sponsor  lacked  credibility
           in respect of the material aspects of  their  evidence.  I  find
           that, on balance, the respondent has discharged the legal burden
           of proof upon him in establishing that the marriage between  the
           appellant and the sponsor is one of convenience."

    8. There is no specific  finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  predominant
       purpose of the marriage was to obtain a right of entry and  residence
       and nor can this be inferred from the decision. It is accepted by  Mr
       Walker this amounts to a material error of law.

    9. In relation to the fairness point, the Judge set out  the  procedural
       chronology between  [1  -  9]  of  the  Grounds  of  Application  for
       permission appeal. This records an earlier adjournment granted to the
       Respondent as they did not have documents previously  served  on  the
       appellant and was seeking translations of  copies  of  text  messages
       taken  from  the  appellant's  mobile  phone  during  an  immigration
       officer's visit on 9 August 2017. The hearing of 25  March  2019  was
       adjourned to 16 July 2019 with directions  the  respondent  file  and
       serve an indexed and paginated bundle including  the  translation  of
       text messages they sought to rely on 14 days  prior  to  the  hearing
       with  the  appellant's  representative  finding   and   serving   any
       supplementary bundle no later than  seven  days  prior  to  the  next
       hearing. It is noted that despite that direction the respondent  only
       filed and served the translation of the text messages on 15 July 2019
       at 11:10, less than 24 hours prior to the hearing.

   10. The appellant asserts the Judges approach to the weight given to such
       evidence was flawed. It is said to Judge places less  weight  on  the
       text messages produced by the  appellant  failing  to  give  adequate
       reasons for doing so. The Judge gives little weight to  the  messages
       as the sponsor found them on  an  old  phone  by  chance  as  he  was
       preparing to sell  the  phone  but  fails  to  express  concerns  the
       messages appear to be forged or fake, and appears to  take  no  issue
       with the messages provided by the respondent which are  in  the  same
       format.

   11. The appellant also assert the Judge was wrong to place the weight  he
       did upon the text messages as the late service  of  those  documents,
       less than 24 hours prior to the hearing, afforded no opportunity  for
       the appellant to have them independently verified. The  grounds  note
       the sponsor took issue with the translation  of  "my  child"  at  the
       hearing and that had the documents been  served  in  accordance  with
       directions  the   appellant   could   have   had   the   translations
       independently verified. The grounds claim the appellant has  now  had
       the messages translated and the relevant  phase  translates  as  "the
       child",  corroborating  the  sponsors  evidence  that   "my"   is   a
       mistranslation. The appellant  asserts  that  to  have  attached  the
       weight to those documents that was given, in all  the  circumstances,
       amounts to an error of law.

   12. At the hearing on 29th October 2018 the  respondent  applied  for  an
       adjournment as shortly prior to that hearing she had served a 10-page
       interview summary which included vastly  more  information  than  the
       refusal. The appellant's position was that the new material needed to
       be dealt with fully and responded to by the appellant who would  have
       to obtain documents to rebut new issues. Handwritten notes were  also
       served the appellant's solicitors who stated  she  needed  to  cross-
       reference these against the summary and that the matter had gone from
       being a straightforward marriage of convenience case to what appeared
       to be a wider conspiracy involving more individuals. The hearing  was
       therefore adjourned with directions. When the matter returned to  the
       First-tier Tribunal on 25th March 2019 the respondent  again  applied
       for an adjournment as the translation of the text  messages  had  not
       been provided, the respondent's bundle  was  said  to  be  "lacking",
       there were several strands of seriousness. and that the interests  of
       justice required further evidence. The judge on that occasion further
       adjourned the hearing with directions for the respondent to file  and
       serve the remaining evidence no later than 14 days prior to the  next
       hearing and directing the appellant's  representatives  to  file  and
       serve any supplementary appellant's bundle no later than  seven  days
       prior to the next hearing.

   13. Whilst the Judge was entitled  to  admit  the  respondent's  evidence
       filed by the respondent outside the time limit provided if the  Judge
       thought it in the interests of justice to do  so,  it  was  incumbent
       upon the Judge to give careful  consideration  to  whether  admitting
       that evidence late required the proceedings to be adjourned to enable
       the  appellant  to  respond,  as  was  anticipated  in  the   earlier
       adjournment decisions. There is no indication  in  the  decision  the
       Judge undertook this exercise and no findings supported  by  adequate
       reasons as to why, in all the circumstances, it was fair  to  proceed
       without providing the appellant the opportunity to do; especially  in
       light of the fact it had previously been considered she  should  have
       such a right in light of the additional material the  respondent  was
       seeking to rely upon.

   14. The grounds seek to challenge  the  weight  the  Judge  gave  to  the
       evidence,  but  the  fundamental  issue  is  the  fairness   of   the
       proceedings. Mr Walker accepted in light of the chronology the  Judge
       had erred in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss  the
       appeal based upon a procedural irregularity in failing to provide the
       appellant the opportunity to comment upon the additional evidence.

   15. Even if the decision is ultimately the same the appellant is entitled
       to a fair hearing of her appeal. I find this has not occurred in this
       matter and accordingly set the decision of the Judge side with  there
       being no preserved findings.

   16. As the appellant has not  had  a  fair  hearing  of  her  appeal,  as
       additional evidence may be required, in light of the fact substantial
       further factual findings may be required, and having  considered  the
       Presidential  Guidance  on  remittal  of  appeals,  I   consider   it
       appropriate in all the circumstances for this appeal to  be  remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard  by  a
       judge other than Judge Hodgkinson.





Decision

   17. The First-tier Judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Judge. I remit this appeal to  Hatton  Cross
       to be heard afresh by a judge other the Judge Hodgkinson.

  Anonymity.

   18. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 October 2020
