
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05940/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2020                   |On 02 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              EGHOSA IKPONMWEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  13  November  1982.  He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  T  R  Smith,
    promulgated on 30 January  2020,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of a residence card under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016 on the ground that the marriage was one of convenience. The appeal
    was decided on the papers at the Appellant's request.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  on
    13 May 2020 on the grounds it was arguable the judge had erred  in  law
    in relying on unsupported evidence in the form of letters inviting  the
    Appellant for interview if in fact those letters were  not  before  the
    judge or part of the Respondent's bundle.

3.   On 30 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Norton Taylor issued a  note  and
    directions expressing his provisional view that it would be appropriate
    to determine the appeal without a hearing. The Appellant was invited to
    address the issues of whether there was an error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and  whether  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside. The parties were invited to submit reasons for the view  that  a
    hearing was necessary.

4.   Judge Norton-Taylor noted the grounds of appeal  were  focused  on  the
    assertion that the Respondent had  failed  to  provide  copies  of  the
    interview invitation letters dated 14 and 18 October 2019. Judge Norton-
    Taylor stated:

         "5.  Having perused the papers on the file for myself, I note  that
             at pages 72 and 75 of the respondent's bundle, which had  been
             sent to the Appellant's representatives  under  cover  of  the
             letter of 30 December  2020,  there  are  copies  of  the  two
             interview invitation letters. Whilst Judge Smith did not state
             in terms he had the respondent's bundle before him,  there  is
             certainly no evidence to suggest that  he  did  not,  and  his
             references to the invitation letters in his decision  indicate
             that he had in fact seen them for himself.


         6.   The appellant's representative may  wish  to  reflect  on  the
             above. It is for  the  appellant  to  make  out  his  case  on
             appeal."

5.   The Appellant's representative  submitted  further  submissions  on  27
    August 2020 stating that the at the date of filing the application  for
    permission to appeal  on  12  February  2020,  the  Appellant  had  not
    received the Respondent's bundle and the Respondent  was  requested  to
    provide proof of service. It was the Appellant's case that he  was  not
    aware of the marriage interview letters and was therefore  deprived  of
    the opportunity to respond to  the  Respondent's  reasonable  suspicion
    that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  Having  regard  to  the
    Appellant's persistent requests for disclosure the  judge  should  have
    considered whether the  Appellant  was  provided  with  copies  of  the
    interview invitation letters. It was in the interests of  justice  that
    the Appellant be afforded opportunity to attend a marriage interview.

6.   The Respondent submitted that it was apparent from pages 72 and  75  of
    the Respondent's bundle that the Appellant and his spouse were  invited
    to attend interview. They failed to indicate that they would attend and
    the Respondent wrote to the Appellant on 24 October 2019  stating  that
    due to this failure the application  would  be  referred  to  the  case
    working team for a decision to be made on the information provided. The
    Respondent contacted the Appellant's representatives,  SLA  Solicitors,
    by telephone on 14 October 2020 and  confirmed  the  email  address  to
    which the interview invitation letters  were  sent.  The  letters  were
    referred to in the refusal letter dated 29 October 2019 and  there  was
    no record of a request to provide copies. The Appellant was aware  that
    the Respondent did not accept the relationship was genuine.

7.   The Appellant requested the appeal be determined  on  the  papers.  The
    judge considered the evidence before him and his  conclusion  that  the
    marriage was not genuine was open to him on that evidence.

8.   It is the Respondent's position that the appeal can be decided  without
    hearing. The Appellant did not express a view on this  matter.  I  have
    considered the views of the parties and the overriding objective. I  am
    satisfied, after considering the submissions from  the  Respondent  and
    the Appellant set out above and the grounds of appeal, that the  appeal
    can be justly determined without a hearing.

Conclusions and reasons

9.   The interview invitation letters dated 14 and 18 October 2019  were  in
    the Respondent's bundle on the court file at pages 72  and  75.  It  is
    apparent from paragraphs  19  and  20  that  the  interview  invitation
    letters, relied on by the Respondent, were before the Judge Smith.

10.  The interview invitation letters were sent to SLA Solicitors  who  have
    represented the Appellant throughout. The address is the same  as  that
    on the court file, the refusal letter and the grounds  of  appeal.  The
    email address is the same as that given in the refusal  letter  and  on
    the letters from SLA solicitors to the Tribunal and the  Respondent  in
    connection  with  the  application  and  the  subsequent  appeal.   The
    Respondent has subsequently confirmed the email address  to  which  the
    letters were sent was correct.

11.  The grounds  of  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal,  dated  4
    November 2019, state:

         "The Respondent's grounds for  refusal  are  unreasonable  and  not
         borne  out  of  the  documentary  evidence   submitted   with   the
         Appellant's application. The Appellant requests that this appeal is
         decided on the papers submitted because the appeal raises the  sole
         issue relating to the genuineness of his marriage as  well  as  the
         validity and proper registration of the Appellant's proxy customary
         marriage in accordance with the applicable Nigeria  marriage  laws.
         Secondly,  neither   the   Appellant   nor   his   solicitors   was
         notified/aware of any invitation for the marriage interviews on  14
         and 18 October 2019. The Secretary of  State/Respondent  is  hereby
         put on notice to  disclose  and  provide  copies  of  the  marriage
         interviews and proofs of delivery/service."

12.   The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  sufficient   to
    establish that the Appellant was invited to interview on two  occasions
    and he failed to attend.  The judge was  entitled  to  take  this  into
    account. The judge gave adequate reasons at [25] to  [33]  for  finding
    that the marriage was not genuine. There  was  no  challenge  to  these
    findings.  The  Appellant's  failure  to  attend  interviews   was   an
    additional factor taken into account at [34].

13.  In any event, the failure to attend interviews was not material to  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal. The Appellant exercised  his  right  of
    appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision.  He  has  been  given  the
    opportunity to respond to Respondent's allegation that the marriage was
    one of convenience and to produce evidence at the appeal. The Appellant
    chose not to attend the hearing and he was not represented.
14.  The judge's conclusion that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  was
    open to him on the evidence before him. There was no error  of  law  in
    the decision of 30 January 2020 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 28 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 28 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
