
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05529/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2018                  |On 17 October 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         JULIUS AIMUAMWOSA AGHAYERE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Ekhorohan - Sponsor.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hindson  in  which  the  Judge  allowed  the
        appellant's appeal.









Background


     2. Mr Aghayere is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  18  March  1965  who
        appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal a refusal of an application for
        entry clearance as the spouse of an  EEA  national.  The  decision-
        maker was of the opinion that Mr Aghayere's marriage is a  marriage
        of convenience.
     3. The Judge records  the  nature  of  the  evidence  provided  before
        setting out findings of  fact  from  [11]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge in the following terms:


             11.  This is a case in which the burden of  proof  is  on  the
                  appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  balance   of
                  probabilities.


             12.   The  background  is  that   the   appellant's   previous
                  application  was  refused  on  the  same  ground  and   he
                  appealed. His appeal was allowed by a  Judge  Atkinson  in
                  2015 who found it was not a marriage of convenience.  That
                  decision is my starting point. Mrs Brewer told me that the
                  interview evidence now available is such that  I  can  and
                  should go behind that decision and dismiss the appeal.


             13.  It has been a difficult case to get to understand because
                  of the poor quality of the respondent's evidence.


             14.  I  have  a  transcript  of  an  interview  in  which  the
                  "appellants" name (rather than  the  name  of  the  person
                  being interviewed) is shown as the appellant. It is  dated
                  03/11/2014. I am told that this is  an  interview  of  the
                  appellant. It is what I  would  describe  as  a  "marriage
                  interview" but it contains nothing to  tell  me  who  "the
                  wife" is.


             15.  Attached to that document is a further marriage interview
                  conducted on 06/03/2016. Again I am not given the name  of
                  the person being interviewed. I am told it is the sponsor.


             16.  In  the  respondent's  bundle  is  a  further  record  of
                  interview. In this document the boxes for the name of  the
                  applicant and  the  date  are  blank.  I  am  told  is  an
                  interview of the appellant but have no way of knowing that
                  from the document itself, or when it was  conducted.  This
                  is again a marriage interview and again the  name  of  the
                  wife is not mentioned.


             17.  The evidence of a  marriage  of  convenience  comes  from
                  these interviews. They are totally inadequate as pieces of
                  documentary evidence to be relied on in a court. I am  not
                  satisfied that they can be relied on at  all  and  I  have
                  disregarded them.


             18.  Absent that  "evidence"  the  respondent  has  failed  to
                  satisfy the evidential burden of showing that there  is  a
                  case for the appellant to answer and I  am  not  satisfied
                  that this is a marriage of convenience. There is certainly
                  not sufficient evidence that would justify me in coming to
                  a different conclusion than did Judge Atkinson.


     4. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  asserting  the
        Judge has made a material error of law in failing  to  engage  with
        the evidence provided to support the decision and  thereby  failing
        to resolve conflicts of fact on  material  matters.  Permission  to
        appeal was refused by another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  but
        granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
        the grounds were arguable.



Error of law


     5. It is in this case worth noting in detail the Secretary  of  States
        grounds for asserting the Judge has materially erred in  law.  They
        are as follows:


             The Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal has made a material error
             of law in the determination by  failing  to  engage  with  the
             evidence provided to support the decision, and thereby failing
             to resolve conflicts of fact on material matters.


             The appellant applied in October 2014 for a family  permit  to
             join his sponsor in the  UK,  being  his  EEA  national  wife,
             Magdalene Ekhorohan. The ECO refuse that  application  because
             he  considered  the  relationship  to   be   a   marriage   of
             convenience. An appeal against that decision came  before  the
             FTT in December 2015, at which hearing the Presenting  Officer
             sought an adjournment on the basis that  new  information  had
             come to light regarding the wife having sponsored another  man
             to come to the UK as her spouse, at a time when  she  was  now
             claiming to have been already living with the  appellant.  The
             adjournment was refused and the appeal allowed.


             The matter was referred back to the ECO who, in light  of  the
             new information  about  the  other  husband,  decided  to  re-
             interview both the appellant and the sponsor,  and  put  these
             issues to them. The outcome of this reconsideration was a  re-
             refusal in March 2016 (refusal notice attached  as  Annex  A),
             and the current appeal which finally came before  the  FTT  in
             October 2017.


             The Judge never sets out what the evidence is on which the ECO
             relies to make the allegation that the  marriage  is  a  sham.
             Rather, he completely disregards the evidence on the basis  of
             superficial  complaints  about   the   presentation   of   the
             documents.


             At paragraph 14 he complains that the November 2014  interview
             record (attached as Annex B) fails to identify who  was  being
             interviewed, nor who the wife is. It  clearly  identifies  the
             appellant's name and the ECO reference number in  the  header.
             The record also clearly identifies the sponsors  address,  her
             children's names, the date of marriage, et cetera.  There  can
             really be no  doubt  whatsoever  that  this  interview  record
             relates to the current application, and the current sponsor.


             At paragraph 15  the  Judge  has  criticised  the  March  2016
             interview of the sponsor (attached at Annex C), on  the  basis
             that it does not name her at the top  of  the  record.  Whilst
             this is unfortunately true it is again  perfectly  clear  from
             the questions that follow that  it  is  the  sponsor  of  this
             application who is being interviewed.


             At paragraph 16 the Judge complains  that  the  3rd  interview
             record (attached as Annex D) fails to give  the  name  of  the
             person being interviewed, or the date on which  the  interview
             took place, in the header. Again this is regrettably the  case
             that the Judge is plainly wrong to say that he has 'no way  of
             knowing' who is being interviewed, given the  context  of  the
             questions recorded, that give such details as the address, the
             date of the marriage, and the name of the sponsor's children.


             The Judge was simply not entitled to reject this evidence  out
             of hand, as he does at paragraph 17, but rather  was  required
             to engage with the substance of the ECO's case.


     6. Mrs Peterson submitted the application is based upon a narrow point
        namely that there was a lot of evidence before the Judge  but  that
        the Judge excluded that evidence and therefore failed to  take  the
        same into account with the other  material  when  arriving  at  the
        decision. It is argued there is a lengthy decision of the  ECO  due
        to the interview that had taken place and the  appellant's  history
        which had been renewed and upheld by an Entry Clearance Manager. It
        is argued the Judge failed to engage  with  the  evidence  and  the
        detailed refusal and that far more was required.
     7. The sponsor's position was to repeat the claim made at the  hearing
        that the marriage is "good".
     8. I find the Secretary of State has made out her case.  The  comments
        of the Judge appear to be based on the form rather  than  substance
        of the ECO's evidence. Although, as accepted in the application for
        permission to appeal, there are deficiencies in  certain  parts  of
        the decision makers evidence it is clear from reading that evidence
        that it is possible to ascertain and understand  its  relevance  to
        these proceedings and who was  being  interviewed  in  relation  to
        which issues. The Judge erred in law in a manner  material  to  the
        decision in excluding such evidence  when  there  was  no  rational
        basis or reason for doing so.
     9. I find that the decision has denied  the  ECO,  a  party  to  these
        proceedings, the right to an effective hearing  before  the  First-
        Tier Tribunal. This amounts to a  material  error  of  law  in  the
        decision which must therefore be set aside.
    10. It is also the case, having considered the fact  the  evidence  has
        not been properly considered at the First-Tier Tribunal level,  and
        in accordance with the practice direction relating to the  remittal
        of appeals  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,  and  in  light  of  the
        extensive fact-finding that will be required once the evidence  has
        been properly considered, that  it  is  appropriate  to  remit  the
        matter to the First-Tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to  be  heard
        by another judge of that Tribunal other than Judge Hindson.





Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        Tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to be heard by a judge other than
        Judge Hindson.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11th October 2018.
