
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05883/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                           |On 06 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                         Charles Ugochukwu Nwachukwu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr C U Ikegwuruka, legal representative, OBAC Legal
Service
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mathews promulgated on 26 November  2018  who  dismissed
    his application for an EEA Residence Card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's application was originally refused by the respondent on
    9 August 2018 on the basis that the respondent was not  satisfied  that
    the EEA sponsor was free to marry, having been named as the EEA sponsor
    in a previous application for an EEA Residence Card by another  unnamed
    individual in 2014 on the basis of a proxy  marriage  to  that  person.
    There was no  evidence  that  that  marriage  had  been  dissolved  and
    therefore the respondent was not satisfied that  what  was  seen  as  a
    second marriage to this appellant was valid.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the case on the papers and dismissed
    the appeal essentially on the basis that the grounds of appeal did  not
    specifically dispute the sponsor's earlier marriage to a  Ghanaian  man
    and in all the circumstances there was a lack of any evidence from  the
    sponsor addressing the issues in the case.  On that basis,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was not persuaded  that  the  parties  had  been  validly
    married as claimed given the previous marriage to a Ghanaian  national.
    However, the grounds of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    expressly dispute the validity or existence of the previous marriage in
    the form that was sent in with the appeal.  It  expressly  stated  that
    the sponsor had never been married before, she had never  been  married
    by proxy or otherwise and believes that someone must  have  stolen  and
    used her identity.

 4. There was further a bundle of documents from the appellant  which  were
    filed with the First-tier Tribunal on 30 October  2018,  predating  the
    appeal being dismissed on the papers, albeit it is  not  clear  whether
    those papers were before the Judge.  Within those papers is a  copy  of
    various documents pertaining to the appellant and the  sponsor  and  in
    particular, witness statements from the appellant, from the sponsor and
    from the sponsor's sister, all of whom  confirmed  that  there  was  no
    previous marriage by proxy or otherwise and that the sponsor  had  only
    entered into one marriage, which was with the appellant.

 5. In these circumstances, it is clear that those documents have not  been
    taken into account  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   That  is  a
    procedural error and amounts to an  error  of  law  in  this  case  for
    failure to consider the  available  and  relevant  evidence.   That  is
    sufficient for the decision to be  set  aside.   The  appeal  therefore
    needs to be remade and I remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    given that  there  are  no  findings  of  fact  as  to  the  underlying
    application or validity of marriage in light of the evidence submitted.



 6. During the hearing, the respondent handed up a decision on appeal  from
    the hitherto unnamed Ghanian national who relied on a proxy marriage to
    the sponsor in an application for an EEA  Residence  Card  which  lends
    support to the sponsor's claim that she had not  been  married  before,
    albeit on the basis that the sponsor's identity card was  not  genuine.
    This is relevant evidence to be  considered  by  both  parties  in  the
    remaking of the appeal.

 7. Further, the respondent's initial reasons for refusal  do  not  examine
    any of the other requirements of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 as to whether an EEA Residence  Card  should  be
    issued and it is important in this case for effective  case  management
    and for the appellant and sponsor to know the case  against  for  them,
    for the respondent to actively review this file  upon  receipt  of  the
    appellant's bundle before the appeal is reheard and confirm any further
    reasons for refusal sufficiently in  advance  of  the  relisted  appeal
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Newport hearing centre) for a de novo  hearing,  to
be heard by  any  Judge  except  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mathews.   Any
further evidence upon which either party wishes to rely should be filed  and
served no later than 14 days before the relisted appeal hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         28th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson



