
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24th July 2019                             |On 15th August 2019          |
|Given orally at Field House on 24th July 2019 |                             |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                             Mr Mohammad Shafiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Malik, WH Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of a Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal who, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11 February 2019,
dismissed the appellant's application under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016, whereby the respondent had refused to
issue the appellant with a residence card.  The basis upon which the appeal
was made was that the appellant contended that he was an extended family
member of an EEA national, who had been residing with that national for the
requisite five-year period, and who therefore was entitled to recognition
of a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.

2.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and it is common ground
that he accepted that evidence so far as the length of time was concerned
that the appellant had been residing with his partner.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal on the following basis.  It was considered by the First-tier
Tribunal to be arguable that the judge had in effect acted in a
procedurally unfair manner in dismissing the appeal, in that he had
indicated at the hearing that he would be allowing the appeal.  That was
said to accord with brief typewritten notes on the file.  It was also
considered to be arguable that the judge, having taken the appellant's
evidence as read without in fact calling upon him to speak to it at the
hearing, made adverse findings which had not been put to him.

4.   So far as the issue was concerned of what the judge said the decision
would be at the hearing, we do not find that there is any material problem
with the decision.  The brief typewritten notes to which the judge who
granted permission made reference make it plain that the judge's decision
was "reserved".  It is true that what he said thereafter indicated that the
judge might have been minded to allow the appeal; but so far as the
decision was concerned, it was not communicated to the parties at the
hearing pursuant to the First-tier Procedure Rules in such a way as to
amount to a decision to allow the appeal.

5.   So far as the second matter is concerned, we note that in the rule 24
notice, prepared by Mr Kotas for the respondent in connection with this
hearing, reference is made to relevant case law, which is binding upon the
Upper Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal. The notice says that the
appellant is said to have demonstrated that he resided in the United
Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for five years because he had
been the extended family member of an EEA national since October 2012.
That was the date upon which the appellant started living with the sponsor,
which was accepted by the First-tier Judge.

6.   We agree with Mr Kotas that the case law in question is determinative
of the matter because the appellant cannot and could not demonstrate to the
judge that, at the relevant time, he had acquired a permanent right of
residence.  In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Aibangbee
[2019] EWCA Civ 339 Sir Stephen Richards, giving judgment, said as follows:

         "I turn to the 2006 Regulations.  I am satisfied that on their
         proper construction and so far as material they are consistent with
         the Directive and produce the result for which the Secretary of
         State contends.  They lay down the conditions for extended family
         members to acquire rights of residence under national law, in
         accordance with the duty of facilitation imposed on member states
         by Article 3(2) of the Directive.  Their effect is that an extended
         family member acquires a right of permanent right of residence
         under regulation 15(1)(b) only if he has resided in the United
         Kingdom with the relevant EEA national for a continuous period of
         five years since being issued with a residence card."

7.   The words "since being issued with a residence card" are plainly
important.  In the present case, looking at the evidence, the appellant
could not demonstrate to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he had been
living for five years since being issued with a residence card.  It was the
case that he could show that he had been living together from an earlier
point in time; but that is not relevant to the legal issue to be determined
by reference to the Regulations.

8.   For these reasons, we do not consider that there has been any material
error on the part of the judge.  Even if we had come to a contrary
conclusion, however, and set aside the decision, it would have been
inevitable that the result of re-making would have been the same.

9.   For these reasons, we dismiss the appellant's appeal.  We do note,
however, that it is possible for the appellant to make a fresh application
if so advised.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
Date: 05 August 2019

The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

