
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05247/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                              |                              |
|                                             |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                              KWAME OPOKU ANSAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Bassiri-Dezfouli, instructed by BWF
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As I announced at the end of the hearing, I  find  there  is  no  legal
    error in the decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge O'Rourke  that
    was issued on 6 June 2017.  It was open to Judge O'Rourke to find  that
    the appellant's marriage was one of convenience and therefore  that  he
    was not the family member of a qualified person for the purposes of  EU
    free movement law.  Although I gave brief reasons for  my  decision  at
    the end of the hearing, I reserved my full reasons, which I now give.

 2. I begin by recording the opposing arguments.

 3. The appellant's principle argument is that Judge O'Rourke impermissibly
    placed the whole or part of the burden of proof on the  appellant  when
    assessing whether the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  which  was
    contrary to the Court of Appeal's judgment in Rosa v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14.  The appellant also alleged
    the judge had erred by relying entirely on the report of an Immigration
    Officer who visited his place of residence but  who  did  so  when  the
    appellant and his wife were absent and therefore  were  not  given  the
    opportunity to answer questions about their  relationship.   The  final
    allegation is that Judge O'Rourke erred in placing  significant  weight
    on the absence of evidence from Miss Janet Afriyie, who  spoke  to  the
    Immigration Officer during the home visit.  The allegation  focuses  on
    the fact the judge drew negative inferences from her absence, which was
    not permissible.

 4. Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli expanded on these arguments.  She pointed out that
    the respondent had failed to provide the documentary evidence described
    by the Immigration Officer  in  his  report.   Without  being  able  to
    examine the underpinning evidence, Judge O'Rourke was in error to  give
    the report the great weight he did.

 5. In addition to these omissions, Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli argued the  report
    included obscurities and inconsistencies.  Extracts  of  the  interview
    record mentioned at the end of the report appear  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  They are not examined by the judge  even  though  they
    provide an insight as to whether Ms Afriyie had access to her husband's
    phone number on a different mobile she owned.  It was  unclear  whether
    the author of the report had looked at the screen saver on Ms Afriyie's
    phone or whether he was looking at the  profile  picture  in  FaceBook.
    The report also omitted the fact Ms Afriyie had  called  the  appellant
    during the Immigration Officer's visit and the appellant had offered to
    return to the house to speak to the officer.

 6. The failure of Judge O'Rourke to analyse all these  problems  with  the
    report, according to Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli, meant his decision  to  give
    it significant weight was legally flawed.

 7. Mr Kotas responded, first relying on the rule 24 response of 10 January
    2018, before arguing the following.  Because the First-tier Tribunal is
    an informal tribunal, Judge O'Rourke was able not  only  to  admit  the
    Immigration Officer's report but to decide what weight to give it.

 8. Mr Kotas pointed out that the appellant had  provided  no  evidence  to
    rebut the observations and conclusions of the Immigration Officer.  The
    failure to call any evidence from Ms Afriyie was  telling  because  she
    was the only person who could rebut the Immigration Officer's  account.
    The guidance in Rosa required an appellant to rebut  evidence  provided
    by the respondent.  That was not to shift  the  legal  burden  but  the
    evidential burden.  It was open to Judge O'Rourke to draw the  negative
    inferences he did.

 9. I begin my assessment by citing the last sentence of  paragraph  29  of
    Rosa.

         "The result that  I  think  the  tribunal  must  have  intended  is
         achieved if the legal burden of proof  lies  on  the  Secretary  of
         State throughout but the evidential burden can shift, as  explained
         in Papajorgji. In my judgment, that is the correct analysis."

    This confirms one of the key points of Mr Kotas's submissions and  sets
    the context in which I must consider the competing arguments.

10. The Immigration Officer's report is sufficient to show that it is  more
    likely than not that the appellant's marriage was one  of  convenience.
    It is clear from the detail in the report that the Immigration  Officer
    spent sufficient time at the property  to  investigate  the  situation.
    His report is objective and detailed, as  would  be  expected  from  an
    immigration professional.  I mention at this juncture that there is  no
    reason to believe the Immigration Officer acted  improperly.   He  must
    abide by a code of conduct when visiting people, and not only is  there
    no allegation that he acted improperly, it is clear  that  if  such  an
    allegation were made, that he would be  able  to  call  on  others  who
    attended the property with him to corroborate his behaviour.   This  is
    not a case where there is any allegation or any reason to  believe  the
    Immigration Officer sought to misrepresent what he observed.

11. What the Immigration Officer observed and  recorded  goes  well  beyond
    mere reasonable doubt as to the nature  of  the  marital  relationship.
    What the Immigration Officer observed and recorded identifies  that  it
    is more likely than not that there is a relationship akin  to  marriage
    (if not marriage) between the appellant and Ms Afriyie.   That  is  why
    the claimed relationship between the appellant  and  his  EEA  national
    sponsor in disputed and why concerns it is a  marriage  of  convenience
    have been raised.

12. Because the report discharges the  initial  evidential  burden  on  the
    respondent, it was for the appellant  to  rebut  it.   He  provided  no
    evidence to rebut the  Immigration  Officer's  report.   There  was  no
    statement from Ms Afriyie.  Her unexplained absence  from  the  hearing
    had to be considered by Judge O'Rourke in that context and it was  open
    to him to draw the inferences he did.

13. Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli's submissions that the report should not have been
    given the weight it was given  are  arguments  that  should  have  been
    pursued before Judge O'Rourke.  There is no evidence they  were,  given
    the submissions of Ms Glass recorded by the judge at paragraph 16(iv).

         "Ms Afriyie has very poor English and was  not  forewarned  of  the
         officer's visit.  The  Appellant  saw  her  potential  evidence  as
         ancillary, considering that he and the Sponsor's evidence would  be
         sufficient, a misunderstanding on his part.   However,  both  their
         evidence today compensates for the absence."

14. It is evident from the appeal file that the  appellant  has  had  legal
    representation throughout and it can be inferred  that  he  would  have
    been properly advised  about  the  failure  to  rebut  the  Immigration
    Officer's report.  It is unsurprising, therefore, that  Judge  O'Rourke
    drew the negative inference he did despite Ms Glass's best efforts.

15. Additionally,  I  recognise  that  the  directions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were to  the  extent  that  the  respondent  was  required  to
    disclose those documents relied upon.  The respondent relied  upon  the
    account provided by the Immigration Officer and did  not  rely  on  the
    documents described therein.  Judge  O'Rourke  does  not  rely  on  the
    documents;  he  relies  on  the  observations  and  comments   of   the
    Immigration Officer for the reasons given at paragraph 17.  It was open
    to him so to do.

16. The final issue is whether the appellant was entitled to be interviewed
    in person.  This was not raised before  Judge  O'Rourke  so  is  a  new
    argument.  I cannot fault Judge  O'Rourke  for  not  dealing  with  the
    issue.  Nor can I see that it was a relevant issue.  The appellant  had
    an opportunity to rebut the Immigration Officer's report  but  did  not
    take it.  As indicated in the submissions of Ms  Glass,  he  sought  to
    rely on the evidence given by him and his EEA national  sponsor  during
    the hearing.

17. It is evident from paragraph 18 that Judge O'Rourke took that  evidence
    into consideration and examined the  case  in  the  round,  as  he  was
    required to do.  He  gave  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence
    provided and why he decided the evidence of the Immigration Officer was
    of greater weight.

18. Having explained the reasons for my decision, I confirm  I  have  found
    there is no legal  error  in  Judge  O'Rourke's  decision  and  reasons
    statement and his conclusion that  the  appellant  is  not  the  family
    member of an EEA national because his marriage is one of convenience is
    upheld.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There is no legal error in the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  Judge
O'Rourke and his decision is upheld.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

