
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/05918/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th April 2018                      |         On 3rd May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                               MD Masum Billah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hossein, Legal Representative; Reymond
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hendry dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State refusing to grant him a residence card under Regulation 17 of the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The decision of Judge  Hendry  was
    promulgated on 2nd November 2017.  Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson, which  in  turn  was  approved  by
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.   The  reasons  given   for   granting
    permission by Judge Robertson may be summarised as follows:

         "It is arguable as submitted in  the  ground  that  the  judge  has
         arguably erred in law in overlooking the evidence  referred  to  in
         Ground 2 when he made his findings of fact.  It  is  not  clear  at
         this stage whether this would make a  material  difference  to  the
         outcome of  the  appeal  and  permission  to  appeal  is  therefore
         granted.

         There is less arguable merit in the other grounds (as to Ground  1,
         the judge heard from and recorded the evidence of all the witnesses
         at paragraph 45 to 105).  The evidence at paragraphs 75 to  105  is
         adequately summarised  at  paragraph  152  as  not  significant  or
         helpful because it was general in nature, and it was open to him to
         so find.  As to Ground 3  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  and  the
         Sponsor were said to live in a bedsit would not prevent people from
         visiting them.  However, as permission is granted on Ground  1  the
         Appellant is  not  precluded  from  relying  on  the  rest  of  the
         grounds."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent  as  one
    was not prepared  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal.   However,  the
    Respondent indicated that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision, which I  shall  now
    give.  I do not find that there was an  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set  aside.   My  reasons  for  so  finding  are  as
    follows.

 4. In relation to Ground 1, the complaint in summary  is  that  the  judge
    failed to give sufficient reasons for not accepting the  evidence  from
    the various witnesses she heard from, upon  which  she  summarises  her
    conclusion to that evidence at paragraph 152 of  the  decision  wherein
    she states: "I heard from various witnesses, but most of their evidence
    was insignificant and unhelpful, confirming only that they had seen the
    Appellant and Sponsor together at arranged events, some occurring after
    the previous hearing."  With respect to Ground 1 as pleaded, I  do  not
    find that the judge's summarisation at paragraph 152 is inadequate  for
    the reason that the judge did find that the evidence from the witnesses
    was, in her  words  -  'insignificant'  and  'unhelpful'  in  that  the
    evidence only confirmed that they had seen the Appellant and Sponsor at
    events on several occasions, but did not contain any further detail  or
    evidence that would go to establishing the marriage was a  genuine  one
    by reference to details such as seeing the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  in
    anything but prearranged social events.  The judge  characterises  this
    as the Appellant and Sponsor not going to various witnesses' residences
    for direct social events or inviting  others  to  socialise  with  them
    directly,  but  rather  only  being  seen  together  at  events,  which
    circumstantial evidence was insufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof that the marriage was not one of convenience, once the burden had
    passed to the Appellant after the Secretary of State had discharged the
    initial burden that fell upon her.

 5. I further observe that it is true to say that  the  witness  statements
    are unhelpful in that they do not say much at all  about  the  personal
    relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor, nor do  they  make  any
    nuanced observations about the couple and whether they are in a genuine
    relationship or not in the measured  opinion  of  the  deponent,  which
    would have been helpful to the Tribunal as well as to  the  Appellant's
    appeal in rebuttal.  The statements seem to merely recite the frequency
    of each deponent seeing the Appellant and Sponsor at  events,  and  the
    witness statements are fairly similar in their content  and  ultimately
    did not substantiate the genuineness of the Appellant's marriage to the
    Sponsor.  Thus the judge's observation that the various  witnesses  saw
    the Appellant and Sponsor together at events  accurately  reflects  the
    quality and nature of the evidence that she heard.

 6. Turning to Ground 2, which Mr Hossein accepted was the strongest ground
    of the four drafted, I do  find  that  the  judge  had  regard  to  the
    evidence complained of in respect of the bank statements and  financial
    documents, which are mentioned at paragraph 144 of the decision, and in
    respect of the evidence from the landlord/landlady, which is  mentioned
    at paragraphs 142 to 143 of the judge's decision.  As to the  electoral
    register, I accept that the judge did not consider  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were reinstated  on  the  electoral  register
    within months of being removed.  However, I cannot see that this  would
    have had a material impact upon the judge's other  robust  findings  on
    the genuineness  of  the  marriage.   As  to  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 151 of the decision that the photographs did not all show the
    Sponsor wearing a hijab at family events but did show her wearing it at
    other times, I do not see this as being an explicit  criticism  of  the
    Sponsor's evidence but moreover a summary of the content of the  photos
    which were  shown  to  the  judge.   The  judge  has  not  specifically
    criticised the Sponsor or Appellant in relation  to  the  frequency  or
    consistency of the Sponsor wearing a hijab and as such there  does  not
    seem to me to be any finding or observation that was not  open  to  the
    judge to make.  Finally, looking at paragraph 143 of the  decision  and
    the appropriateness or otherwise of the  tenancy  agreements  and  flat
    rentals, whilst pages 63 to 65 of the  Appellant's  bundle  do  confirm
    that the Appellant and Sponsor were lodgers at the  property  and  that
    the landlord and landlady  did  not  have  access  to  official  lodger
    agreements but used a tenancy agreement instead, again,  I  cannot  see
    how the format of the agreement would have had a material difference to
    the outcome of the appeal given the judge's other findings.

 7. Turning to Ground 3 and the judge's finding at  paragraph  154  of  the
    decision that the photos showed careful posing  on  special  occasions,
    again, the repeated argument that the Appellant and Sponsor  could  not
    be visited if they were living in what is in effect a bedsit would  not
    prevent people from visiting them as they did live in  a  shared  house
    and this argument does not  demonstrate  in  and  of  itself  that  the
    finding was not one that was open to the judge to  make,  nor  was  the
    judge inappropriate in referring  to  the  evidence  from  the  earlier
    hearing at paragraph 142 of the decision when considering the letter of
    the landlady and finding it unpersuasive.

 8. In relation to Ground 4, this ground at first blush may have held  some
    merit in criticising  paragraph  157  of  the  decision.   However,  as
    canvassed with Mr Hossein, paragraphs 155 to 157 should be  read  as  a
    whole, which collectively make clear that the judge was  aware  of  the
    leading Upper Tribunal authority of Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -  marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and mentioned  that  the
    refusal letter raised questions about whether the marriage was  genuine
    and that  there  were  reasons  to  suspect  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience in accordance with Papajorgji,  which  shifted  the  burden
    from the Respondent to the Appellant to provide a response.  I  further
    observe that even if this  paragraph  was  infelicitously  framed,  any
    error is not material, as this is a Devaseelan matter where  there  has
    been a previous outcome from the First-tier Tribunal  that  has  fallen
    against the Appellant which raised the same issue, and therefore  there
    was sufficient material in that previous outcome to justify the judge's
    observation at paragraphs 155 to 157 that the burden of proof lay  with
    the Appellant in the appeal as the previous findings were sufficient to
    discharge the initial burden of proof upon the  Respondent  to  show  a
    reasonable suspicion in doubting the marriage.

 9. Therefore, in light  of  the  above  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not reveal an error of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 02 May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini





