
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05368/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2019                              |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             ABM ABDUL MUTTALIB

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 15  June  1982  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 4 May 2017 to refuse  to  issue  him  a
    permanent resident card as a family member. The First-tier Tribunal, in
    a decision promulgated on 28 February 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing at Birmingham on 19 March 2019
    nor did his solicitor, Londonium, attend.  I  had  a  letter  from  the
    solicitors dated 18 March 2019. This states that, 'we do not  have  any
    instructions  from  the  appellant  to  attend  the  hearing  for   the
    appellant.' The letter also states that the solicitors would not attend
    the Tribunal hearing, 'however, we still represent  the  appellant  for
    his immigration matters.' I also had an email dated 18 March 2019  from
    the appellant himself. This states  that  the  appellant's  father  had
    suffered a heart attack in Bangladesh where he  was  hospitalised.  The
    appellant states that,  'I  had  to  arrange  an  emergency  travel  to
    Bangladesh to see my dad in hospital bed. His current situation is  not
    very well.' Attached to the email are copies of air tickets from London
    to Bangladesh for Monday, 11 March 2019 and from Bangladesh  to  London
    on Saturday, 30 March 2019.

 3. The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provide at paragraph
    [38]:

    If a party fails to attend a hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  may  proceed
    with the hearing if the Upper Tribunal-

    (a) is satisfied that the party has been notified  of  the  hearing  or
    that reasonable steps have been  taken  to  notify  the  party  of  the
    hearing; and

    (b) considers that it is in the interests of justice  to  proceed  with
    the hearing.

 4. I am satisfied that the appellant has  been  notified  of  the  hearing
    because he has written  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  respect  of  that
    hearing. I am also satisfied that it is in the interest of  justice  to
    proceed with the  hearing.  I  consider  that  the  appellant  and  his
    solicitor have intended by their respective letters to leave the  Upper
    Tribunal with no option but to adjourn the hearing. The letter from the
    solicitors is particularly unsatisfactory. The solicitors make it clear
    in the letter that they continue to represent the  appellant  yet  they
    failed to attend the hearing. Likewise, the letter from  the  appellant
    is not satisfactory. There is  no  evidence  of  the  sickness  of  the
    appellant's father. There is no indication on the tickets  as  to  when
    they were purchased. Having left the United Kingdom on 12  March  2019,
    the appellant fails to explain why he did not seek to  return  in  time
    for the hearing. It is not clear why the  appellant,  knowing  that  he
    could not attend the hearing in  person,  has  either  failed  to  give
    instructions to his  solicitors  to  attend  on  his  behalf  or,  more
    worryingly, has instructed them not to attend the hearing. The  conduct
    of the appellant and his solicitors is such that I  am  not  minded  to
    agree to adjourn the hearing as requested.

 5. Moreover, the interests of justice will not be served by relisting this
    appeal at a later date. That is because the appeal is wholly devoid  of
    merit. There is one ground  of  appeal.  The  appellant  claims  to  be
    entitled to a permanent residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  a  Polish
    citizen exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom.  Following  the
    dissolution of his marriage, the appellant claimed a retained right  of
    residence pursuant  to  regulation  10  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016. The judge found that the appellant had
    never been married to the woman he claimed was his wife because, at the
    time of their wedding, he was already married  to  a  woman  living  in
    Bangladesh. By the operation of  section  11  (b)  of  the  Matrimonial
    Causes Act 1973, his marriage was void ab  initio.  The  appellant  has
    sought to argue that the Secretary of State's guidance  (Free  Movement
    Rights: retained rights of residence Ver 3.0) contradicts the  position
    in statute because it indicates that a marriage is  terminated  on  the
    date a decree of nullity  is  issued.  That  submission  has  no  merit
    whatever. The Secretary of State's guidance plainly can only  apply  to
    marriages which are voidable and not void, as in the appellant's  case.
    In any event, the judge was unarguably right when he concluded that the
    appellant had never been the family member of an EU national because he
    had never been lawfully married to her.

 6. Finally, I am told by Mr Mills,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, that the appellant has been granted a residence card because  he
    is now in a new relationship with an EU citizen. The card was issued on
    8 January 2019.




Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 19 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
