
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05332/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 May 2021                       |On 10 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               RAMAZAN REXHAJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 17 February 2021, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision  should  be  set  aside.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as  the  'respondent'  and  the
         respondent as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before
         the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant was born on 27 February 1994
         and is a citizen of Albania. He applied to the Secretary  of  State
         for a residence card  as  an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national. His application  was  refused  by  a  decision  dated  18
         September 2019. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in  a
         decision promulgated on 14 January 2020, allowed  the  appeal.  The
         Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the appeal  should  be  allowed.  My  reasons  for
         reaching that conclusion are as follows. First, at [31]  the  judge
         purports to allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds. This was an
         error of law  (see  Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA  appeals;  human
         rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC):  the  appellant  had  not  served  a
         section 120 notice and he was not appealing against a  decision  to
         remove him). Secondly, the conclusion at [31]  is  wholly  unclear.
         Whilst under the subsequent 'Notice of Decision' the  judge  allows
         the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016   he
         qualifies this at [31] by stating, 'I therefore remit the matter to
         the respondent to enable her to reconsider the matter in the  light
         of my findings and in the light of the outstanding  claims  by  the
         appellant.' Those 'outstanding claims' include a trafficking  claim
         and an application for international protection. The judge  had  no
         power to remit the matter. What he says at [31] leaves it uncertain
         whether he was  allowing  the  appeal  or  not.  His  decision  is,
         therefore, wrong in law and cannot stand.

         3.   The judge's job was to consider the appeal on a single  basis,
         that is whether the respondent (who accepts that the appellant is a
         relationship  with  an  EEA   national)   correctly   refused   the
         application for a residence card on  grounds  of  'appropriateness'
         (see regulation 18 (4) (c)). He was required to have regard to  the
         circumstances as they existed at the date of  the  hearing  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  The  fact  that  other  claims  made  by  the
         appellant remained outstanding at that date was  not  relevant;  it
         was not part of  the  judge's  function  to  indulge  in  pointless
         speculation which was no part of the task before him. The judge was
         patently irritated that the appellant's other claims  had  not  yet
         been determined. I agree with  Mr  Melvin,  who  appeared  for  the
         Secretary of State at the Upper Tribunal initial hearing, that  the
         judge allowed his irritation to interfere with his analysis of  the
         relevant evidence to an extend that the analysis has been vitiated;
         the decision leaves the  very  strong  impression  that  the  judge
         considered that allowing the appellant might punish the  respondent
         for her delay or, at the very least, compel her  to  determine  the
         appellant' outstanding claims. The judge's finding at [27] that the
         'respondent was delaying matters' is, in  any  event,  unwarranted;
         the trafficking decision lies with a body over which the  Secretary
         of State has no control. The fact the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing could not tell  the  judge  'when  [the
         trafficking application]  might  be  determined  [23]'  was  hardly
         surprising.

         4.    At  [22],  the  judge's  unnecessary  consideration  of   the
         outstanding trafficking  claim  led  him  into  further  error.  He
         considered that it was possible that the appellant (who in February
         2016 had been convicted of cannabis  production,  sentenced  to  12
         months'  imprisonment  and  deported)  might  'appeal  against  his
         conviction [on the defence of duress]'. The judge  considered  that
         the outcome of such an appeal (many years out of time) might  be  a
         factor in the residence  card  appeal.  That  constituted  a  legal
         error. Quite apart from the irrelevance of such speculation to  the
         issue at hand, the judge seems unaware that, if the  appellant  had
         been trafficked to work in a cannabis factory, he must  have  known
         that at the time of his trial in 2016; it makes no sense  that,  in
         order to raise a defence of duress at the trial or  on  appeal,  he
         needed a conclusive decision on his  trafficking  claim  before  he
         could do so.

         5.   I also agree with Mr Melvin that the judge erred by failing to
         have any proper regard at all for  the  fact  that  the  appellant,
         having been deported, re-entered the United Kingdom  the  following
         week in breach of the deportation order. That  was  a  circumstance
         which plainly should have been considered in  the  determining  the
         appropriateness of issuing a card to the  appellant.  However,  the
         judge seems to have ignored it.

         6.   Mr Ahmed, who appeared for  the  appellant,  agreed  that  the
         judge had erred in purporting to remit the matter to the  Secretary
         of State and allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds  but  he
         argued that the decision was essentially sound. Whilst I agree with
         Mr Ahmed that the judge's reference at [25] to the appellant having
         not breached the terms of his licence  may  refer  historically  to
         2016/2017 and not the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  (as
         the respondent argues), I find that the decision is so  flawed  for
         the reasons I give above that it must be set aside.

         7.   The facts in this appeal are uncontroversial. The decision can
         be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None  of  the
         findings of fact shall stand. The decision shall be remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal following a resumed hearing  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Lane, if available. If not, any  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  or  Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Judge;  no  interpreter;  remote  hearing  on  first
         available date; the parties may rely on new evidence provided  that
         such evidence (including witness statements) are served  and  filed
         no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.) "

 2. I did not hear any oral evidence at the resumed hearing. The  appellant
    had filed a supplementary bundle of  documents  which  included  a  new
    witness statement by his partner. Mr McVeety  did  not  seek  to  cross
    examine her.

 3. Having heard the submissions of  the  representatives,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 4. As I noted in my error of  law  decision,  the  facts  are  essentially
    agreed. Since the promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal decision, the
    appellant has, on 5 March 2021, been recognised by the Single Competent
    Authority (SCA) as a victim of trafficking between  2006  and  2011  in
    Albania  and  the  United  Kingdom.  In  addition,  the  appellant  has
    completed courses designed to rehabilitate him following  his  criminal
    offending. Mr Ahmed, who  appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal initial  hearing,  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  shown
    remorse for his offending and did not constitute a threat to the United
    Kingdom as regards further  criminal  offending.  He  referred  to  the
    medical evidence of Dr Hussain which indicated that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from an anxiety and depressive disorder. He submitted that it
    was possible that the appellant had been 'unable  to  rationalise'  his
    decision-making at the time in  2016  when,  having  been  deported  to
    Albania, he illegally re-entered the  United  Kingdom.  Mr  Ahmed  also
    submitted that it was possible that the appellant had  been  scared  of
    returning to Albania and encountering those who have trafficked him and
    that his fear explained his decision to return so  promptly.  Mr  Ahmed
    noted the absence of any record of the sentencing remarks of the  Crown
    Court judge. As a consequence, it was impossible to  know  whether  the
    fact that the appellant had been trafficked had been taken into account
    by the judge in determining the duration of the sentence (12 months).

 5. Mr Ahmed's submissions were skilfully advanced but I do not accept that
    the Secretary  of  State  has  exercised  her  discretion  in  any  way
    improperly when she refused to issue a residence card to the appellant.



 6. Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, paragraph 18(4) provides:

         (4)  The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
         extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
         not an EEA national on application if-

             (a)  the application is accompanied or joined by a valid
             passport;

             (b)  the relevant EEA national is a qualified person or an EEA
             national with a right of permanent residence under regulation
             15; and

             (c)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
             State appropriate to issue the residence card.

         [my emphasis]

    Sub-paragraph (c) ('in all the  circumstances')  plainly  entitles  the
    Secretary of State to take a comprehensive view of all  relevant  facts
    in each case. In the instant appeal, those facts included not only  the
    appellant's criminal offending but also the extraordinary  speed  (less
    than one week) with which he chose to disregard the laws of the  United
    Kingdom by returning and thereafter working  illegally  (with  all  the
    damage to the efficient operation of  the  economy  and  the  potential
    risks  to  the  appellant  himself  and  the  public  which  such  work
    inevitably creates) for the next two years.  Set against  those  facts,
    the matters raised in Mr Ahmed's submissions are speculative  at  best.
    Notwithstanding the trafficking decision, there is no evidence that the
    appellant came back to the United Kingdom  because  he  was  scared  of
    criminals in Albania. Likewise, a diagnosis of anxiety  and  depression
    does not in itself support the claim that the appellant had been unable
    to act rationally when he  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom;  on  the
    contrary, his actions have every appearance of a  rational  calculation
    (correctly as it transpired) that he would not be apprehended either on
    arrival or whilst subsequently working illegally. Moreover, as Mr Ahmed
    acknowledged, that the appellant has, long  after  the  decision  under
    challenge, undertaken rehabilitation courses and may not intend to  re-
    offend is  irrelevant  to  the  test  of  'appropriateness'  which  the
    Secretary of State was obliged to apply. In my opinion,  the  Secretary
    of State's exercise of the discretion provided by paragraph  18  cannot
    be described as perverse, irrational or improper either for the reasons
    put forward by the appellant or at all.  Discretion  was  exercised  by
    reference to relevant and undisputed facts,  in  particular  concerning
    the appellant's appalling immigration history. Accordingly,  I  dismiss
    the appeal.




    Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appeal is dismissed.




    Signed   Date 26 May 2021
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


