
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05922/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st of January 2020                       |On 5th of February 2020       |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                      Toluwanimoroti Mosopefoluwa Osoba
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Haseldine of Counsel, instructed by Augustine
                  Clement Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr P Deller, Senior Home Officer Presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lawrence, promulgated on 20 March 2019, which included a  finding
    that there was no valid appeal by the Appellant under Rule  22  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and therefore no decision made in respect  of  her.
    In a decision dated 9 December 2019, the Upper Tribunal found an  error
    of law in that decision and gave directions for the re-hearing  of  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  The background to this appeal is set out
    in the error of law decision annexed not be  repeated  here  in  savers
    where necessary.

Relevant Immigration law

 2. The Appellant's application for a derivative residence  card  was  made
    under  Regulation  16  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations"); which  so  far  as  material
    provides as follows:


          1) A person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
             which the person -
               a) is not an exempt person: and
               b) satisfies each of the criteria in  one  paragraph  (2)  to
                  (6).


          2) The criteria in this paragraph that -
               a) the person is the primary carer of an EEA national: and
               b) the EEA national -
                   i) is under the age of 18:
                  ii) reside in the United  Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient
                      person; and
                 iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom  with
                      the person left the United Kingdom for an  indefinite
                      period.


         ...


         (6)  The criteria this paragraph are that -
             (a)  the person is under the age of 18;
             (b)  the person does not have leave to enter, a remaining, the
                  United Kingdom under  the  1971  Act  (but  see  paragraph
                  (7A));
             (c)  the person's primary carer is entitled  to  a  derivative
                  right to reside in the United Kingdom under paragraph (2),
                  (4) or (5); and
             (d)   the primary carer would be prevented  from  residing  in
                  the United Kingdom if the person left the  United  Kingdom
                  for an indefinite period.

 3. Regulation 20 of the 2016  the  issue  of  a  derivative  residence  as
    follows:


          1) The Secretary of State must issue a person with  a  derivative
             residence card on application and production of -
               a) a valid national identity card issued by an EEA State or a
                  valid passport; and
               b) prove that the applicant has a derivative right to  reside
                  under regulation 16.


          2) ...


          3) A derivative residence card  issued  under  paragraph  (1)  is
             valid until -
               a) the date five years from the date of issue;
               b) any earlier date specified by the Secretary of State  when
                  issuing a derivative residence card.

          4) ...


          5) A derivative residence card is -
               a) proof of the holder's derivative right to  reside  on  the
                  day of issue;
               b) no longer valid if the holder ceases to have a  derivative
                  right to reside under regulation 16;
               c) invalid if the holder never  had  a  derivative  right  to
                  reside under regulation 16.


          6) This regulation is subject to regulations 24 and 25.

 4. Pursuant to Regulation 24(3) of the 2016 Regulations, the Secretary  of
    State may revoke a residence card if the holder has ceased to have,  or
    has never had, a right to reside under the 2016 Regulations.  By virtue
    of Regulation 28 of the same, the reference to residence card  includes
    a derivative residence card.

The hearing

 5. The Appellant's mother,  Olayirika  Abiola  Osoba,  attended  the  oral
    hearing, adopted her  written  statement  dated  30  January  2020  and
    confirmed the truces contents set out therein.  There  was  no  further
    examination  or  cross-examination  and  I  clarified  the  Appellant's
    current medical condition.

 6. Mr Deller accepted  on  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements  in  Regulation  16(6)(a),  (b)  and  (d)  of   the   2016
    Regulations, in particular by reference to  the  Appellant's  age,  the
    evidence from her parents and the medical evidence.   However,  it  was
    not accepted  that  she  could  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    16(6)(c) because her mother, her primary carer, is no longer  a  person
    entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom  because
    Regulation 16(2)(b)(i) of the 2016 Regulations was not met  -  the  EEA
    national upon whom the Appellant's mother and in turn,  the  Appellant,
    was reliant upon, is no longer under the age of 18.

 7. At the time of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, which was  at
    that time a linked appeal for both the Appellant and  her  mother,  the
    EEA citizen was under the age of 18 and it was accepted that his mother
    was his primary carer and that he would not be able to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without her.  The EEA  national  reach  the  age  of  18
    shortly after  his  mother's  appeal  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, although this does not appear to have been considered by  the
    Respondent who subsequently issued  her  with  a  derivative  residence
    card.  Mr Deller suggested that this is likely to be an  administrative
    error which will need to be followed up separately by  the  Respondent,
    but which in fact does not impact on the determination of this appeal.

 8. The issue of an EEA derivative residence card is  only  recognition  of
    entitlement in accordance with the regulations when it is issued and is
    not of itself confer a  right  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further, pursuant to Regulation  20(5)(b)  the  2016  Regulations,  the
    derivative residence card is no longer valid  because  the  Appellant's
    mother has ceased  to  have  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 16.  Ultimately, the Respondent also has the power to revoke
    the derivative residence card issued to the Appellant's mother.

 9. Mr Deller submitted that the regulation  has  a  clear  and  exact  age
    requirement for the EEA national which is not satisfied in the  present
    case.  He submitted that there was nothing in the treaties or case  law
    to allow anything other than a literal  reading  of  this  requirement,
    even if it could be shown that there was  a  continuing  need  for  the
    primary carer, for example for a vulnerable adult.  There is nothing in
    this case to suggest that the EEA national could not continue  to  meet
    the 2016 Regulations in his own right, nor that he would be required to
    leave if his mother left the United Kingdom.  This is a submitted  that
    there is a good reason for the age requirement as  it  is  and  however
    desirable it may be for the Appellant's mother  to  remain  the  United
    Kingdom, the evidence does not show it is needed.

10. This point in relation to age is substantively  different  to  the  age
    point suggested on behalf of the Respondent at the error of law hearing
    and made without notice prior to the day of the hearing  (with  neither
    party having complied with directions given in  the  previous  decision
    for the filing of evidence and skeleton arguments).  Mr  Haseldine  did
    however confirm that he was able to deal with the  point  at  the  oral
    hearing without the need for an adjournment.

11. On behalf of the  Appellant,  Mr  Haseldine  submitted  that  the  only
    argument in response is that there must be some  give  to  the  literal
    meaning  of  the  Regulations  containing  the  age  requirement.   The
    evidence shows, and was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal,  that  the
    Appellant's  mother  is  the  primary  carer  for  both  children,  the
    Appellant and the EEA national and it is accepted by the Respondent now
    that the requirements in Regulation 16(6)(d) of the 2016 Regulations is
    met this Appellant.

12. Mr Haseldine suggested that the age of 18 was chosen in the regulations
    because before that age, children are not able to, nor expected to look
    after themselves and therefore may be unable to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom to exercise their treaty rights without the presence  of  their
    primary carer.  In the present case it was submitted that  exactly  the
    same reason is made out on the evidence, that the EEA national is  only
    just over the age of 18 but has not yet position to look after  himself
    and exercises treaty rights independently in the United Kingdom without
    the presence of his mother.  The Appellant's mother's evidence is  that
    the EEA national would have to return to Nigeria with her if she had to
    leave with the Appellant and he would be unable to remain here  without
    a  primary  carer.   Mr  Haseldine  accepted  that  this  evidence  was
    subjective rather than object of, but presented this as the reality  of
    the family situation.

13. Finally, it was suggested that it was necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to
    consider the best interests of the Appellant as  a  child  pursuant  to
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  in
    particular to consider her health needs.  However, Haseldine could  not
    identify where, within Regulation 16 of the 2016 Regulations this could
    be appropriately factored in, in the context of an EEA  rather  than  a
    human rights appeal.  In these circumstances the point was not  pursued
    further.

Findings and reasons

14. On a literal reading of Regulation 16(2)(b)(i) and 16(6)(c) of the 2016
    Regulations, there is no dispute between the parties that the Appellant
    is not entitled to a derivative right of residence as the EEA  national
    upon which her mother's derivative right to reside  and  therefore  her
    own  is placed, is now over the age of 18.  On that  basis  her  appeal
    falls to be dismissed  unless  there  is  some  basis  upon  which  the
    Appellant can show that the requirement in  Regulation  16(2)(b)(i)  of
    the 2016 Regulations should not be read literally.  Mr Haseldine  could
    not identify anything in the EU treaties or case  law  which  supported
    anything other than a literal interpretation of the age requirement and
    I am not aware of anything either.

15. Mr Haseldine did make submissions as to why the age of 18 may have been
    included as a requirement which focused broadly on a child's  inability
    to look after themselves.  However, this is not solely for emotional or
    guidance reasons but must also be for legal reasons as to the  lack  of
    legal capacity of a child to enter into  certain  formal  relationships
    required for independent living.  There is a broad range of reasons  as
    to why a person is treated as an adult at the age of 18 and  likely  to
    be able to live independently at that age,  which  go  far  wider  than
    those suggested by Mr Haseldine by reference to the  evidence  in  this
    appeal.

16. In any event, even if there was some principle or reason  not  to  read
    the age requirement literally, the evidence in this appeal simply  does
    not support the extension of the  provisions  to  include  the  primary
    carer of this EEA national, or by extension, to the  Appellant.   There
    is nothing to suggest the EEA national is anything other than a typical
    18 year old who has started university.  There is no  evidence  of  any
    medical conditions, any particular vulnerability or dependency  on  his
    mother and he no longer lives at home on  a  full-time  basis.   Whilst
    there is no dispute that the continuing support from his  mother  would
    be desirable, not least for the reasons she gives in  her  own  written
    statement, they fall far short of establishing that he would be  unable
    to remain in the United Kingdom if she left.  Therefore,  even  if  the
    express age requirement is disregarded or applied  more  flexibly,  the
    requirement in Regulation 16(2)(b)(iii) of the 2016  Regulations  could
    no  longer  be  met  as  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (notwithstanding the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  were
    made at a time when the EEA national was under the age of 18  with  the
    obvious consequences on his ability to live independently).  For  these
    reasons, the Appellant can not meet the  requirements  for  a  derivate
    residence card and her appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The reasons set out in the attached error of law  decision,  the  making  of
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and  as  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision is remade as follows.

The appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         3rd February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/05920/2018
                                                               EA/05922/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2019                         |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                  (SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                   Olayinka Abiola Osoba (first appellant)
            Toluwanimoroti Mosopefoluwa Osoba (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Haseldine of Counsel, instructed by Augustine
                  Clement Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The second appellant appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, which included a finding that there
    was no valid appeal by the  second  appellant  under  Rule  22  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and therefore no decision made in respect of her.

 2. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's
    refusal of a derivative residence card firstly for Mrs Osoba, the first
    appellant, as  the  primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  child  under
    Regulation 16 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 and secondly, in respect of the second appellant, as the dependent
    of the first appellant (her daughter).

 3. Before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  first  appellant's  appeal,  was
    allowed on the basis that she satisfied the requirements of  Regulation
    16 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.   The
    First-tier Tribunal found in paragraphs 16 to 18 of the  decision  that
    there was no valid appeal from the second appellant because the  First-
    tier Tribunal had not been provided with a decision  in  in  her  case,
    noting only a covering letter from the  respondent  which  referred  to
    both appellants.

 4. However, as accepted today on behalf of the respondent, the Reasons for
    Refusal Letter clearly deals with both appellants, the mother  and  the
    daughter.  The final paragraph of the substantive part of the  decision
    states:

         "You have also applied for a derivative residence card on behalf of
         Toluwanimoroti Mosopefoluwa Osoba as your dependant.  As  you  have
         failed to demonstrate that you meet the requirements of  Regulation
         16(2) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  (as  amended)
         Toluwanimoroti Mosopefoluwa Osoba is therefore, unable to derive  a
         right on the basis that you  are  the  primary  carer  of  a  self-
         sufficient EEA national child and is refused in line."

 5.  Although  the  decision  is  only  formally  addressed  to  the  first
    appellant, the covering letter clearly identifies both  appellants  and
    it is beyond doubt that the decision letter is in respect of  both  and
    contains a substantive decision in relation to them both.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal therefore erred in law in  finding  that  there
    was no valid appeal in relation to the second appellant  and  erred  in
    failing to make any decision under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 on that basis.  It would further,  although  not
    strictly necessary to add, be a procedural error for this point not  to
    have been raised with the parties before the decision  was  reached  on
    that basis in circumstances where neither party had raised the issue.

 7. The decision in paragraphs  16  to  18  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is a material error of law and it is necessary  to  set  aside
    that  part  of  the  decision.   The  second  appellant's   appeal   in
    consequence remains outstanding.

 8. There are two points of dispute  between  the  parties  as  to  whether
    Regulation  16(6)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 is met.  One relates to the age of the person, or more
    specifically, which person has to be  under  the  age  of  18;  and  in
    subparagraph (d) whether the primary  carer  would  be  prevented  from
    residing in the United Kingdom if the  person  (the  second  appellant)
    left the United Kingdom for an indefinite period.

 9. These matters  require  only  limited  further  findings  of  fact  and
    potentially further limited evidence such that  the  remaking  of  this
    appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal and will be listed for further
    hearing on the first available date before UTJ Jackson.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision in respect of the second appellant.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
second appellant.

Directions

 i) The appeal to be re-listed before UTJ Jackson on  the  first  available
    date.


ii) Any further evidence the Appellant wishes to rely upon is to  be  filed
    and served no later than 14 days before the re-listed hearing.

iii) The parties are at  liberty  to,  but  are  not  required  to,  file  a
    skeleton argument no later than 7 days before the re-listed hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


