
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05043/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2016                  |On 18 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                Jimmy Noceda
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Henderson promulgated on 14 July 2016, in which she dismissed  an
    appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 19th  April
    2016 to refuse the appellant's application for  a  permanent  residence
    card as the family member of an EEA national  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


 2. The respondent's decision of 19th April 2016 noted that  the  appellant
    had not provided sufficient evidence that both the  appellant  and  his
    EEA sponsor resided in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for  a
    continuous five year period.


 3. The findings of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs [7] to [10]  of
    her decision.  The Judge found at paragraph [7] of  her  decision  that
    the appellant had provided evidence of his  employment  in  the  United
    Kingdom between 5th April 2011 and April  2016.   She  notes  that  the
    appellant has provided evidence that he has been working and living  in
    this country for at least 5 years.


 4. At paragraph [8] of her decision, the Judge turned to  the  information
    about the appellant's EEA sponsor, his father.  The evidence that there
    was about the sponsor before the Tribunal is set out at  paragraph  [8]
    of the decision.


 5. At paragraph 9 of the decision the Judge states:


         "The first issue is providing evidence that the Appellant's  father
         has been  here  as  a  "Qualified  Person"  for  five  years.   The
         difficulty with this application is that  the  Appellant  does  not
         appear to fully understand the evidential  requirement  in  showing
         that his sponsor has been resident in the United Kingdom exercising
         treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.  The  evidence
         of his employment is only provided for a limited time  period  from
         2005 - 2008 and there is a gap until the  tax  year  to  5th  April
         2015.  It is not a continuous record."


 6. Ms Appiah did not  have  in  the  papers  before  her,  copies  of  the
    documents that  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  in
    particular, the documents relating to the appellant's sponsor.  I  have
    given her an opportunity at the commencement of the hearing  before  me
    to have a look through the documents that were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Ms  Appiah  was  able  to  satisfy  herself  that  the
    documents that were before the Judge, have clearly and accurately  been
    recorded at paragraph [8] of her decision.


 7. The appellant appeals on the ground that the  Judge,  in  reaching  her
    finding at paragraph [9], failed to have regard to the wage  slips  and
    contract of employment that were before her.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 15th November 2016.


 8. The Judge found at paragraph [9] of her decision that the  evidence  of
    the appellant's sponsor's employment is only  provided  for  a  limited
    time period between 2005 and 2008, with a gap then unitil the tax  year
    to 5th April 2015.  That on the face of it, fails to  take  account  of
    the contract for employment as a caretaker dated 26 April 2013, and the
    wage slips of 28th September 2013 and 28th  September  2014,  that  the
    Judge refers to in paragraph [8].


 9. It seems that there was evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    of the appellant's sponsor having been employed since May 2013 onwards.
     The terms and conditions under which the sponsor was employed, are set
    out in a letter dated 26th April 2013.  That  letter  states  that  the
    first day of employment will be 22nd May 2013 and that is the date upon
    which the sponsor's period of continuous employment is deemed  to  have
    commenced. That in itself does not assist the appellant,  because  what
    he has to establish is that his sponsor has been continuously  employed
    in the UK for a continuous period of five years.  Even  taking  account
    of the letter from the sponsor's employer, there remains a gap  in  the
    evidence between 2008 and May 2013.  It follows that even if the  Judge
    erred in failing to take account  of  the  letter  from  the  sponsor's
    employer in reaching her decision at paragraph [9], that failure is not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.


10. Ms Appiah, rightly in my judgment, accepts that there is still that gap
    in the evidence between 2008 and 2013 to establish that the appellant's
    sponsor resided in the UK exercising treaty  rights  for  a  continuous
    period of five years in accordance with  the  Regulations.    In  those
    circumstances, as I say, although the  Judge  does  not  refer  to  the
    evidence of the sponsor's employment since April 2013 in paragraph  [9]
    of her decision, that ommission is immaterial to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  On any view, the evidence before the Judge was such  that  the
    appellant could not establish that his sponsor had resided  in  the  UK
    exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in
    accordance with the Regulations.


11. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


