


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05252/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 12 August 2019                    |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                JOSEPHINE [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  made  by  Designated
         First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure dated 30 April 2019, in which  he
         dismissed her appeal on EEA grounds.  The  sole  issue  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') was whether the appellant's marriage to
         her  EEA  citizen  spouse  ('the  sponsor')  was  a   marriage   of
         convenience.  The FTT concluded that the marriage was  not  genuine
         and was a marriage of convenience.



Grounds of appeal / Hearing

      2. The appellant appealed against the FTT's decision relying  upon  22
         grounds of appeal,  drafted  by  AJO  solicitors.   Permission  was
         refused in comprehensive terms by Designated FTT Judge Shaerf on 31
         May  2019.   He  observed  that  the  FTT  identified   significant
         discrepancies in the evidence which remained  unchallenged  by  the
         grounds  of  appeal,  and  these  are  sufficient  to  support  the
         conclusion reached  by  the  FTT  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience.  Shorter but unenumerated renewal  grounds  of  appeal
         were submitted to the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

      3. In a decision dated 4 July 2019  Deputy  UT  Judge  Mailer  granted
         permission to appeal observing it arguable that there may have been
         errors in the FTT's findings as set out in the renewal grounds.

      4. The SSHD submitted a Rule 24 notice dated 17 July 2019 inviting the
         UT to uphold the FTT's decision.

      5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Semega-Janneh indicated that  he
         relied upon all the grounds of appeal: the 22 initial  grounds  and
         the renewal grounds.  As many of the grounds  were  repetitive  and
         overlapping, I invited Mr Semega-Janneh to focus upon his  stronger
         grounds and to place these in a consolidated document.  Mr  Semega-
         Janneh relied upon 13 reformulated written grounds  of  appeal  and
         amplified these in submissions.  I then heard  from  Mrs  Pettersen
         before reserving my decision.

Legal framework

      6. A spouse does not include a party to a marriage  of  convenience  -
         see Regulation 2 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the
         2016 Regulations').  The 2016 Regulations do not define a  marriage
         of convenience.  That, however, is set out within  the  overarching
         Article 1 of EC Council Resolution 97/C382/01 of 4  December  1997.
         That Article defines a marriage of convenience as follows:

             "A marriage concluded between a national of a member state  or
             third country national legally resident in a member state  and
             a third country national with the sole  aim  of  circumventing
             the Rules on entry and residence of  third  country  nationals
             and obtaining for  the  third  country  national  a  residence
             permit or authority to reside in the member state".

      7. It is well-known that the burden of proof of  establishing  that  a
         marriage is one of convenience rests on the Secretary of State, see
         Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC  54.
         Once the  Secretary  of  State  displaces  the  legal  burden,  the
         evidential burden then rests on the person who is alleging that the
         marriage is not one of convenience.

Error of law discussion

      8.  I  begin  by  making  general  observations  regarding  the  FTT's
         decision.

          i) The FTT focussed its attention upon the circumstances relevant
             as at the date of the parties marriage on 21 April  2018,  but
             placed this into context and in coming to  its  decision  took
             into account all the evidence -  see  [49]  and  [61]  of  the
             decision.

         ii) The FTT was fully aware of the background history relevant  to
             the relationship between the appellant  and  sponsor  and  set
             this out in detail.  This included the summary of a  visit  by
             immigration officers to the home address on 24 April 2018  and
             a summary  of  the  discrepancies  identified  at  a  marriage
             interview that took place on 12 July 2018 - see [14] to [18].

        iii) The FTT  heard  detailed  evidence  from  the  appellant,  the
             sponsor and their friend  Mr  [AE]  and  carefully  summarised
             their  evidence  in  his  decision  at  [19]  to  [31].   This
             included, inter alia, the following two significant claims: if
             the marriage was not genuine: (a) the parties would  not  have
             taken  steps  to  have  a  child  together  as  evidenced   by
             documentary evidence from Hewitt  Fertility  Centre;  (b)  the
             sponsor would not have travelled to Nigeria  (the  appellant's
             country of origin) on 17 February 2018, in order to  undertake
             the traditional marriage traditions there.

         iv) The FTT correctly directed itself to the applicable burden  of
             proof at [40] and [41].

          v) The FTT made findings of fact relevant  to  the  discrepancies
             that emerged following the immigration visit and the  marriage
             interview for the reasons provided at [50] to [60].

      9. The majority of the grounds of appeal do no more than disagree with
         the  FTT's  findings  regarding  the  discrepancies  that   emerged
         following the immigration visit and the marriage interview.  Having
         heard evidence from the parties, these findings were  open  to  the
         FTT.  Grounds 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 12 and 13 do no more than re-argue
         the case on behalf of the appellant.  Having directed itself to the
         evidence addressing the issues raised in response to the identified
         discrepancies, there was no requirement on the part of the  FTT  to
         identify and refer to every single  aspect  of  the  evidence  when
         reaching its conclusions on the discrepancies.

     10. However, grounds 5 and 8 raise discrete issues,  unrelated  to  the
         FTT's conclusions on the  discrepancies  in  the  evidence.   These
         submit that the FTT failed  to  make  any  clear  findings  on  two
         significant claims in support of the claim that  the  marriage  was
         not one of convenience.  These relate to (a) the  parties  attempts
         to conceive a child by IVF, and; (b) the  traditional  marriage  in
         Nigeria on 17 February 2018.

     11. The FTT expressly referred to documentary evidence from the  Hewitt
         Fertility Centre at [32] and [33]  when  summarising  the  evidence
         available to it and prior to making findings on the  evidence.   At
         [33] the FTT said this (my emphasis):

             "In some senses important in that respect is page 34  part  of
             the document from the Hewitt fertility Centre where the person
             stated to be providing a semen sample is  stated  to  be  [MC]
             ..."

     12. [MC] is the sponsor.  The FTT  does  not  refer  to  this  evidence
         again.  There is therefore no  clarification  as  to  why  the  FTT
         regarded this evidence important and no explanation as  to  why  it
         was not "added to the mix" when considering the parties  intentions
         when they got married.  The  marriage  in  the  UK  took  place  in
         Liverpool on 21 April 2018.  The 'instructions for  the  production
         of semen samples' letter is dated shortly after this - 1 May 2018 -
         and addressed to the sponsor.

     13. The parties claimed in their statements and oral evidence (see [20]
         of the decision) that  the  traditional  marriage  in  Nigeria  was
         clearly evidenced and it would have been unnecessary  to  undertake
         this, as the marriage at the Liverpool registry office sufficed for
         the marriage to be lawful.

     14. The evidence relevant to the parties beginning IVF and the  sponsor
         taking  part  in  traditional  marriage  customs  in   Nigeria   is
         potentially important  evidence  supporting  the  parties'  claimed
         genuine intentions in marrying each other,  yet  the  FTT  has  not
         addressed this evidence when giving its reasons.  The FTT may  well
         have considered this evidence as forming part of a deliberate  ruse
         to assist in making the marriage appear genuine.  However, it  made
         no finding in this regard.

     15. It follows that when reaching  its  ultimate  conclusion  that  the
         marriage is one of convenience the FTT omitted to take into account
         two matters capable of supporting the  appellant's  case.   I  have
         already noted that the FTT expressly stated on two  occasions  that
         it took all the evidence into account.   If,  in  the  alternative,
         these two matters were taken into account, the FTT failed  to  give
         adequate reasons why this evidence was incapable of supporting  the
         appellant's case.

     16. Although the FTT provided many other  reasons  in  support  of  its
         conclusion, it cannot be said that these  two  matters  would  have
         made no difference.  The errors of law I have identified  regarding
         these two matters therefore constitute material errors of law.

Disposal

     17. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  It  is  difficult
         to separate the FTT's approach to the discrepancies  from  the  two
         matters that it failed to take into account.  If these matters were
         considered and found to support the appellant's claim, a  different
         view might have been taken on the explanations provided by  her  in
         response to the  discrepancies.   It  follows  that  there  are  no
         preserved findings.  Fresh findings of fact are necessary and  this
         will involve detailed oral evidence and cross-examination on  wide-
         ranging matters.

Decision

     18. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     19. The appeal shall be remitted to the FTT, where the decision will be
         remade on a de novo basis by any judge other than Judge McClure.


Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer                             14 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
