
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05383/2018
                                                               HU/18779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 January 2021                          |On 15 February 2021             |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                       SACHINTHAKA RANASINGHE KORALAGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka who born on 27 July 1985, appeals
    to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated on 20 January 2020,  which  dismissed  his  appeal  against
    decisions of the Secretary of State dated 24 July 2018 and 5  September
    2018 to refuse (i) his application for a residence card  and  (ii)  his
    application to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant had leave to remain in the United Kingdom from 16 October
    2008 until 22 October 2012 and, between 22 October 2012 until  1  March
    2018, had a residence card as a family member of an EEA  national  (his
    spouse). A decree absolute  dissolving  the  appellant's  marriage  was
    issued on 22 May 2018; the divorce  petition  had  been  issued  on  23
    October 2017. The appellant claimed a right to  remain  as  the  former
    family member of an EEA national and on private  life  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds (including a claim that there exist very significant  obstacles
    to his re-integration in Sri Lanka). Before the First-tier Tribunal the
    appellant accepted that his EEA appeal could not succeed; the appellant
    could not prove that his former spouse was a qualified  person  at  the
    date of initiation of the divorce  proceedings  [54].  The  appellant's
    remaining grounds of appeal focussed on his claimed long residence  (10
    years plus) and Article 8 ECHR. He relied upon the respondent's  policy
    concerning long residence which provides that  a  period  of  residence
    which was lawful for the  purposes  of  EU  law  may  count  towards  a
    continuous period of long residence for the  purposes  of  a  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the Rules. However, the judge [69] found  that,
    from April 2016 and notwithstanding that he had a residence card  which
    did not expire until 1 March 2018, the appellant had not been  lawfully
    present under EU law. After April 2016, the judge found that it had not
    been established that the appellant's former spouse had been exercising
    Treaty Rights as a  worker  or  otherwise.  The  judge  held  that  the
    residence card had declaratory authority only;  where  evidence  showed
    that the basis upon which it had been issued no longer pertained,  then
    the card per se was insufficient to  prove  lawful  residence  for  the
    purposes of the respondent's policy.

 3. The judge's findings and his view of the law concerning residence cards
    were determinative of the appeal because, as he states  at  [82],  'the
    appellant's accepts that he cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE or in
    relation to Article 8 outside the Rules  other  than  by  reference  to
    meeting the spirit of paragraph 276B [i.e. 10 years  continuous  lawful
    residence]'.

 4. The appellant does not challenge the judge's finding at  [64]  that  he
    would not face very significant  obstacles  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    Whether the judge correctly calculated the period of continuous  lawful
    residence turns  on  domestic  and  European  jurisprudence  concerning
    residence cards. The appellant argues that the judge  failed  to  apply
    the principles of Nkrumah (OFM - annulment of residence  permit)  Ghana
    [2011] UKUT 00163 (IAC) which held that:

         9. Once residence card has been issued it retains its  validity  as
         authority to remain unless or until it expires, lapses by reason of
         prolonged absence or is revoked under regulation 20.

 5. The judge refers to Nkrumah at [16].  However,  the  appellant  submits
    that he erred by failing to follow  that  decision  of  a  Presidential
    panel of the Upper Tribunal. As a consequence, the continuous period of
    the appellant's lawful residence should have ended not  in  April  2016
    but March 2018 and  the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  was,
    therefore, based on an inaccurate factual matrix.

 6. The respondent submits that the judge  did  not  err  in  law.  On  the
    contrary, she argues that his decision is consistent with the  judgment
    of the European Court of Justice in Case C-325/09 (Dias v Secretary  of
    State for Work and Pensions). Dias was promulgated after  Nkrumah  and,
    unlike the Upper Tribunal decision, supported the First-tier Tribunal's
    opinion that residence card is of declaratory value only:

         44      Since Ms Dias' third period  of  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom was based solely on the possession of  a  residence  permit
         issued in  accordance  with  Directive  68/360,  the  present  case
         therefore makes it necessary  to  examine  whether  such  residence
         permits were declaratory in nature or whether they created rights.

         45      In that regard, Ms Dias submits  that  a  residence  permit
         issued by the government of the host Member State and not withdrawn
         by it, even though it had the possibility to  do  so,  conferred  a
         right of residence on the person concerned throughout its period of
         validity. In her view, since Directive 68/360 did not  contain  any
         provision equivalent to Article 3 of Directive 90/364, the right of
         residence recognised under Directive 68/360 and  certified  by  the
         grant of a residence permit remained in effect  until  that  permit
         expired or was withdrawn, irrespective of the fact that its  holder
         had ceased to fulfil the conditions necessary for residence.

         46      By contrast, the United Kingdom and Danish Governments  and
         the European Commission express the view that the residence  permit
         issued under Directive 68/360 was purely declaratory  and  did  not
         establish any right of residence.

         47      Ms Dias' contention cannot be accepted.

         48      As the Court has held on numerous occasions, the  right  of
         nationals of a Member State  to  enter  the  territory  of  another
         Member State and to reside there for the purposes intended  by  the
         EC Treaty is a right conferred directly by the Treaty, or,  as  the
         case may be, by the provisions adopted for its implementation.  The
         grant of a residence permit to a national of a Member State  is  to
         be regarded, not as a measure giving  rise  to  rights,  but  as  a
         measure by a Member State serving to prove the individual  position
         of a national of another Member State with regard to provisions  of
         European Union law (see Case C-408/03 Commission v  Belgium  [2006]
         ECR I-2647, paragraphs 62 and 63 and case-law cited).

         49      Such a declaratory, as opposed to a constitutive, character
         of residence permits, in regard to rights, has been acknowledged by
         the Court independently of the fact that the permit in question was
         issued pursuant to the provisions of Directive 68/360 or  Directive
         90/364 (see, to that effect, Commission v Belgium, paragraph 65).

         50      It follows that the differences between the  provisions  of
         Directives 90/364 and 68/360 cannot justify  the  contention  that,
         contrary to the principle noted in  paragraph  48  of  the  present
         judgment, residence permits issued  pursuant  to  Directive  68/360
         were capable of establishing rights for their holders.

         51      In addition, it should be borne in mind that Article  3  of
         Directive 90/364 referred, not to the permit issued  to  prove  the
         right of residence, but to the right of residence as  such  and  to
         the conditions laid down for the grant of that right. Consequently,
         no conclusion can be drawn from that provision with regard  to  the
         nature of the residence permit provided  for  in  Article  2(1)  of
         Directive 90/364, nor, a fortiori, with regard to that provided for
         in Article 4(2) of Directive 68/360.

         52      In addition, the only provision of Directive  68/360  which
         referred to the withdrawal of the residence permit, namely  Article
         7(1) of that directive, confirms the existence of an inherent  link
         between that permit and the citizen's  already  existing  right  of
         residence. Like the right of residence of a worker which,  as  with
         the status of worker itself, was not lost solely because its holder
         was no longer in employment,  either  because  he  was  temporarily
         unable to work as a result of illness or accident or because he was
         involuntarily  unemployed,  this  being  duly  confirmed   by   the
         competent employment office, that provision also did not allow  the
         valid residence permit of a worker who was in such a  situation  to
         be withdrawn.

         53      Finally, it is, admittedly, true that, with regard  to  the
         declaratory nature of residence permits, the Court has  ruled  only
         in regard to situations in which such a residence  permit  had  not
         been issued even though the Union citizen concerned  fulfilled  the
         conditions  governing  residence  in  the  host  Member  State   in
         accordance with European Union law.

         54      However, as has been pointed out in paragraphs 48 to 52  of
         the  present  judgment,  the  declaratory  character  of  residence
         permits means that  those  permits  merely  certify  that  a  right
         already exists. Consequently, just as such a declaratory  character
         means that a citizen's residence may not be  regarded  as  illegal,
         within the meaning of European Union law, solely on the ground that
         he does not hold a residence permit, it precludes a Union citizen's
         residence from being regarded  as  legal,  within  the  meaning  of
         European Union law, solely on the ground that  such  a  permit  was
         validly issued to him.

 7. I agree with the respondent that the  judgment  in  Dias  unequivocally
    supports the reasoning of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  accept  that  a
    Presidential  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be   accorded
    significant respect by the First-tier Tribunal but Nkrumah  was  not  a
    starred or country guidance decision  and  was  not,  as  a  matter  of
    procedure, binding on the First-tier Tribunal.  Moreover,  Nkrumah  was
    decided without the Upper Tribunal having the benefit of reading  Dias.
    It is worth noting that the italic headnote of Nkrumah (which  contains
    that  part  of  the  decision  which  the  panel  considered   required
    reporting) does not  include  the  passage  upon  which  the  appellant
    relies. Mr Malik drew my attention to the use by the European Court  to
    the word 'solely' at [54] of Dias ('...residence may not be regarded as
    illegal solely on  the  ground  that  he  does  not  hold  a  residence
    permit...'). He submitted that there were other factors in  the  appeal
    which affected the weight to be accorded the  public  interest  in  the
    proportionality assessment. Had the judge accepted that  the  appellant
    had enjoyed almost  10  years  of  continuous  lawful  residence  (i.e.
    October 2008 until March 2018), then he may have  accepted  Mr  Malik's
    submission that the appellant had only failed to prove  long  residence
    under the policy for a 'marginal and technical' reason.

 8. I am not persuaded that the use of the qualifying adverb  'solely'  can
    bear the significance which Mr Malik places on it. The  ratio  of  Dias
    could not be clearer and the First-tier Tribunal cannot  be  criticised
    for following it (albeit possibly coincidentally, as the judge does not
    refer to the judgment). Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal  made  its
    Article 8 ECHR assessment by reference to an accurate  factual  matrix.
    It then reached a decision on the  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  which  was
    plainly available to it. It follows that he appellant's  appeal  should
    be dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                     Date  29  January
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane














