






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06756/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2020                   |On 10 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MHB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A A Gbaja (sponsor/McKenzie Friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State 26 September 2018 refusing the appellant's application  for  a
    derivative residence card confirming that she was the primary carer  of
    a British citizen.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15 May 2019  was
    set aside following a hearing before me on 20 August 2019

Anonymity

 3. Such a direction was made previously and is repeated below because this
    appeal  concerns  minor  children,   one   of   whom   has   additional
    vulnerabilities.

Procedural Background

 4. Following the error of law hearing, directions were made which included
    that the appellant was to serve evidence of her child N's paternity and
    residence in the UK on the respondent and Upper Tribunal prior  to  the
    next hearing date.

 5. This matter was twice  adjourned  at  the  request  of  the  respondent
    pending the judgment in Patel [2019] UKSC 59. In the interim I directed
    the respondent to consider the relevance to the  instant  case  of  the
    judgment of the Administrative Court in K  [2018]  EWHC  1834  (Admin),
    regarding which the Secretary of State had withdrawn her appeal.

 6. On 9 January 2020, Ms Isherwood replied on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State and confirmed that DNA evidence had been provided showing that Mr
    Gbaja (the German national) is the father of N; that the child was also
    a German national and was not being discriminated against and  that  as
    Mr Gbaja acquired permanent residency on 11 March 2010,  with  N  being
    born on 19 April 2016, it was accepted that he met the requirements  to
    be considered British.  The remaining issues  for  the  respondent  was
    whether the appellant was the primary or joint carer of N,  the  impact
    on the child of the removal of the  appellant  and  whether  the  child
    would be compelled to leave the UK.

The hearing

 7. Mr Gbaja, the appellant's partner and father of N attended the  hearing
    as a McKenzie Friend. He was familiar with the decision in Patel and he
    explained in straightforward terms why N and indeed their younger child
    would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom if the appellant had  to
    leave. In short, N was aged 3 and had speech and language delay and his
    sibling was aged just 6 months old and was still being  breastfed.  The
    appellant is their primary carer and looks after them "24/7." Mr  Gbaja
    is studying for an LLM at the University of London and attends  classes
    on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, followed by long  sessions  in  the
    library. On Tuesdays and Thursdays, he is undertaking  work  experience
    in a Citizens Advice Bureau, providing legal advice to the  public  for
    up to 10 hours a day. He explained that if the appellant were to  leave
    the UK, he would be unable to cope with  looking  after  the  children,
    completing his studies and obtaining  legal  experience  and  therefore
    there would be no option but for the children to accompany their mother
    to Nigeria. It was not in the best interests of the children  to  leave
    the UK, particularly as N's treatment for his special  needs  would  be
    undermined.

 8. Upon hearing that evidence, much of which was supported by  documentary
    evidence Mr Tarlow stated that he was persuaded by the evidence but  as
    he was unable to change the respondent's decision,  he  invited  me  to
    "dispose" of the appeal in an efficient manner.

 9. At the end of the hearing I announced that the appeal was allowed.

Decision on remaking

10. There is no challenge by the respondent to the facts.  It is  the  case
    that the appellant's minor British citizen children will  be  compelled
    to accompany her to Nigeria should she be removed. The evidence  before
    me is that the sponsor is unable  to  care  for  them  because  of  his
    studies and  work.  Furthermore,  the  younger  child  is  still  being
    breastfed and N has special educational needs. It is overwhelmingly  in
    the best interests of the children to remain in the United Kingdom  and
    to continue to  reside  with  both  parents.  There  would  also  be  a
    detrimental impact on the children were the appellant to leave them  in
    the UK while she returned to Nigeria, given that the extent of the care
    she provides to them.

11. In the light of the judgment in Patel, the facts demonstrate  that  the
    appellant is the primary carer of both children and that she has a  far
    greater role in their lives owing to their young ages as  well  as  the
    fact that the sponsor is busy with his career for the vast majority  of
    the time.  Therefore, the children have the  relevant  relationship  of
    dependency with the appellant. The element of  compulsion  has  clearly
    been demonstrated by the fact the evidence that the children  would  be
    forced to go to Nigeria with the appellant if she were  to  be  removed
    from the UK.

12. The appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The evidence of paternity  and  compulsion  which  was  the  basis  of  this
allowed appeal, was not available to the  respondent  at  the  time  of  the
decision in question.


Signed:                             Date: 7 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

