
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06471/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2019                      |On 09 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                mr Baba Aminu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen dismissing his appeal against the decision of
    the respondent to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right of residence.

 2. The Secretary of State's case is that the marriage  is  not  a  genuine
    marriage,  that  conclusion  being  based  both  on   the   appellant's
    immigration history, which is set out at paragraph  2  of  the  judge's
    decision, and the responses to  questions  in  interviews  carried  out
    between the appellant and his wife.  There is a partial  transcript  of
    that which appears in the refusal letter although I note that a  number
    of questions are omitted.

 3. Having recorded that he had heard oral evidence from the appellant, the
    judge directed himself as follows

         "The burden of proving that the decision of the respondent was  not
         in accordance with the law and the relevant Regulations rests  upon
         the appellant.  The standard  of  that  proof  is  the  balance  of
         probabilities.  The relevant date  for  the  consideration  of  the
         evidence is for the purposes of this appeal  is  the  date  of  the
         hearing".

 4. The judge then goes on to analyse the evidence over the following pages
    although it is not at all clear what, if any, weight he attached to the
    oral evidence he had heard.  Indeed the judge appears to have forgotten
    when writing his decision that he had heard oral evidence.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in failing properly to direct himself as  to  the  burden  of
    proof which, in the case of A marriage of convenience  lies  throughout
    on the Secretary of State, following Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrew on  29  May  2019.   I
    heard brief submissions from both parties.

 7. Despite her best efforts Ms Pal was unable  to  persuade  me  that  the
    judge had, despite clearly misdirecting himself in law at paragraph 21,
    in that he failed to note that of course the burden is on the Secretary
    of State to prove a marriage of convenience, had  nonetheless  properly
    applied the correct burden.  She accepted also that it was not  evident
    whether the judge had evaluated the oral evidence or what  he  made  of
    it.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did make an error of law  in  this  case.
    There was a failure properly to set out the correct burden of proof  in
    line with Rosa and whilst that might have been  cured  had  there  been
    some other indication in the remainder of his determination that he had
    indeed applied the proper burden of proof, there is no such evidence.

 9. It is  also  worrying  that  nowhere  in  the  decision  is  there  any
    indication of the weight attached  to  the  oral  evidence.   As  noted
    earlier it is almost as though the judge forgot that it had been given.

10. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law  and  I  set  it  aside.   I  am
    satisfied that in this case given the fundamental error with regard  to
    the burden of proof and the  failure  properly  to  evaluate  the  oral
    evidence, that it will be necessary for the entire  application  to  be
    reheard and for proper findings of fact to be made.

11. In the circumstances therefore I consider that  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  it  to  be  determined
    afresh by a judge other than Judge Cohen.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
    on all issues.


Signed                                  Date 3 July 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



