
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06634/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2019                    |On 27 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               mr Yasir Hameed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, acting on behalf of Resolve Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 18 December 2018, dismissing his appeal on
         EEA grounds.  In summary, the FTT had one issue  to  determine  and
         that is whether or not the appellant's former spouse was exercising
         treaty rights at the time that divorce proceedings  were  initiated
         in October 2017.





Background

      2. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   His  ex-wife  is  of
         Pakistani background but was born  in  the  Netherlands  and  is  a
         citizen of that country.  She is therefore an EEA citizen but  also
         holds Pakistani citizenship by descent.  The appellant has  claimed
         that they lived together until his wife left him in  around  August
         2016, albeit that he did not  initiate  divorce  proceedings  until
         October 2017.  The appellant claimed that up until  the  point  his
         wife left him she had been living and  working  in  around  Burnley
         and/or Nelson, but after that he was unaware as to whether she  was
         working although he believed that  she  was  working  from  various
         sources.

Representation

      3. The appellant has been represented by Mr Malik  who  has  described
         himself as an immigration consultant working on behalf  of  Resolve
         Solicitors.  The notice that falls to be completed as a  matter  of
         course before the Tribunal, that is the notice under section 84  of
         the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, was unclear.   Multiple  boxes
         were ticked.  I therefore asked Mr Malik to clarify the basis  upon
         which he was providing  immigration  services.   He  was  given  an
         opportunity to reflect and to speak with Resolve Solicitors.  After
         some time he corrected the form to tick the box that he was  acting
         on behalf of or under the supervision of a person who falls  within
         the box ticked above.  He also provided by way of  email  a  letter
         from Resolve Solicitors dated 12 August 2019 which says this:

             "We write further to above matter and confirm  that  Mr  Rafiq
             Malik is working with us as a immigration  consultant  and  is
             authorised to appear on our behalf with the Tribunal.   Please
             don't hesitate to contact us if  any  further  information  is
             required."

      4. Having been provided with that letter and having no  reason  to  go
         behind the assertion within the letter that Mr Malik was acting  on
         behalf of a solicitor at Resolve Solicitors, namely a Habat Ranjha,
         I agreed for him to continue to represent the  appellant  in  these
         proceedings.  I simply note on this occasion it is  not  altogether
         clear the extent to which Mr  Malik  is  being  supervised  by  any
         solicitor at Resolve Solicitors and the extent to which he has been
         acting on behalf of those solicitors, but given the contents of the
         letter and for the purposes of this hearing, I was content for  him
         to proceed as a representative.

FTT decision

      5. In a carefully drafted and comprehensive decision, FTT Judge  Tully
         explained the manner in which the hearing came before her:  it  was
         listed on the float list and as such did not  start  until  2.25pm.
         Judge Tully  noted  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  the
         appellant's representative, Mr Malik, confirmed that he  was  ready
         to proceed.  It was only after the evidence had been completed  and
         toward the end of Mr Malik's submissions that he indicated that  he
         wished for there to be an Amos direction.  Judge Tully  refused  to
         consider the  application  at  that  late  stage  and  went  on  to
         determine the  appeal  on  its  substantive  merits.   Judge  Tully
         directed herself to the relevant law as set  out  in  Amos  v  SSHD
         [2011] EWCA Civ 552 and in Baigazieva v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1088.



      6. Judge Tully correctly accepted that the relevant date in dispute as
         to whether or not the former spouse was  exercising  treaty  rights
         was the date of the initiation of the divorce proceedings, that  is
         October 2017.  She then proceeded to give reasons as to why in  her
         judgment, having considered oral evidence as  well  as  documentary
         evidence, she was not satisfied that the ex-spouse  was  exercising
         treaty rights at that stage.   She  referred  specifically  to  the
         evidence provided by Mr Rizwan Hamid, the letter from  Star  Print,
         the oral evidence as well as the  other  more  general  documentary
         evidence.  Judge Tully reminded herself that the  burden  of  proof
         rested upon the appellant and did not accept, given the paucity  of
         the evidence before her, that he had established  that  his  former
         wife was exercising treaty rights as at the date of the  initiation
         of the divorce.  She also  queried  whether  there  was  sufficient
         evidence  as  to  the  appellant's  own  work  history,  which  she
         considered  to  be  confusing  and  vague.   Judge  Tully   however
         concluded that given her  findings  regarding  the  ex-wife's  work
         history, it  was  immaterial  to  establish  the  appellant's  work
         history.

Hearing

      7. At the hearing Mr Malik relied upon the three grounds of appeal  in
         relation to which permission had been granted.  The first and third
         grounds are linked.  They submit that  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in
         failing to accede to the request for an Amos direction as  well  as
         failing to deal with the application that the  Secretary  of  State
         should have provided the evidence to support their  assertion  that
         inter-agency checks confirmed that the ex-spouse had no  record  as
         being either employed or self-employed after September 2016 in  the
         UK.   The second ground submitted that the FTT erred in refusing to
         accept as credible the evidence provided by  Star  Print  regarding
         the ex-spouse's claimed employment, for the period 1 September 2017
         to 10 January 2018.

      8. Judge O'Callaghan granted permission to appeal in a decision  dated
         1 March 2019 and made the following observation:

             "I remind myself that the hurdle as to arguable is low.  It is
             arguable that  contrary  to  the  position  stated  at  4  the
             appellant had sought an order at the hearing.  See  section  B
             of the hearing  information  form  for  float  cases.   It  is
             therefore arguable that by not considering the application the
             judge did not seek to establish whether the appellant had made
             a reasonable effort to obtain the required details as  at  the
             date of hearing.  The  Upper  Tribunal  will  expect  evidence
             identifying such efforts to be filed and served prior  to  the
             hearing."

      9. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the grounds of  appeal  had  not  been
         made out and that the FTT had given adequate reasons for taking the
         approach that it did.  Mrs Pettersen  also  reminded  the  Tribunal
         that if an Amos direction continued to be sought in this case there
         was nothing to prevent  the  appellant  from  making  a  fresh  EEA
         application during the course of which an Amos application could be
         made.

Error of law discussion

Grounds 1 and 3

     10. As I have already indicated these grounds are  linked  and  can  be
         taken together.  I deal firstly with the  Amos  application  point.
         It is helpful to summarise the  procedural  history  regarding  the
         Amos application.  In a letter sent to the FTT and received  on  15
         November 2018, Resolve Solicitors submitted that it would be in the
         interests of justice and in order to narrow  the  issues,  for  the
         Tribunal to issue directions to the Home Office in order to  obtain
         the ex-spouse's employment history from  the  HMRC  for  the  three
         years before the appellant  initiated  divorce  proceedings.   That
         application was refused by a Tribunal  caseworker  on  19  November
         2018.  The Tribunal caseworker observed this:

             "The appellant has not evidenced that  reasonable  steps  have
             been taken to obtain his former spouse's employment history."

     11. The matter remained in the list for  4  December  2018.   Mr  Malik
         completed a 'hearing information  form  for  float  cases'  on  the
         morning of the hearing.  This contains the following at section  B:



             "The Home Office have not provided the documents they received
             from HMRC or WP or national insurance  agency  on  which  they
             relied to send the refusal letter."

         There is no reference within  the  'hearing  information  form  for
         float cases' to a renewed request for the Tribunal to issue an Amos
         direction.  The  only  matter  that  is  referred  to  within  that
         'hearing information form for float cases' is  a  request  for  the
         inter-agency evidence referred to by the respondent in his decision
         letter.

     12. It follows that when Judge Tully said that there was no application
         for an Amos direction until the very end of Mr Malik's  submissions
         she was correct to summarise the history in that manner.  Whilst an
         application had been made on the papers, it  was  rejected.   There
         was no renewal of that application either before 4 December 2018 or
         within the hearing information form  for  float  cases  or  at  the
         beginning of the hearing.  It is  to  be  expected  that  where  an
         appellant or his representative seeks a direction from the Tribunal
         that has previously been rejected, that that representative  should
         make a renewed application.  That was not done until it was far too
         late to do so and in rejecting the application for a  direction  on
         this basis, the FTT has not made any error of law.

     13. I now turn to the matter relating to the request  for  inter-agency
         checks.  The decision letter in this case says this in relation  to
         the evidence provided as to the ex-spouse's employment:

             "Due to concerns over the quality of  the  documents  provided
             this department conducted inter-agency checks in order to gain
             an accurate record  of  your  sponsor's  employment  or  self-
             employment in the UK.  Our checks revealed that  your  sponsor
             has had no record as an employed or  self-employed  person  in
             the UK after September 2016 suggesting she may not  have  even
             been resident in the UK during this period.  As a result there
             is no evidence of your sponsor exercising treaty rights in the
             UK at the time of your divorce in April 2018."

     14. The FTT said this in relation to inter-agency checks:

             "24. The respondent says in the  decision  that  he  has  made
                  enquiries with HMRC and there is no record  that  she  has
                  made  tax  or  national  insurance   contributions   after
                  September 2016.  It is not helpful that the respondent did
                  not produce evidence of the checks that they received from
                  HMRC and the respondent's representative could provide  no
                  explanation for the  omission  of  this  evidence  in  the
                  bundle.

             25.  However I remind myself to the burden of proof is on  the
                  appellant.  I do not accept given the paucity of  evidence
                  before me that he has established that his former wife was
                  exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce."

     15. It is clear that the FTT was aware that the appellant was concerned
         at the absence of evidence to support the contention that  the  ex-
         wife had not been working at the time  of  the  initiation  of  the
         divorce.  However this must be seen in context.  This is not a case
         where the respondent was relying about specific  information,  that
         provided figures or referred to dates or numbers.   The  respondent
         in this case was relying upon an absence of evidence.  The  absence
         of evidence was made clear in the decision letter well  in  advance
         of the hearing and the appellant was therefore  under  notice  that
         that evidence was not forthcoming from the inter-agency check.  The
         appellant as a result of that sought to  obtain  his  own  evidence
         regarding his ex-spouse's employment.  That  evidence  was  varied.
         It included evidence from  a  live  witness,  Mr  Hamid,  who  gave
         evidence that he believed that the ex-wife was  working.   It  also
         included evidence in the form of a letter  from  Star  Print,  oral
         evidence from the appellant and his brother and  other  documentary
         evidence.  The FTT considered all of that evidence in  considerable
         detail and was entitled to reject it for the reasons provided - see
         [18] to [25] of the FTT's decision.  It follows that in  concluding
         that there was a paucity of evidence such that  the  appellant  had
         not displaced the burden of proof, the FTT has acted  lawfully  and
         in accordance with the evidence available to it.

Ground 2

     16. This turns on the letter provided by Star Print dated  20  November
         2018.  This purports to confirm that the ex-spouse worked  at  Star
         Print, gave her address, date of birth and hours of work.  The  FTT
         considered this evidence very  carefully  indeed  at  [20]  of  its
         decision.  It observed that the document is of  poor  quality,  the
         signature is not an original signature, the writer  of  the  letter
         did not attend to give oral evidence and  the  address  within  the
         letter appeared to be inconsistent with the chronology provided  by
         the appellant.

     17. Given that summary as set  out  in  more  detail  at  [20]  of  the
         decision the FTT was entitled to attach no weight  to  the  letter.
         In all the circumstances, the FTT has not acted unlawfully in doing
         so.

Conclusion

     18. The three grounds of appeal are not made out.  The FTT has  reached
         a lawful decision on the evidence before it.  The FTT has not acted
         unfairly bearing in mind the particular procedural history  of  the
         case and the manner in which the applications were made.

Decision

     19. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not  set
         it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 21 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
