
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06151/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                             AMANDA DIANN CORBIT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Simon Barr, Simon Barr Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a Canadian national, has been granted  permission
    to appeal the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  who
    dismissed her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated  5
    July 2018 refusing her  application  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 for an EEA residence card.   The  judge
    observed that the appellant and a Mr Fox  had  moved  to  Cork  in  the
    Republic of Ireland in January 2015, where he obtained bar  work.   She
    had previously been to a teacher's college in Glasgow and had moved  to
    London to work as a teacher for two years on a work permit.   They  had
    been together in Canada previously.  They married in Cork in June 2015.
     The appellant gave evidence where the couple had lived in the Republic
    of Ireland where she had undertaken childminding work.  They moved back
    to the United Kingdom on 27 November 2015.

 2. After directing himself in relation to  a  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Justice in O & B v the Netherlands and a decision of the Inner House AA
    v the Secretary of State [2017] CSIH 38 the judge reached the following
    conclusions:

         "50. I am not persuaded, on a consideration of the entirety of  the
             evidence, that this couple's move from Canada to  Ireland  was
             anything other than to circumvent the consequences of Mr Fox's
             leave in Canada coming to an end and his inability to have his
             partner, and now wife, join him in the United Kingdom  because
             of the unattainable income threshold.  She  candidly  admitted
             this was a problem for them.

         51.  Their evidence of the  research  they  carried  out  prior  to
             migrating to Ireland was somewhat  in  conflict.   Mrs  Corbit
             said they had investigated but Mr Fox was less sure.

         52.  Neither party has had any previous  connection  with  Ireland.
             Mrs Corbit had gone there on holiday when a student.   Neither
             had any family there.  That in itself does not  give  rise  to
             any suspicion per se, but in the context of  the  entirety  of
             the evidence does not support their claim that this was a bona
             fide intention to establish themselves  in  Ireland  with  any
             degree of permanence.

         53.  Their evidence was in conflict on the availability of work  in
             the United Kingdom.  Mr Fox said his type of work presented no
             difficulties, and that in my  judgement  it  manifestly  true.
             Bar work is ubiquitous throughout the British Isles.  Its  low
             skilled nature and their lack of preplanning  does  not  again
             persuade  me  that  there  was  any  intention  to   establish
             themselves in Ireland or any real concern on their part  about
             obtaining  work  elsewhere;  the  primary  issue   being   the
             immigration objective.  The explanation  that  they  moved  to
             Northern Ireland because the type  of  work  was  seasonal  is
             again implausible and easily  anticipated  by  someone  in  Mr
             Fox's position.  He did not deny that alternative  work  could
             have been obtained when the work at the boutique hotel  ended,
             but that what was available was unattractive.

         54.  The parties were vague in  regard  to  the  childminding  work
             undertaken by Mrs Corbit.   There  is  no  evidence  that  she
             sought work commensurate with her qualifications or  that  her
             inability to speak Irish was a bar to obtaining employment, if
             not as a teacher, then in some  capacity  that  reflected  her
             ability as a university  graduate  with  teaching  experience.
             Someone in her position would be well used to preparing  a  CV
             and approaching the task of getting work in a purposeful  way,
             such that the Tribunal can  fairly  conclude  that  they  were
             indeed making Ireland their home.

         55.  The length of the parties' joint residence  in  Ireland  -  no
             more than eight  months  -  is  again  a  relevant  factor  in
             determining whether their move was genuine.  Neither does that
             short  stay  persuade  me  that  there  could  have  been  any
             meaningful integration in Ireland during the eight months.  It
             is also worth noting that Mrs Corbit's first lawful  residence
             in the EU with her British spouse was when  she  obtained  the
             registration certificate in Ireland.

         56.  In the result, I find she has not proved that her presence  in
             the Republic of Ireland was  "sufficiently  genuine"  applying
             the above test in regard to permanence, continuity or at least
             expectation of continuity, to amount to residence  within  the
             ordinary meaning of the word."

    And thus dismissed the appeal.

 3. The grounds of challenge argue that no weight had  been  given  to  the
    qualitative effect of the appellant marrying  his  sponsor  during  the
    period  of  residence  and   thus   strengthening   the   relationship.
    Furthermore, the concern is expressed that the judge had  not  referred
    to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v  Christy  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 2378.  Although not clearly argued in the form of a  submission  it
    is contended that it was not proper to usurp the authority's  decision-
    making role with reference to Akrich Case C-109/01 [2003].  The grounds
    conclude with the argument that the judge had failed  to  give  reasons
    for not following the caselaw presented to him.

 4. In granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes
    explained that the grounds asserted the judge erred  by  not  correctly
    applying the caselaw.   He considered there was  little  he  needed  or
    could say and that the grounds were arguable.

 5.  Since the decision of First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    given guidance on the approach to be taken with reference to regulation
    9 and an allegation of abuse of rights.  ZA (Reg 9 EEA Regs;  abuse  of
    rights) Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 281 (IAC) explains:

         "(i) The requirement to have transferred the centre of  one's  life
             to the host member state is not a requirement of EU  law,  nor
             is it endorsed by the CJEU.

         (ii) Where an EU national of one state ("the home  members  state")
             has exercised the right of freedom of movement to take up self-
             employment in another EU  state  the  host  state  ("the  host
             state") his or her family members have a derivative  right  to
             enter the member state if the exercise of Treaty rights in the
             host state was "genuine"  in  the  sense  that  it  was  real,
             substantive and effective.  It is for  an  appellant  to  show
             that there had been a genuine exercise of Treaty rights.

         (iii)    The question of whether family life was established and/or
             strengthened and whether there has been a genuine exercise  of
             Treaty rights requires a qualitative assessment which will  be
             fact-specific and will need to bear in mind the following:

             (1)  Any work or self-employment must have been  "genuine  and
                  effective" and not marginal or ancillary;

             (2)  The assessment of whether a stay in the  host  state  was
                  genuine does not involve an assessment of  the  intentions
                  of the parties over and above a consideration  of  whether
                  what they intended to do was in fact  to  exercise  Treaty
                  rights;

             (3)  There is no requirement for the EU national or his family
                  to have integrated into the host member state, nor for the
                  sole place of residence to be in the host state; there  is
                  no requirement to have severed ties with the  home  member
                  state; albeit that these factors may, to a limited degree,
                  be relevant to the qualitative assessment of  whether  the
                  exercise of Treaty rights was genuine.

         (iv) If it is alleged that the stay in the host  member  state  was
             such that reg. 9(4) applies, the burden is on the Secretary of
             State to show that there an abuse of rights."

 6. With commendable candour Ms Pettersen accepts that the judge  took  the
    wrong approach in his decision in focusing on  the  intentions  of  the
    parties and that the decision is tainted by error of law.   Accordingly
    the decision is set aside.

 7. The issues to be addressed are those captured in the guidance given  in
    ZA and it is for the appellant to demonstrate that  the  employment  of
    which he gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  genuine  and
    effective and not marginal or ancillary.  Until that is resolved it  is
    not possible for the appellant to rely on the exercise of treaty rights
    nor can there be engagement with any allegation  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that there has been an abuse of those rights.   The  judge  noted
    the history on employment on which he received evidence but he did  not
    consider whether the aggregate income during the period of stay in Cork
    was sufficient to engage free movement rights.  This case needs  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for its  further  consideration  of
    this issue, and the further issue of genuineness  of  the  exercise  of
    those rights raised by the Secretary of State in  the  decision  letter
    dated 5 July 2018.

 8. By way of conclusion therefore the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside for error of law and the case remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for its further consideration by a different judge.


Signed                                  Date 11 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
