
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06021/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 April 2019                     |On 24 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                             ARSLAN SARFRAZ BUTT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms R. Moffatt, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This decision considers whether the  phrase  "a  relative  of  an  EEA
    national" contained  in  regulation  8  of  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016"),  and  the
    respondent's policy on "Free Movement Rights: extended  family  members
    of EEA nationals" conform with European Union law.

2.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 23 August  2018
    to refuse to issue a residence card recognising a right of residence as
    an extended family member of an EEA national. The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  regulation  8
    because he was related to the EEA national's spouse  and  not  the  EEA
    national. He noted that the appellant was previously issued with an EEA
    family permit on 24 December 2017 but asserted that it  was  issued  in
    error under the EEA Regulations 2016.

3.    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Loughridge  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 31 January 2019.  The  judge  noted
    that  the  respondent  "accepts  that  the  dependency  and   household
    requirements are met" and that "the sole  issue  for  me  to  determine
    requires an interpretation of the 2016 Regulations  against  an  agreed
    factual background."  The judge noted that  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006") defined an
    extended family member under regulation 8(2) as "a relative of  an  EEA
    national, his spouse or his civil partner".

4.    In contrast, the judge found that  the  EEA  Regulations  2016,  which
    came into force on 01 February 2017 only refer to a "relative of an EEA
    national". He observed that this appeared to be a deliberate change  in
    the regulations, which was borne out by the provision  of  transitional
    provisions in regulation 8(7) for those issued with family  permits  or
    residence cards as extended family members  prior  to  the  regulations
    coming into force. Regulation 8(7) allowed someone to  continue  to  be
    treated as an  extended  family  member  even  though  they  would  not
    otherwise meet the new definition in  the  EEA  Regulations  2016.  The
    judge found that the appellant did not  come  within  the  transitional
    provision because the family permit was issued after 01 February 2017.

5.    The appellant argued that the term "relative"  included  relatives  by
    marriage. The judge accepted that  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  do  not
    define the term. He concluded that, if the term were  read  to  include
    relatives through marriage it would render regulation 8(7) meaningless.
    For this reason, he concluded that the term "relative" must be read  to
    mean only blood relatives. He noted that Lord Boyd rejected  a  similar
    argument in a case before the Outer House, Court of  Session  in  Singh
    [2018] CSOH 96.

6.    The judge  rejected  the  appellant's  alternative  argument  that  he
    should succeed under regulation 7(3) without reference to regulation 8.
    He found that regulation 7(3) still required the  person  to  meet  the
    requirements of regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5). He concluded that the
    appellant could not satisfy the definition of 'extended family  member'
    outlined in regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations 2016 because "he  is
    not in the category of individuals covered by that  statutory  regime".
    In  addressing  the  appellant's  argument  relating  to  the  Citizens
    Directive (2004/38/EC) the judge made the following finding:

         "16.      Finally,  I  will  comment  briefly  on   Mrs   Hodgson's
             submission that the 2016 Regulations to not properly implement
             the  underlying  Directive  i.e.   Directive   2004/38   ("the
             Directive"). This submission fails because the distinction  in
             the 2016 Regulations between relatives of an EEA national  and
             relatives of the spouse or civil partner of an EEA national is
             in my view within  the  margin  of  appreciation  afforded  to
             contracting states. Recital 6 in the preamble to the Directive
             refers to Members States  examining  the  situation  of  those
             person who are  not  included  in  the  definition  of  family
             members and deciding whether entry  and  residence  should  be
             granted  to  such  persons  taking  into  consideration  their
             relationship with the EEA citizen or any  other  circumstances
             such as  their  financial  or  physical  dependence  upon  the
             citizen; and the reference  in  Article  3  to  "other  family
             members" means members of the  EEA  citizen's  family,  rather
             than members of the family of an EEA citizen's spouse or civil
             partner. Overall, the revised  and  slightly  narrower  scheme
             within the 2016 Regulations is  not  inconsistent/incompatible
             with the obligations on Member  States  contained  within  the
             Directive."

7.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

    (i)    The judge erred in his interpretation of regulation 8 of the EEA
         Regulations 2016.

    (ii)   The judge erred in finding that his interpretation  of  the  EEA
         Regulations 2016 conformed with EU law.

    (iii)  The judge failed to apply a correct interpretation of EU law  in
         view of the "defective transposition" contained in regulation 8 and
         the respondent's policy relating to the definition of 'other family
         members' of an EEA national.

8.    Prior to the hearing, the Upper Tribunal asked the parties to  clarify
    whether it had jurisdiction. The decision letter dated 23  August  2018
    refused the application with reference to regulation 8. At the date  of
    the decision, the definition of an appealable "EEA decision" in the EEA
    Regulations 2016 excluded a decision to refuse a residence card  to  an
    extended family member. However, the decision letter  stated  that  the
    appellant had a right of appeal. At the  hearing,  the  parties  agreed
    that the Upper Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear the  appeal.  Although
    the decision letter  asserted  that  the  previous  family  permit  was
    "issued in error" there was no evidence to suggest that it was revoked.
    By operation of regulation 7(3) the appellant was treated as  a  family
    member for the  purpose  of  the  application  for  a  residence  card.
    Regulation 18(1) applied because regulation 17(4) specifically excluded
    extended  family  members  falling  within  regulation  7(3).  Although
    neither party was able to provide us with  a  copy  of  the  notice  of
    decision, we were satisfied, in any event, that the decision letter met
    the substantive requirements of The Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations
    2003.

Legal framework

The Citizens Directive

9.    Recitals 5 and 6 of the  Directive  say  the  following  about  family
    members.

          5) The right of all Union citizens  to  move  and  reside  freely
             within the territory of the Member States should, if it is  to
             be  exercised  under  objective  conditions  of  freedom   and
             dignity, be also granted to their family members, irrespective
             of nationality.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Directive,  the
             definition  of  'family  member'  should  also   include   the
             registered partner if the legislation of the host Member State
             treats registered partnership as equivalent to marriage.

          6) In order to maintain the unity of  the  family  in  a  broader
             sense  and   without   prejudice   to   the   prohibition   of
             discrimination on grounds of  nationality,  the  situation  of
             those persons who are not included in the definition of family
             members under this Directive, and who therefore do  not  enjoy
             an automatic right of entry and residence in the  host  Member
             State, should be examined by the  host  Member  State  on  the
             basis of its own national  legislation,  in  order  to  decide
             whether entry and residence could be granted to such  persons,
             taking into consideration their relationship  with  the  Union
             citizen or any other circumstances, such as their financial or
             physical dependence on the Union citizen.

10.   Article 2 sets out the following definitions.

         For the purposes of this Directive:

         1. 'Union citizen' means any person having  the  nationality  of  a
             Member State;

         2. 'family member' means:

             (a) the spouse;

             (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has  contracted  a
                  registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of
                  a Member State, if the  legislation  of  the  host  Member
                  State treats  registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                  marriage and in accordance with the conditions  laid  down
                  in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;

             (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or  are
                  dependants and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined
                  in point (b);

             (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending  line  and
                  those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

         3. 'host Member State' means the Member  State  to  which  a  Union
             citizen moves in order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
             movement and residence.

11.   Article 3 provides.

         1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to  or
             reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are  a
             national, and to their family members as defined in point 2 of
             Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2. Without prejudice to any right to free  movement  and  residence
             the persons concerned may have in their own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:

             (a)  any  other  family   members,   irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or
                  where serious health grounds strictly require the personal
                  care of the family member by the Union citizen;

             (b) the partner with whom the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                  relationship, duly attested.

             The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination
             of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial  of
             entry or residence to these people.

The EEA Regulations 2016

12.   Although it has been  subject  to  recent  amendment  by  way  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area Nationals)  (EU  Exit)  Regulations
    2019 (28 March 2019), at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,
    regulation 7 of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  contained  the  following
    provisions relating to 'family  members'  of  EEA  nationals  [emphasis
    added].

         (1)      In these Regulations, "family member" means,  in  relation
             to a person ("A")-

             (a) A's spouse or civil partner;

             (b) A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants  of  A's
                  spouse or civil partner who are either-

                  (i)  aged under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of A, or of A's spouse or civil partner;

             (c) dependent direct relatives in A's ascending  line,  or  in
                  that of A's spouse or civil partner.

         (2)      Where A is  a  student  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
             otherwise  than  under  regulation  13   (initial   right   of
             residence), a person  is  not  a  family  member  of  A  under
             paragraph (1)(b) or (c) unless-

             (a) in the  case  of  paragraph  (1)(b),  the  person  is  the
                  dependent child of A or of A's spouse or civil partner; or

             (b) A also  falls  within  one  of  the  other  categories  of
                  qualified person mentioned in regulation 6(1).

         (3)      A person ("B") who is an extended family  member  and  has
             been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a   registration
             certificate or a residence card must be treated  as  a  family
             member of A, provided-

             (a) B continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation  8(2),
                  (3), (4) or (5); and

             (b)  the  EEA  family  permit,  registration  certificate   or
                  residence card remains in force.

         (4)      A must be an EEA  national  unless  regulation  9  applies
             (family members of British citizens).

13.   Regulation 8 stated the following  in  relation  to  'extended  family
    members' of EEA nationals [emphasis added].

         (1)      In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
             person who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under
             regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies  a  condition
             in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2)      The condition in this paragraph is that the person is-

             (a) a relative of an EEA national; and

             (b) residing in a country other than the United Kingdom and is
                  dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of the  EEA
                  national's household; and either-

                  (i)  is  accompanying  the  EEA  national  to  the  United
                      Kingdom or wants to join  the  EEA  national  in  the
                      United Kingdom; or

                  (ii) has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                      continues to be dependent upon the EEA  national,  or
                      to be a member of the EEA national's household.

         (3)      The condition in this paragraph is that the  person  is  a
             relative of an EEA national and  on  serious  health  grounds,
             strictly requires the personal care of the EEA national.

         (4)      The condition in this paragraph is that the  person  is  a
             relative of an EEA national and would meet the requirements in
             the immigration rules (other  than  those  relating  to  entry
             clearance) for indefinite leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national.

         (5)      The condition in this paragraph is that the person is  the
             partner (other than a civil partner)  of,  and  in  a  durable
             relationship with, an EEA national, and is able to prove  this
             to the decision maker.

         (6)      In these Regulations, "relevant EEA  national"  means,  in
             relation to an extended family member-

             (a) referred to in paragraph (2), (3) or (4), the EEA national
                  to whom the extended family member is related;

             (b) referred to in paragraph (5), the EEA national who is  the
                  durable partner of the extended family member.

         (7)      In paragraphs (2) and (3), "relative of an  EEA  national"
             includes a relative of the spouse or civil partner of  an  EEA
             national where on the basis of being an extended family member
             a person-

             (a) has prior to the 1st February 2017 been issued with-

                  (i)  an EEA family permit;

                  (ii) a registration certificate; or

                  (iii)      a residence card; and

             (b) has since the most recent issue of a  document  satisfying
                  sub-paragraph (a) been continuously resident in the United
                  Kingdom.

The Home Office policy

14.   The relevant policy guidance applied by the respondent at the date  of
    the decision, which was in force at the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing, was "Free Movement Rights:  extended  family  members  of  EEA
    nationals (Version 6.0) published for Home  Office  staff  on  08  June
    2018. The relevant part of the guidance was as follows.

         Definition of extended family member

         Regulation 8 defines an extended family member as a person  who  is
         not a family member of an EEA national  under  regulation  7(1)(a),
         (b) or (c) and who is either:

           . a relative of an EEA national who is  residing  in  a  country
             other than the UK and is dependent on the EEA national

           . is a member of their household and either:

             o   is accompanying the EEA national to the UK  or  wishes  to
                  join them

             o   has joined them in the UK and continues to be dependent on
                  them or to be a member of their household

           . a relative of  an  EEA  national  who  strictly  requires  the
             personal care of  the  EEA  national  due  to  serious  health
             grounds

           . a relative of an EEA national who would meet the  requirements
             of the Immigration Rules for indefinite leave to remain (other
             than  those  relating  to  entry  clearance)  as  a  dependent
             relative of an EEA national as  if  the  EEA  national  was  a
             person present and settled in the UK

           . the partner (other than a civil partner) of  an  EEA  national
             who can prove they are in a durable relationship with the  EEA
             national

         There is no limit on the distance of the relationship  between  the
         EEA national and the extended family member as  long  as  they  can
         provide valid proof of the relationship between them.

         From 1 February 2017 the rights of  extended  family  members  only
         applies to relatives of the EEA national and not  to  relatives  of
         the EEA national's spouse or civil  partner.  This  means  that  an
         extended family member can no longer rely on their relationship  to
         the EEA national's spouse or civil partner in  order  to  meet  the
         requirements of regulation 8. Instead, they must show that they are
         related to the EEA national.

         Transitional arrangements

         In order not to  disadvantage  applicants  who  have  already  been
         issued documentation on the basis that they are the relative of  an
         EEA national's spouse or civil partner, an extended  family  member
         can continue to be regarded as the relative of  an  EEA  national's
         spouse or civil partner where:

           . prior to 1 February 2017, they have been issued with either:

             o   an EEA family permit

             o   a registration certificate o a residence card

           . they have been continuously resident in the UK, since the most
             recent issue of one of the above documents

         For example, an extended family member submits an application for a
         permanent residence card on 1 April  2017.  They  provide  evidence
         they were issued a residence card in May 2012 which is valid  until
         May 2017 on the basis they are the relative of the spouse of an EEA
         national. They provide evidence that they remain dependent  on  the
         spouse, and that they continue to meet all  other  requirements  of
         the regulations. In these circumstances, you can issue a  permanent
         residence card.

         Definition of relative

         The term 'relative' includes:

         .  brothers

         .  sisters

         .  aunts

         .  uncles

         .  cousins

         .  nieces

         .  nephews

         This list is not complete. You can also include  those  related  by
         marriage to the EEA national and further generations of  the  above
         relatives such as great-aunts, great- nephews and  second  cousins.
         Since 11 February 2016 an applicant  related  by  marriage  to  the
         spouse of an EEA national who has not previously been  issued  with
         documentation under the regulations is not considered  an  extended
         family member.

         Rights of an extended family member

         Extended family members do not have automatic rights to  enter  and
         reside in the UK. Under regulation 7(3) of the 2016 regulations, an
         extended family member has the  same  rights  as  a  direct  family
         member. They must continue to satisfy the conditions of  regulation
         8 and have been issued with one of the  following  documents  which
         remains in force:

           . an EEA family permit

           . a registration certificate

           . a residence card

           . a permanent residence card

           . a document certifying permanent residence

Case law

15.   In British Gas Trading Ltd v Lock and Anor [2016] 1 CMLR 25 the  Court
    of  Appeal  reviewed  relevant  case  law   relating   to   'conforming
    interpretation' of EU and human rights  law  and  considered  the  core
    principles outlined in Marleasing S.A v LA Commercial Internacional  de
    Alimentacion S.A. [1992] 1 CMLR 305,  Ghaidan  v  Godin-Mendoza  [2004]
    UKHL 30, Vodafone 2 v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2009] EWCA Civ
    446 and Swift (trading as A Swift Move) v Robertson [2014] 1 WLFR 3438.



16.   In Vodafone 2  the  Court  of  Appeal  approved  the  summary  of  the
    principles of conforming interpretation prepared  by  counsel  for  the
    HMRC.

         "37.  ...

         "In summary, the obligation on the English courts to construe
         domestic legislation consistently with Community law obligations is
         both broad and far-reaching. In particular: (a) it is not
         constrained by conventional rules of construction (per Lord Oliver
         of Aylmerton in the Pickstone case, at p. 126B); it does not
         require ambiguity in the legislative language (per Lord Oliver in
         the Pickstone case, at p. 126B and Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in
         Ghaidan's case, at para 32); (c) it is not an exercise in semantics
         or linguistics (per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at paras 31
         and 35; per Lord Steyn, at paras 48-49; per Lord Rodger of
         Earlsferry, at paras 110-115); (d) it permits departure from the
         strict and literal application of the words which the legislature
         has elected to use (per Lord Oliver in the Litster case, at p 577A;
         per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at para 31); (e) it permits
         the implication of words necessary to comply with Community law
         obligations (per Lord Templeman in the Pickstone case, at pp 120H-
         121A; per Lord Oliver in the Litster case, at p 577A); and (f) the
         precise form of the words to be implied does not matter (per Lord
         Keith of Kinkel in the Pickstone case, at p 112D; per Lord Rodger
         in Ghaidan's case, at para 122; per Arden LJ in the IDT Card
         Services case, at para 114)

         ...

         "The only constraints on the broad and far-reaching nature of the
         interpretative obligation are that: (a) the meaning should 'go with
         the grain of the legislation' and be compatible with the underlying
         thrust of the legislation being construed': see per Lord Nicholls
         in Ghaidan v. Godin-Medoza [2004] 2 AC 557, para 53; Dyson LJ in
         Revenue and Customs v. EB Central Services Ltd [2008] STC 2209,
         para 81. An interpretation should not be adopted which is
         inconsistent with a fundamental or cardinal feature of the
         legislation since this would cross the boundary between
         interpretation and amendment (see per Lord Nicholls, at para 33,
         Lord Rodger, at paras 110-113 in Ghaidan's case; per Arden LJ in R
         (IDT Card Services Ireland Ltd) v. Customs and Excise Comrs [2006]
         STC 1252, paras 82 and 113); and (b) the exercise of the
         interpretative obligation cannot require the courts to make
         decisions for which they are not equipped or give rise to important
         practical repercussions which the court is not equipped to
         evaluate: see the Ghaidan case, per Lord Nicholls, at para 33; per
         Lord Rodger, at para 115; per Arden LJ in the IDT Card Services
         case, at para 113.'"

17.   In Swift the Supreme Court considered the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union ("CJEU") decision  in  Schulte  v  Seutche  Bausparkasse
    Badenia AG (Case C-350/03) [2003] All ER (EC) 420, which summarised the
    core interpretative principle as follows.

         "When hearing a case between individuals,  the  national  court  is
         required, when applying the provisions of domestic law adopted  for
         the purpose of transposing obligations laid down by a Directive, to
         consider the whole body of rules of national law and  to  interpret
         them, so far as possible, in the light of the wording  and  purpose
         of the Directive in order to achieve an outcome consistent with the
         objective pursued by the Directive."

18.         In SSHD v Rahman [2013] QB 249 the Grand  Chamber  of  the  CJEU
    considered the case of 'other family members' of an  EEA  national  who
    were relatives of the EEA national's spouse. The focus of the  decision
    was to answer questions relating to the  assessment  of  dependency  of
    other family members. The court made the following findings:

         "19.     As contended  by  the  governments  which  have  submitted
             observations to the Court and by the European  Commission,  it
             follows both from the wording of  Article 3(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38 and from the general system of the directive that  the
             European legislature has drawn a distinction between  a  Union
             citizen's  family  members  as  defined  in  Article 2(2)  of
             Directive  2004/38,  who  enjoy,  as  provided  for   in   the
             directive, a  right  of  entry  into  and  residence  in  that
             citizen's host Member State,  and  the  other  family  members
             envisaged in Article 3(2) of the directive, whose  entry  and
             residence has only to be facilitated by that Member State.

         20.      That interpretation is borne  out  by  recital 6  in  the
             preamble to Directive 2004/38 ...

         21.      Whilst it is  therefore  apparent  that  Article  3(2)  of
             Directive 2004/38 does not oblige the Member States to  accord
             a right of entry and  residence  to  persons  who  are  family
             members, in the broad sense, dependent on a Union citizen, the
             fact remains, as is clear from the use  of  the  words  'shall
             facilitate' in Article 3(2), that that  provision  imposes  an
             obligation on the Member States to confer a certain advantage,
             compared with applications for entry and  residence  of  other
             nationals  of  third  States,  on  applications  submitted  by
             persons who have a relationship of particular dependence  with
             a Union citizen.

         22.      In order to meet that obligation, the Member States  must,
             in accordance with the second subparagraph of Article 3(2)  of
             Directive 2004/38, make it possible for persons  envisaged  in
             the first subparagraph of Article 3(2) to obtain a decision on
             their application that is founded on an extensive  examination
             of their personal circumstances and, in the event of  refusal,
             is justified by reasons.

         23.      As is clear from recital 6 in the preamble  to  Directive
             2004/38, it is incumbent upon the  competent  authority,  when
             undertaking  that  examination  of  the  applicant's  personal
             circumstances, to take account of the various factors that may
             be relevant in the particular case,  such  as  the  extent  of
             economic or physical dependence and the degree of relationship
             between the family member and the Union citizen whom he wishes
             to accompany or join.

         24.      In the light both of the absence of more specific rules in
             Directive 2004/38 and of the use of the words  'in  accordance
             with  its  national  legislation'  in  Article  3(2)  of   the
             directive, each Member State has a wide discretion as  regards
             the selection of the factors to be taken  into  account.  None
             the  less,  the  host  Member  State  must  ensure  that   its
             legislation contains criteria which are  consistent  with  the
             normal meaning of the  term  'facilitate'  and  of  the  words
             relating to dependence used in Article 3(2), and which do  not
             deprive that provision of its effectiveness.

         25.      Finally,  even  though,  as  the  governments  which  have
             submitted observations have correctly  observed,  the  wording
             used in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 is not sufficiently
             precise to enable an applicant for entry or residence to  rely
             directly on that provision in order to invoke  criteria  which
             should in his view be applied when assessing his  application,
             the fact remains that such  an  applicant  is  entitled  to  a
             judicial review of whether the national  legislation  and  its
             application have remained within the limits of the  discretion
             set  by  that  directive  (see,  by  analogy,   Case   C-72/95
             Kraaijeveld and Others [1996] ECR I-5403, paragraph 56; Case C-
             127/02 Waddenvereniging and Vogelbeschermingsvereniging [2004]
             ECR I-7405, paragraph 66; and Joined  Cases  C-165/09  to  C-
             167/09 Stichting Natuur en Milieu and  Others  [2011]  ECR  I-
             4599, paragraphs 100 to 103)."

19.   In assessing further questions relating to dependency  the  CJEU  said
    the following about the objective of Article 3(2) of the Directive.

         "32.     So far as concerns the time at which the applicant must be
             in a situation of dependence  in  order  to  be  considered  a
             'dependant' within the meaning of Article 3(2)  of  Directive
             2004/38, it is to be noted that, as follows from recital 6 in
             the directive's preamble, the objective of that  provision  is
             to 'maintain the unity of the family in a  broader  sense'  by
             facilitating entry and  residence  for  persons  who  are  not
             included in the definition of family member of a Union citizen
             contained  in  Article 2(2)  of  Directive  2004/38  but  who
             nevertheless maintain close and  stable  family  ties  with  a
             Union citizen on account of  specific  factual  circumstances,
             such as economic dependence, being a member of  the  household
             or serious health grounds."

20.   In SM (Algeria) v ECO, UK Visa  Section  [2018]  UKSC  9  the  Supreme
    Court considered the case of an Algerian child who was placed under the
    guardianship of European citizens who were  resident  in  the  UK.  The
    appellant's primary case was that  the  child  was  a  'family  member'
    within the meaning of Article 2(2) of the Directive. The Supreme  Court
    referred the point for a preliminary ruling from the  CJEU  to  clarify
    the meaning of 'direct descendent' in such circumstances. However,  the
    court had little difficulty in finding that she would,  in  any  event,
    come within the definition of 'other family member' within the  meaning
    of Article 3(2). With reference  to  Article  3(2)  the  Supreme  Court
    found:

         "17.     This Court has little  doubt  that  Susana  [a  pseudonym]
             would fall within article 3.2(a) if she does not  fall  within
             article 2.2(c). The 2006 Regulations have caused confusion  by
             introducing the  word  "relative"  which  nowhere  appears  in
             article  3.2(a).  "Family  member"  is  a  wider   term   than
             "relative" as it is well capable of including people  who  are
             not related by consanguinity or affinity. All that is required
             is that the person (i)  falls  within  the  broad  concept  of
             "family member"; (ii) was either a dependant or  a  member  of
             the household of the Union citizen; and (iii) that  dependency
             or household membership was in  the  country  from  which  the
             person has or would come. A child for whom the  Union  citizen
             has parental responsibility  under  the  law  of  the  child's
             country of origin is clearly capable of being  regarded  as  a
             family member; Susana was both a dependant and a member of the
             household of Mr and Mrs  M;  and  this  was  in  Algeria,  the
             country from which she would be coming to this country.

         18.      The obligation of the host member state is  to  facilitate
             entry  and  residence  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, to undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the
             personal circumstances, and to justify any denial of entry and
             residence. UK legislation relating  to  foreign  adoptions  is
             clearly relevant to that examination. A refusal of  entry  and
             residence would, in principle,  be  justified  if  there  were
             reason  to  believe  that  the  child  was   the   victim   of
             exploitation, abuse or trafficking, or that the claims of  the
             birth family had not been respected.

         ...

         21.      In making that evaluation, the decision-makers, whether in
             the Home Office or in the appellate system, would also have to
             bear in mind that the purpose of the Directive is to  simplify
             and strengthen the right of free movement  and  residence  for
             all Union citizens, freedom  of  movement  being  one  of  the
             fundamental freedoms of the internal market.  Having  to  live
             apart from family members or members  of  the  family  in  the
             wider sense may be a powerful deterrent  to  the  exercise  of
             that freedom."

21.   When the Grand Chamber of the CJEU heard the case  in  SM  v  ECO,  UK
    Visa Section EU:C:2019:248 (26 March 2019) it found that a  child  that
    had  not  been  formally  adopted  giving  rise   to   a   parent-child
    relationship recognised by UK law did not come  within  the  definition
    under Article 2(2) but could fall within the ambit of Article 3(2).

         "57.     That being said, such a child does fall, as was emphasised
             by the referring court, under the definition  of  one  of  the
             'other family members'  referred  to  in  Article 3(2)(a)  of
             Directive 2004/38.

         58.      Under that provision, Member  States  are,  in  accordance
             with their  national  legislation,  to  facilitate  entry  and
             residence for 'any  other  family  members  ...  who,  in  the
             country from which they have come, are dependants  or  members
             of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right
             of residence'.

         59.      The words used in  that  provision  are  thus  capable  of
             covering the situation of a child who  has  been  placed  with
             citizens of the Union under a legal guardianship  system  such
             as Algerian kafala and in respect  of  whom  those  citizens
             assume responsibility for its care, education and  protection,
             in accordance with an undertaking entered into on the basis of
             the law of the child's country of origin.

         60.      As follows  from  recital  6  of  Directive  2004/38,  the
             objective of Article 3(2)(a) thereof is to 'maintain the unity
             of the family in a broader sense' by  facilitating  entry  and
             residence for persons who are not included in  the  definition
             of  'family  member'  of  a   Union   citizen   contained   in
             Article 2(2) of that directive but who nevertheless  maintain
             close and stable family ties with a Union citizen  on  account
             of  specific   factual   circumstances,   such   as   economic
             dependence, being a member of the household or serious  health
             grounds (judgment of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-
             83/11, EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 32).

         61.      According to the case-law of the Court,  Article 3(2)  of
             Directive 2004/38 imposes an obligation on the  Member  States
             to confer a certain advantage on applications submitted by the
             third-country nationals referred to in that article,  compared
             with applications for entry  and  residence  of  other  third-
             country  nationals  (see,  to  that   effect,   judgments   of
             5 September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-83/11, EU:C:2012:519,
             paragraph 21,  and  of  12 July  2018, Banger,  C-89/17,
             EU:C:2018:570, paragraph 31).

         62.      Thus, the Member States  must,  in  accordance  with  that
             provision, make it possible for the persons envisaged  therein
             to obtain a decision on their application that is  founded  on
             an extensive  examination  of  their  personal  circumstances,
             taking account of the various factors that  may  be  relevant,
             and, in the event of refusal, is justified by reasons (see, to
             that effect, judgments of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others,
             C-83/11, EU:C:2012:519, paragraphs 22 and 23, and of 12 July
             2018, Banger, C-89/17, EU:C:2018:570, paragraphs 38 and 39).

         63.      It is true that each Member State has a wide discretion as
             regards the selection of the factors to be taken into account,
             provided that their legislation contains  criteria  which  are
             consistent with the normal meaning of  the  term  'facilitate'
             used in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 and  which  do  not
             deprive that provision of  its  effectiveness  (see,  to  that
             effect, judgments of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-
             83/11,  EU:C:2012:519,  paragraph 24,   and   of   12 July
             2018, Banger, C-89/17, EU:C:2018:570, paragraph 40).

         64.      However, that discretion must, having regard to recital 31
             of Directive 2004/38, be exercised in the light of and in line
             with the provisions of the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights  of
             the European Union ('the Charter') (see, by analogy,  judgment
             of 6 December 2012, O and  Others,  C-356/11  and  C-357/11,
             EU:C:2012:776, paragraphs 79 and 80 and the case-law cited).

         65.      In that regard, Article 7 of the Charter  recognises  the
             right to respect for private and family life. As  is  apparent
             from the Explanations relating to the Charter  of  Fundamental
             Rights  (OJ  2007  C 303,  p. 17),  in   accordance   with
             Article 52(3)  of  the  Charter,  the  rights  guaranteed  by
             Article 7 thereof have the same meaning and the same scope as
             those guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention  for
             the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms,
             signed in Rome on  4 November  1950  (see,  to  that  effect,
             judgments   of   5 October   2010, McB.,   C-400/10   PPU,
             EU:C:2010:582, paragraph 53, and of 5 June 2018, Coman  and
             Others, C-673/16, EU:C:2018:385, paragraph 49).

         ...

         68.      Accordingly, in order to comply with those provisions when
             exercising their discretion, it is for the competent  national
             authorities, when implementing the  obligation  to  facilitate
             entry and residence for the other family members laid down  in
             Article 3(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38, to make a balanced  and
             reasonable  assessment  of  all  the  current   and   relevant
             circumstances of the case, taking account of all the interests
             in play and, in particular, of the best interests of the child
             concerned (see, by analogy, judgments of 6 December  2012, O
             and   Others,   C-356/11    and    C-357/11,    EU:C:2012:776,
             paragraph 81; of 13 September 2016, Rend�n Mar�n, C-165/14,
             EU:C:2016:675, paragraph 85; and of 13 September 2016, CS, C-
             304/14, EU:C:2016:674, paragraph 41)."

Decision and reasons

22.   Having set out the legal framework  at  some  length,  the  applicable
    principles of European law become clear.

    (i)    The Directive recognises that having to live  apart  from  close
         family members might  act  as  an  obstacle  to  European  citizens
         exercising rights under the Treaties.

    (ii)   The Directive makes a distinction between 'family  members'  who
         have a right of entry and residence in  a  host  Member  State  and
         'other  family  members'  whose  entry  and  residence  should   be
         facilitated by the host Member State.

    (iii)  Nothing in the wording of Article 3(2) restricts the  nature  or
         type of relationship of 'other family members' to the EEA  citizen.
         In fact, recital 6 makes clear that the purpose of the provision is
         to maintain the "unity of the family in the broader sense".

    (iv)   The measure of whether a person is an 'other family member'  who
         should be facilitated entry is whether  they  maintain  "close  and
         stable family ties with a Union  citizen  on  account  of  specific
         factual circumstances, such as economic dependence, being a  member
         of the household or serious health grounds".

    (v)     The  competent  authority  in  the  host  Member  State,   when
         undertaking   an   examination   of   the   applicant's    personal
         circumstances, can take into account various factors  that  may  be
         relevant such as the extent of the economic or physical  dependence
         and the degree of relationship between the family  member  and  the
         Union citizen who they wish to accompany or join.

    (vi)   The host Member  State  has  a  wide  discretion  regarding  the
         selection of factors to be taken into account "in  accordance  with
         national legislation". Nevertheless, the  host  Member  State  must
         ensure that legislation is consistent with the  normal  meaning  of
         the term 'facilitate' and must not  deprive  Article  3(2)  of  its
         effectiveness.

    (vii)  The exercise of discretion by the host Member State must be done
         in line with the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
         the European  Union.  In  particular,  Article  7  of  the  Charter
         recognises the right to family life.

    (viii) The term 'family member' can  include  people  of  who  are  not
         related by "consanguinity or affinity". It becomes clear  from  the
         Supreme Court and the CJEU decisions in  SM  that  it  matters  not
         whether a person is a blood relative of the European citizen.  What
         is important is the nature and extent of the familial relationship.



23.   We apply these principles to our assessment  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2016.

24.   We  accept  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  wide  discretion  to
    introduce national legislation regarding the selection of factors to be
    taken into account in assessing whether to facilitate entry  to  'other
    family members' ('extended family members' under  the  EEA  Regulations
    2016).

25.   Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006 defined  an  extended  family
    member as "a relative of an EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
    partner".  In  contrast,  the  wording  of  regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 was restricted to "a relative of an EEA national". The
    transitional provisions contained in regulation 8(7) were  intended  to
    provide continuity to extended family  members  who  were  issued  with
    documentation  recognising  a  right  of  residence   under   the   EEA
    Regulations 2006. The wording of the Home  Office  policy  makes  clear
    that the intention was to exclude family members of the EEA  national's
    spouse from consideration under regulation 8 in applications made on or
    after the 01 February 2017, when the EEA  Regulations  2016  came  into
    force.

26.   When the purpose of the Directive  is  properly  analysed  it  becomes
    clear that any provision of national legislation purporting to restrict
    the interpretation of  'other  family  member'  to  specified  familial
    relationships does not conform with the principles of the Directive  or
    the Charter given the broad sense in which  the  phrase  'other  family
    members' is to be interpreted under Article 3(2).

27.   Having recognised that the important issue is the  nature  and  extent
    of the familial relationship, we do not consider that relatives of  the
    EEA national's spouse or civil partner can lawfully  be  excluded  from
    consideration in the way that the EEA Regulations 2016 and the relevant
    Home Office guidance currently purport to do.  Although  the  competent
    authority has a wide discretion to identify various factors that  might
    be relevant to the assessment of whether it should facilitate the entry
    or  residence  of  'other  family  members',  provisions  of   national
    legislation cannot go  so  far  as  to  deprive  Article  3(2)  of  its
    effectiveness.

28.   In  assessing  whether  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  the
    required level of familial ties or dependency to meet the  requirements
    of regulation 8, the respondent is entitled to take  into  account  the
    nature and degree of the relationship between the applicant and the EEA
    national. What he cannot do is to fetter his discretion  by  specifying
    that a certain type of familial relationship can never engage the broad
    meaning of family life encompassed by Article 3(2)  of  the  Directive.
    Whether the familial relationship is sufficient to show that  a  person
    is an extended family member for the purpose of  the  regulations  will
    depend on the facts and the evidence in each case.

29.   We note that the decisions in Rahman and SM were both taken at a  time
    when UK national legislation, under the EEA Regulations 2006,  included
    a broader definition of extended family  members  under  regulation  8.
    However, we find that this makes no difference to the assessment of the
    underlying principles of European law outlined by the CJEU.  Mr  Rahman
    was a family member of the EEA national's spouse. SM was  not  a  blood
    relative or legally adopted for the purpose of UK law,  yet  was  still
    found to be a family member for  the  purpose  of  Article  3(2).  Both
    decisions were made with reference to general  principles  of  European
    law and not by reference to the UK regulations.

30.   What is the consequence of our findings?  In  order  to  conform  with
    Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive the phrase "relative of  an  EEA
    national" in regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2016 must be  read  to
    include any family member of the EEA national, including those  related
    by marriage through the EEA national's spouse or civil partner. The key
    issue is whether the family member has close  and  stable  family  ties
    with the EEA national on account  of  specific  factual  circumstances,
    such as economic dependence, being a member of the household or serious
    health grounds.

31.   The section of the Home Office policy "Free Movement Rights;  extended
    family members of EEA nationals" (Version 6.0) (08 June 2018), and  the
    current policy containing the same  wording  (Version  7.0)  (27  March
    2019), purporting to narrow eligible family members only  to  those  of
    the EEA national does not  conform  with  a  proper  interpretation  of
    Article 3(2) of the Directive.

32.   Regulation  8(7)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  is  a  transitional
    provision intended to implement the change in Home  Office  policy.  It
    should not be used to interpret the meaning  of  "relative  of  an  EEA
    national" in a way that does not  conform  with  Article  3(2)  of  the
    Directive.

Conclusion

33.   In light of our findings, we conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law and must be  set  aside
    and remade.

34.   The First-tier Tribunal judge interpreted  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
    with reference to regulation 8(7) and the policy guidance. In so far as
    he relied on the decision in Singh, that was a brief decision  refusing
    permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings.  The  court  refused
    permission solely on the face of the wording of  regulation  8  without
    any analysis of relevant European law.

35.    The  judge  also  erred  in  finding  that   his   more   restrictive
    interpretation of the wording to regulation 8 was "within the margin of
    appreciation  afforded  to   contracting   states".   The   margin   of
    appreciation is a doctrine of international law that has  no  place  in
    the  interpretation  of  European  Union  law.  In  so  far  as  Rahman
    recognised that a Member State has  wide  discretion,  such  discretion
    cannot go so far as to render the purpose of Article 3(2) ineffective.

36.   The EEA national sponsor is a Polish citizen.  The  appellant  is  her
    husband's brother. The appellant was issued with a family permit as  an
    extended family member on  24  December  2017.  The  assertion  in  the
    decision letter that the family permit was issued in  error  under  the
    EEA Regulations 2016 relies  on  the  respondent's  policy  to  exclude
    relatives of the EEA national's spouse. However, there is  no  evidence
    to suggest that the permit was revoked. We have found that  the  policy
    does not conform with a proper interpretation of Article  3(2)  of  the
    Directive. The phrase  "relative  of  an  EEA  national"  contained  in
    regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2016 should be interpreted  broadly
    and can include a relative of the EEA national's spouse.  In  light  of
    our findings, the family permit was not issued in error simply  because
    of the degree of the relationship.

37.   The key issue is whether the appellant has  close  and  stable  family
    ties with  the  EEA  national,  which  might  be  demonstrated  by  his
    dependency on the EEA national. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing  the
    respondent accepted that the appellant was dependent within the meaning
    of regulation 8. Ms Isherwood accepted a concession was  made  and  did
    not  resile  from  that  position.  Given  that  the  only  issue   for
    determination is whether the appellant  is  the  'relative  of  an  EEA
    national' it follows that the appeal must be allowed.

38.   The respondent's decision breaches the appellant's  rights  under  the
    EU Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED


Signed   [pic]   Date 23 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

