
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06404/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 March 2018                   |On 22 March 2018                    |
|                                   |                                    |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                   Mr AMRO MAHMOUD SOLIMAN MOUSTAFA ELRAEY

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:          No appearance

For the Respondent:      Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      Introduction




      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Gibb on 25 January 2018 against the decision  and
           reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  J  Woolley  who  had
           dismissed the  Appellant's  EEA  retained  rights  appeal  in  a
           decision and reasons promulgated on 25 October 2017.




      2.    The Appellant is a national of Egypt.  He had  claimed  that  he
           had been married  to  an  EEA  national,  an  Italian  national,
           between 7 July 2011 and 28 August 2015.  His  wife  had  been  a
           qualified  person  at  all  material  times.   The  Respondent's
           position was that the marriage was one of convenience  only  and
           so could not be recognised.  In  any  event  the  Appellant  had
           provided  insufficient  evidence  that  his  wife  had  been   a
           qualified person as at the date of  the  decree  absolute.   The
           judge found that the Respondent had  discharged  the  legal  and
           evidential burden applicable,  and  that  the  marriage  was  in
           effect a sham.  The judge also  found  that  the  Appellant  had
           failed to prove that his  former  spouse  had  exercised  treaty
           rights for five years, and was ineligible on that basis as well.






      3.    Permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Gibb (with strong reservations as to  several  of
           the grounds advanced) because he considered that the  judge  had
           arguably erred by failing to appreciate that the nature  of  the
           Respondent's evidence as to the substance of  the  marriage  was
           retrospective and indirect.  It was also arguable that the judge
           had erred when finding that 5 years' residence was required: see
           Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552.




      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      5.    When the  appeal  was  called  on  for  hearing,  there  was  no
           appearance by  the  Appellant  or  his  representative  nor  any
           application for an adjournment in consequence.  Having satisfied
           itself that notice of the time, date and place  of  the  hearing
           had been duly served on the Respondent and  his  representative,
           the tribunal decided that it should proceed in the  Respondent's
           absence and that it was just and fair to do so.




      Submissions




      6.    Ms Isherwood for the Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
           material error of law.  The judge had given proper  reasons  for
           finding that the burden of proof  on  the  Respondent  had  been
           discharged  and  that  the  relevant   marriage   was   one   of
           convenience.  Whether the judge had failed to apply Amos (above)
           was not important.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.




      Discussion - no error of law




      7.    No further communication had been received  from  the  Appellant
           nor any  representative  by  the  time  this  determination  was
           prepared.  The tribunal  accepts  the  submissions  made  by  Ms
           Isherwood.




      8.     The  Amos  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  552  point  is  something  of   a
           distraction.   For  reasons  which   are   unclear,   the   very
           experienced judge relied on an  outdated  understanding  of  the
           required length of residence for retained rights purposes, based
           on the overturned decision in  OA  (EEA  -  retained  rights  of
           residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT 00003. The  Appellant's  counsel
           had concurred with that approach at the first instance  hearing.
           The Amos point was ungraciously taken against the judge in  [19]
           of the permission to appeal application, but it is correct.




      9.    Nevertheless, error of law though that was, it was  not  in  the
           event material as it had no bearing at all on the judge's secure
           primary finding, namely that the marriage was entered  into  for
           improper reasons, and had no substance at all.  Far from relying
           solely on the prima facie case advanced by the  Respondent,  the
           judge examined the whole of the evidence meticulously.   He gave
           full and detailed reasons for  finding  that  the  marriage  was
           nothing more than a sham: see [24] onwards of the  decision  and
           reasons.




      10.   Those findings destroyed any case which the  Appellant  had  put
           forward.  There was  thus  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
           decision and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.




      DECISION




      The onwards appeal is dismissed




      The original decision and reasons stands unchanged








      Signed
      Dated 20 March 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell



