
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06422/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th November 2018                         |On 30th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                           Kolawole Shakiru shitta
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Olaogun, Aminu Aminu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Colvin promulgated on 4th July  2018  dismissing  his  application  for
    confirmation of a right to a residence card as a family  member  having
    retained a right of residence following divorce from  a  former  spouse
    under Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.   The
    Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission  to
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  in  the  following
    terms:

         "It is arguable that in light of the  case  of  Baigazieva  v  SSHD
         [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 that has been handed down since  the  date  of
         promulgation of the decision, with no disrespect to the Judge, that
         the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  provided  may  have  been
         sufficient to show that [the] EEA national  was  exercising  Treaty
         rights when divorce proceedings were commenced".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent but  was
    given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  shall  now
    give.  I do find that there is a material error of law in the  decision
    such that it should be set aside.  My reasons for  so  finding  are  as
    follows.

 4. As observed by Judge Grant-Hutchison in granting permission to  appeal,
    since the decision of the First-tier Tribunal a  relevant  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal given by Lord Justice Singh was handed down on 20th
    April 2018 wherein the Secretary of State as a  party  to  that  appeal
    sought to clarify her position in respect of the proper manner in which
    the question of when the assessment of a retained  right  of  residence
    should  be  made  under  Regulation  10(5)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 (hereafter "EEA Regulations").

 5. I have read [11] to [18] of Baigazieva with particular care and  it  is
    plain from [12] to [14] that,  as  Lord  Justice  Singh  observes,  the
    Secretary of State has confirmed that there is a distinction drawn from
    the CJEU's judgment (arising from a reference made in the matter of  NA
    v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  995)
    between, "first, the point at which the right of residence is retained,
    and secondly, the criteria to be met for that to happen".  As is stated
    at [14] of Baigazieva, the reference in Regulation 10(5)(a) to a family
    member's status ceasing "on the termination of the  marriage"  and  the
    ratio in Diatta v Land Berlin (C-267/83 1985 ECR  567)  are  consistent
    with [47] to [48] of the CJEU's judgment in NA and it is accepted  that
    Article 13(2) of the European Directive of Free Movement does not  take
    effect until the point of divorce, but that  does  not  mean  that  the
    third country national had to show that the qualified status  of  their
    spouse continued  up  until  that  point.   As  confirmed  in  [16]  of
    Baigazieva, Regulation  10(5)  is  supposed  to  represent  a  faithful
    transposition of Article 13(2)(a) of the Directive and is  purposefully
    drafted to distinguish between the cessation of family member status at
    the point of divorce under Regulation 10(5)(a), and the criteria to  be
    met for the right of residence to be retained at that point in terms of
    Regulation 10(5)(c) with reference to Regulation 10(6).   Thus,  it  is
    apparent from [12] of the judgment in Baigazieva that the Secretary  of
    State's position is that the point at which  the  right  to  reside  is
    retained pursuant to Article 13(2) is the initiation or commencement of
    divorce proceedings; and secondly, the  criteria  to  be  met  for  the
    retention of that right are to be seen in  paragraphs  (a)  to  (d)  of
    Article 13(2) of the Directive.

 6. Thus, in that light it is apparent that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    erred in considering whether the Appellant is  able  to  show  that  he
    himself was a worker or self-employed  person  or  otherwise  qualified
    after the initiation of divorce proceedings.  As far as I read  Article
    13(1) and 13(2)(a) to (d) in light of the judgment of  Baigazieva,  any
    court or tribunal  considering  this  matter  will  be  concerned  with
    whether an applicant or appellant is able to meet sub-paragraphs (a) to
    (d) of Article 13(2) when divorce proceedings commenced or at the point
    of divorce (i.e. decree absolute).

 7.  Thus,  given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  analysis  is  largely
    concerned with the years following the Appellant's divorce proceedings,
    that is an assessment that is not entirely  relevant  when  considering
    whether the Appellant has retained his right of residence and thus  the
    decision suffers from material error by taking irrelevant evidence into
    when assessing whether the right was retained under Article 13(2)(a) to
    (d) of the Directive.

 8. Mr Olaogun was keen to highlight that page 25 of the Appellant's bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal contained a letter from HMRC  dated  2nd
    May 2018 which showed  that  the  relevant  branch  of  Government  had
    confirmed the Appellant's employment history which,  according  to  the
    start and end dates, certainly covered  the  period  during  which  the
    divorce proceedings were commenced.   Mr  Olaogun  further  highlighted
    that there was a payslip for the relevant month in  which  the  divorce
    proceedings began, namely October 2015 and he also pointed out that  at
    page 42 of the Appellant's bundle a payslip existed which reflected the
    Appellant had worked the very month in which the divorce was concluded.



 9. Thus, in light of the above findings, I find that there is  a  material
    error of law in the decision such that it should be set aside.

10. However, I am unable to remake this decision  as  the  Respondent  must
    have the opportunity of testing the evidence on these issues if  he  is
    so advised and given that the matter requires the evidence to be  heard
    de novo.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set  aside  and  this
    appeal is to be remitted to  be  heard  by  a  differently  constituted
    bench.

13. I make the following directions in  respect  of  the  further  remitted
    appeal hearing that is to take place before the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

 i) The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Taylor House.

ii) No interpreter is required.

iii) One witness is apparently to be called.

iv) Time estimate given is two hours.

 v) No special directions have been requested by either party.

vi) I do not make an anonymity direction  as  one  is  not  appropriate  or
    called for.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini            25 November 2018

