
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06247/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2019                   |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                IRYNA SMAGINA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms B. Asanovic, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  29  June  2017
    to refuse to issue a residence card as the family member of  a  British
    citizen with reference to regulation 9  of  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations 2016").

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 26  June  2018.  She  outlined  the  provisions
    contained in regulation 9 of the EEA  Regulations  2016.  At  [14]  she
    noted the terms of regulation 9(3), which sets out several requirements
    for assessing whether residence in the EEA state was genuine.  At  [15]
    she noted that regulation 9(4) allowed for refusal of  the  application
    where the purpose of the residence in the EEA state  was  a  means  for
    circumventing any immigration laws that would otherwise  apply  to  the
    non-EEA national. In  assessing  this  aspect  of  the  regulation  she
    referred to the arguments put forward by the appellant's representative
    with reference to the Court of Justice of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)
    decision in Minister voor Immigratie, Integratie  en  Asiel  v  O  &  B
    [2014] EUECJ C-456/12. The judge went on to consider what was  said  by
    the Upper Tribunal in Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015]  UKUT  00593  [16].
    She also noted the appellant's reliance on the principles  outlined  in
    Akrich [2003] EUECJ C-109/01 [17-18]. She summarised the principles  as
    follows:

         "18.     The court further held that were the  marriage  between  a
             national of a member state and  a  national  of  a  non-member
             state is genuine, the fact that the spouses install themselves
             in another member state in order on their return to the member
             state of which the former is a national to obtain the  benefit
             of rights conferred by Community law is  not  relevant  to  an
             assessment  of  their  legal  situation   by   the   competent
             authorities of the latter state."

3.    The judge went on to distinguish Akrich in the following terms:

         "19.     In find that the case  of  Akrich  was  heard  before  the
             Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  were
             drafted. The Regulations form part of English law. The  United
             Kingdom as a member state of the European Union is entitled to
             apply domestic  law  to  interpret  and  give  effect  to  the
             Directive. Regulation 9(4) states that the regulation does not
             apply where the purposes of the  EEA  state  was  a  means  of
             circumventing  any  immigration  laws  applying   to   non-EEA
             nationals to  which  the  family  member  would  otherwise  be
             subject  to.  I  find  that  it  is  common  ground  that  the
             appellant's previous application for leave to remain under the
             Immigration  Rules  was  refused  and  a   subsequent   appeal
             dismissed."

4.    The judge noted the appellant's explanation as  to  why  she  and  her
    husband decided to move to Spain. They were unable to  continue  living
    in the United Kingdom because her application for leave to  remain  had
    been refused. The appellant's husband said that  they  moved  to  Spain
    because they wanted to be together [20]. The respondent  accepted  that
    the sponsor genuinely exercised treaty rights in Spain. Both he and the
    appellant were issued with residence cards [21]. The judge went  on  to
    consider what ties the sponsor retained with the UK while they were  in
    Spain [21-25]. She concluded:

         "26.     I find that they both intended to  stay  in  Spain  for  a
             short period of time and then to return to the United  Kingdom
             where Mr Mirza's principal  residence  was.  I  find  that  he
             ensured that  at  all  times  whilst  he  was  in  Spain,  the
             residential part of his commercial property was always  vacant
             for him. I find that the accommodation in the EEA state,  that
             is Spain, was always temporary in nature. There is no credible
             evidence before me that either the appellant  or  her  husband
             speak Spanish although I accept that English is widely spoken.
             In reaching my determination I take into account  the  article
             by  Colin  Yeo  dated  2  September  2014  entitled   "EU   to
             investigate  UK  interpretation  of   Surrinder   Singh".   In
             assessing  the  evidence  as  a  whole   on   a   balance   of
             probabilities, I do not find  that  the  appellant  meets  the
             requirements  of  Regulation  9  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
             Regulations 2016."

5.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The judge erred in applying requirements of regulation 9 which  did
         not conform with European law contrary to the decisions in  O  &  B
         and Akrich.

     ii) In any event, the judge failed to consider  relevant  evidence  put
         forward to show that the sponsor had transferred the centre of  his
         life to Spain, albeit it turned out to be for  a  relatively  short
         period.

Legal framework

6.    At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  regulation  9  of  the
    EEA Regulations 2016 stated (later amendments were introduced by way of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)  Regulations  2018
    on 24 July 2018):

         9  (1)   If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
                  Regulations apply to a person who  is  the  family  member
                  ("F") of a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an
                  EEA national.

             (2) The conditions are that-

                  (a)  BC-

                      (i)   is residing in an EEA State as a worker,  self-
                           employed  person,  self-sufficient  person  or  a
                           student,  or  so   resided   immediately   before
                           returning to the United Kingdom; or

                      (ii)  has acquired the right of  permanent  residence
                           in an EEA State;

                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

             (3) Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State  is
                  or was genuine include-

                  (a)  whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                      EEA State;

                  (b)  the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (c)   the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                      accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or
                      was BC's principal residence;

                  (d)  the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                      was in the EEA State.

             (4) This regulation does not apply-

                  (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                      was as a means for circumventing any immigration laws
                      applying  to  non-EEA  nationals  to  which  F  would
                      otherwise  be  subject  (such   as   any   applicable
                      requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom); ...

7.    In Levin [1982] EUECJ R-53/81 the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
    Union ("CJEU") made the following findings:

         "19.     The third question essentially seeks to ascertain  whether
             the right to enter and reside in the  territory  of  a  member
             state may be denied to a worker whose main objectives, pursued
             by means of his entry and residence, are different  from  that
             of the pursuit of an activity as an employed person as defined
             in the answer to the first and second questions.

         20.      Under article 48(3) of the treaty the right to move freely
             within the territory of the member states  is  conferred  upon
             workers for the 'purpose' of accepting  offers  of  employment
             actually made. By virtue of the same provision  workers  enjoy
             the right to stay  in  one  of  the  member  states  'for  the
             purpose' of employment there. Moreover, it is  stated  in  the
             preamble to regulation ( EEC )  no  1612/68  that  freedom  of
             movement for workers entails the  right  of  workers  to  move
             freely within the community 'in order to'   pursue  activities
             as employed persons, whilst article 2 of directive  68/360/EEC
             requires the member states to grant workers the right to leave
             their territory 'in order to' take up activities  as  employed
             persons or to pursue them in the territory of  another  member
             state.

         21.      However, these formulations merely give expression to  the
             requirement, which  is  inherent  in  the  very  principle  of
             freedom of movement for workers,  that  the  advantages  which
             community law confers in the  name  of  that  freedom  may  be
             relied upon only by persons who actually pursue  or  seriously
             wish to pursue activities as employed persons.  They  do  not,
             however, mean that the enjoyment of this freedom may  be  made
             to depend upon the aims pursued by  a  national  of  a  member
             state  in  applying  for  entry  upon  and  residence  in  the
             territory of another member state ,  provided  that  he  there
             pursues or wishes  to  pursue  an  activity  which  meets  the
             criteria specified above, that is to  say,  an  effective  and
             genuine activity as an employed person.

         22.      Once this condition is satisfied, the  motives  which  may
             have prompted the worker to  seek  employment  in  the  member
             state concerned are of no account and must not be  taken  into
             consideration."

8.    The right of residence in the UK under  European  law  as  the  family
    member of a British citizen who has exercised rights of  free  movement
    before returning to the UK was  outlined  by  CJEU  in  Surinder  Singh
    [1992] EUECJ C-370/90:

         "19.     A national of  a  Member  State  might  be  deterred  from
             leaving his country of origin in order to pursue  an  activity
             as an employed or self-employed person  as  envisaged  by  the
             Treaty in  the  territory  of  another  Member  State  if,  on
             returning to the Member State of which he  is  a  national  in
             order to pursue an activity there  as  an  employed  or  self-
             employed person, the conditions of  his  entry  and  residence
             were not at least equivalent to those  which  he  would  enjoy
             under the Treaty or secondary law in the territory of  another
             Member State.

         20.      He would in particular be deterred from so  doing  if  his
             spouse and children were  not  also  permitted  to  enter  and
             reside in the territory of his Member State  of  origin  under
             conditions at  least  equivalent  to  those  granted  them  by
             Community law in the territory of another Member State.

         21.      It follows that a national of a Member State who has  gone
             to another Member State in order to work there as an  employed
             person pursuant to Article 48 of the  Treaty  and  returns  to
             establish himself in order to pursue an activity  as  a  self-
             employed person in the territory of the Member State of  which
             he is a national has  the  right,  under  Article  52  of  the
             Treaty, to be accompanied in the territory of the latter State
             by his spouse, a national of a non-member country,  under  the
             same conditions as are laid down  by  Regulation  No  1612/68,
             Directive 68/360 or Directive 73/148, cited above.

         22.      Admittedly, as the United Kingdom submits, a national of a
             Member State enters and resides in the territory of that State
             by virtue of the rights attendant upon his nationality and not
             by virtue of those conferred  on  him  by  Community  law.  In
             particular, as is provided, moreover,  by  Article  3  of  the
             Fourth Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights,  a
             State may not expel one of its own nationals or deny him entry
             to its territory.

         23.      However, this case is concerned not  with  a  right  under
             national law but with the rights of movement and establishment
             granted to a Community national by Articles 48 and 52  of  the
             Treaty. These rights cannot  be  fully  effective  if  such  a
             person may be  deterred  from  exercising  them  by  obstacles
             raised in his or her  country  of  origin  to  the  entry  and
             residence of his or her spouse. Accordingly, when a  Community
             national who has availed himself or herself  of  those  rights
             returns to his or her country of origin,  his  or  her  spouse
             must enjoy at least the same rights of entry and residence  as
             would be granted to him or her under Community law if  his  or
             her spouse chose to enter and reside in another Member  State.
             Nevertheless, Articles 48 and 52 of the Treaty do not  prevent
             Member States from applying to foreign spouses  of  their  own
             nationals rules on entry and residence  more  favourable  than
             those provided for by Community law.

         24.      As regards the risk of fraud referred  to  by  the  United
             Kingdom, it is sufficient to  note  that,  as  the  Court  has
             consistently held (see in particular  the  judgments  in  Case
             115/78 Knoors v Secretary of State for Economic Affairs [1979]
             ECR 399, paragraph 25, and Case C-61/89 Bouchoucha [1990]  ECR
             I-3551, paragraph 14), the facilities created  by  the  Treaty
             cannot have the effect of allowing  the  persons  who  benefit
             from them to evade the application of national legislation and
             of  prohibiting  Member  States  from  taking   the   measures
             necessary to prevent such abuse."

9.    In Akrich [2003] EUECJ C-109/01 the CJEU considered the scope  of  the
    judgment in Singh  where  the  Member  State  concerned  (the  UK)  had
    concerns that the couple moved to Ireland with the express  purpose  of
    establishing rights under European law to enable them to return to  the
    UK. The court summarised the position at [39].

         "39.     Having found as a fact, inter alia, that Mr and Mrs Akrich
             had moved to Ireland for the express purpose  of  subsequently
             exercising Community rights to enable them to  return  to  the
             United  Kingdom,  the  Immigration  Adjudicator   nevertheless
             concluded that,  as  a  matter  of  law,  there  had  been  an
             effective exercise by Mrs Akrich of Community rights which had
             not been tainted by the intentions of the  spouses,  and  that
             they had therefore not relied on Community law  to  evade  the
             provisions of the United Kingdom's  national  legislation.  He
             also found that Mr Akrich did not constitute  such  a  genuine
             and sufficiently serious threat to public policy as to justify
             the continuation of the deportation order."

10.   The CJEU went on to find:

         "55.     As regards the question of abuse mentioned at paragraph 24
             of the Singh judgment, cited above,  it  should  be  mentioned
             that the motives which may have prompted a worker of a  Member
             State to seek employment in another Member  State  are  of  no
             account as regards his  right  to  enter  and  reside  in  the
             territory of the latter State provided that he  there  pursues
             or wishes to pursue an effective and  genuine  activity  (Case
             53/81 Levin [1982] ECR 1035, paragraph 23).

         56.      Nor are such  motives  relevant  in  assessing  the  legal
             situation of the couple at the time of  their  return  to  the
             Member State of which the worker is a national.  Such  conduct
             cannot constitute an abuse within the meaning of paragraph  24
             of the Singh judgment even if the spouse did not, at the  time
             when the couple installed itself in another Member State, have
             a right to remain in the Member State of which the worker is a
             national."

11.   In Minister voor Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel v O [2013]  EUECJ  C-
    456/12  Advocate  General  Sharpston  considered  what  is   meant   by
    'residence' in another Member State.

         "100.    In  Swaddling  the  Court  held  that  the  definition  of
             residence in Article  1(h)  of  Regulation  No  1408/71 meant
             'habitual residence' and suggested that it therefore had an EU-
             wide meaning.  The Court interpreted the  phrase  'the  Member
             State in which they reside' as  being  the  place  'where  the
             habitual centre of their interests  is  to  be  found',  which
             should  be  determined  taking  into  account  'the   employed
             person's family situation; the reasons which have led  him  to
             move; the length and continuity of  his  residence;  the  fact
             (where it is the case) that he is in  stable  employment;  and
             his intention as it appears from all the circumstances'. In so
             saying, the Court has indicated that a proper understanding of
             whether a person is resident or not must be based,  not  on  a
             single factor, but on a collection of elements  that  together
             enable  the  individual's  situation  to   be   assessed   and
             categorised as residence or non-residence.

         101.     In other areas of EU law,  the  Court  has  articulated  a
             similar understanding of residence: it is where a  person  has
             his habitual or usual centre  of  interests  and  it  must  be
             determined in light of the facts at issue, which include  both
             objective and subjective elements."

12.   When the case came before the Grand  Chamber  of  the  CJEU  (Minister
    voor Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel v O & B [2014] EUECJ C-456/12)  no
    mention was made of a 'habitual residence'  test.  Instead,  the  Grand
    Chamber answered the questions in the following terms:

         "39.     Accordingly, Directive 2004/38 establishes a derived right
             of  residence  for  third-country  nationals  who  are  family
             members of a Union citizen, within the meaning of Article 2(2)
             of that directive, only where that citizen has  exercised  his
             right of freedom of movement  by  becoming  established  in  a
             Member State other than the Member State  of  which  he  is  a
             national (see, to that effect, Metock  and  Others,  paragraph
             73; Case  C-256/11  Dereci  and  Others  [2011]  ECR  I-11315,
             paragraph 56; Iida, paragraph 51; and  Joined  Cases  C-356/11
             and C-357/11 O. and Others [2012] ECR, paragraph 41).

         ...

         45.      In that regard, it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
             purpose and justification of that derived right  of  residence
             is based on the fact that a refusal  to  allow  such  a  right
             would be such as to interfere with the Union citizen's freedom
             of movement by discouraging him from exercising his rights  of
             entry into and residence in the host Member State  (see  Iida,
             paragraph 68; Ymeraga and  Ymeraga-Tafarshiku,  paragraph  35;
             and Alokpa and Others, paragraph 22).

         46.      The Court has accordingly held that where a Union  citizen
             has resided with  a  family  member  who  is  a  third-country
             national in a Member State other  than  the  Member  State  of
             which he is a national for a period exceeding two and  a  half
             years and one and half years respectively,  and  was  employed
             there,  that  third-country  national  must,  when  the  Union
             citizen returns to the Member State of which he is a national,
             be entitled, under Union law, to a derived right of  residence
             in the latter  State  (see  Singh,  paragraph  25,  and  Eind,
             paragraph 45). If that third-country  national  did  not  have
             such a right, a  worker  who  is  a  Union  citizen  could  be
             discouraged from leaving the Member State of  which  he  is  a
             national in order to  pursue  gainful  employment  in  another
             Member State simply because of the prospect for that worker of
             not being able to continue, on returning to his  Member  State
             of origin, a way of family life which may have come into being
             in the host Member State as a result  of  marriage  or  family
             reunification (see Eind,  paragraphs  35  and  36,  and  Iida,
             paragraph 70).

         47.      Therefore, an obstacle to  leaving  the  Member  State  of
             which the worker is a national,  as  mentioned  in  Singh  and
             Eind, is created by the refusal to confer,  when  that  worker
             returns to his Member State of  origin,  a  derived  right  of
             residence on the family members of that worker who are  third-
             country nationals, where that worker resided with his  family
             members  in  the  host  Member  State  pursuant  to,  and   in
             conformity with, Union law.

         49.      That is indeed the case. The grant, when a  Union  citizen
             returns to the Member State of which he is a  national,  of  a
             derived right of residence to a third-country national who  is
             a family member of that  Union  citizen  and  with  whom  that
             citizen has resided, solely by virtue of  his  being  a  Union
             citizen, pursuant to and in conformity with Union law  in  the
             host Member State, seeks to remove the same type  of  obstacle
             on leaving the Member State of origin as that referred  to  in
             paragraph 47 above, by guaranteeing that that citizen will  be
             able, in his Member State of origin, to  continue  the  family
             life which he created  or  strengthened  in  the  host  Member
             State.

         50.      So far as concerns the conditions  for  granting,  when  a
             Union citizen returns to the Member State of  which  he  is  a
             national, a derived right of residence, based on Article 21(1)
             TFEU, to a third-country national who is a  family  member  of
             that Union citizen with whom that citizen has resided,  solely
             by virtue of his being a Union citizen,  in  the  host  Member
             State, those conditions should  not,  in  principle,  be  more
             strict than those provided for by Directive  2004/38  for  the
             grant of such a right of residence to a third-country national
             who is a family member of a Union citizen in a case where that
             citizen has exercised his right  of  freedom  of  movement  by
             becoming established in a Member State other than  the  Member
             State of which he is a national. Even though Directive 2004/38
             does not cover such a return, it should be applied by  analogy
             to the conditions for the residence of a Union  citizen  in  a
             Member State other than that of which he is a national,  given
             that in both cases it is the Union citizen who is the  sponsor
             for the grant of a derived right  of  residence  to  a  third-
             country national who is a member of his family.

         51.      An obstacle such as that referred to in paragraph 47 above
             will arise only where the residence of the  Union  citizen  in
             the host Member State has been sufficiently genuine so  as  to
             enable that citizen to create or  strengthen  family  life  in
             that Member State.  Article  21(1)  TFEU  does  not  therefore
             require that every residence in the host  Member  State  by  a
             Union citizen accompanied by a family member who is  a  third-
             country  national  necessarily  confers  a  derived  right  of
             residence on that family member in the Member State  of  which
             that citizen is a national upon the citizen's return  to  that
             Member State."

13.   In British Gas Trading Ltd v Lock and Anor [2016] 1 CMLR 25 the  Court
    of  Appeal  reviewed  relevant  case  law   relating   to   'conforming
    interpretation' of EU and human rights  law  and  considered  the  core
    principles outlined in Marleasing S.A v LA Commercial Internacional  de
    Alimentacion S.A. [1992] 1 CMLR 305,  Ghaidan  v  Godin-Mendoza  [2004]
    UKHL 30, Vodafone 2 v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2009] EWCA Civ
    446 and Swift (trading as A Swift Move) v Robertson [2014] 1 WLFR 3438.



14.   In Vodafone 2  the  Court  of  Appeal  approved  the  summary  of  the
    principles of conforming interpretation prepared  by  counsel  for  the
    HMRC.

         "37.     ...

             "In summary, the obligation on the English courts to construe
             domestic legislation consistently with Community law
             obligations is both broad and far-reaching. In particular:

                  (a)  it is not constrained by conventional rules of
                  construction (per Lord Oliver of Aylmerton in the
                  Pickstone case, at p. 126B);

                  (b)  it does not require ambiguity in the legislative
                  language (per Lord Oliver in the Pickstone case, at p.
                  126B and Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in Ghaidan's case, at
                  para 32);

                  (c)  it is not an exercise in semantics or linguistics
                  (per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at paras 31 and 35;
                  per Lord Steyn, at paras 48-49; per Lord Rodger of
                  Earlsferry, at paras 110-115);

                  (d)  it permits departure from the strict and literal
                  application of the words which the legislature has elected
                  to use (per Lord Oliver in the Litster case, at p 577A;
                  per Lord Nicholls in Ghaidan's case, at para 31);

                  (e)  it permits the implication of words necessary to
                  comply with Community law obligations (per Lord Templeman
                  in the Pickstone case, at pp 120H-121A; per Lord Oliver in
                  the Litster case, at p 577A); and

                  (f)  the precise form of the words to be implied does not
                  matter (per Lord Keith of Kinkel in the Pickstone case, at
                  p 112D; per Lord Rodger in Ghaidan's case, at para 122;
                  per Arden LJ in the IDT Card Services case, at para 114)

         ...

             "The only constraints on the broad and far-reaching nature of
             the interpretative obligation are that:

                  (a)  the meaning should 'go with the grain of the
                  legislation' and be compatible with the underlying thrust
                  of the legislation being construed': see per Lord Nicholls
                  in Ghaidan v. Godin-Medoza [2004] 2 AC 557, para 53; Dyson
                  LJ in Revenue and Customs v. EB Central Services Ltd
                  [2008] STC 2209, para 81. An interpretation should not be
                  adopted which is inconsistent with a fundamental or
                  cardinal feature of the legislation since this would cross
                  the boundary between interpretation and amendment (see per
                  Lord Nicholls, at para 33, Lord Rodger, at paras 110-113
                  in Ghaidan's case; per Arden LJ in R (IDT Card Services
                  Ireland Ltd) v. Customs and Excise Comrs [2006] STC 1252,
                  paras 82 and 113); and

                  (b)  the exercise of the interpretative obligation cannot
                  require the courts to make decisions for which they are
                  not equipped or give rise to important practical
                  repercussions which the court is not equipped to evaluate:
                  see the Ghaidan case, per Lord Nicholls, at para 33; per
                  Lord Rodger, at para 115; per Arden LJ in the IDT Card
                  Services case, at para 113.'"

15.   In Swift the Supreme Court considered the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union decision in Schulte v Seutche  Bausparkasse  Badenia  AG
    (Case C-350/03) [2003] All ER  (EC)  420,  which  summarised  the  core
    interpretative principle as follows.

           "When hearing a case between individuals, the national court  is
           required, when applying the provisions of domestic  law  adopted
           for the purpose  of  transposing  obligations  laid  down  by  a
           Directive, to consider the whole body of rules of  national  law
           and to interpret them, so far as possible, in the light  of  the
           wording and purpose of the Directive  in  order  to  achieve  an
           outcome consistent with the objective pursued by the Directive."

Decision and reasons

Error of law

16.   Having considered the grounds and submissions made by both  parties  I
    conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making  of
    an error of law and must be set aside.

17.   First, the judge referred to the decision in  O  &  B  but  failed  to
    engage or apply the relevant principles.

18.   Second, a proper approach to  conforming  interpretation  of  European
    law did not permit the  judge  to  distinguish,  or  to  disapply,  the
    principles outlined in Akrich  simply  because  it  pre-dated  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016. The EEA Regulations 2016 do not override decisions of
    the CJEU and must be read to conform with relevant  European  law.  The
    judge failed to engage with the argument that requirements contained in
    regulation 9(3) of the EEA Regulations 2016 did not  conform  with  the
    current state of EU law in Singh cases. If aspects of  the  regulations
    did not conform  with  EU  law  the  judge  was  obliged  to  read  the
    regulations in a way that did conform, which might include ignoring non-
    conforming provisions.

19.   Third, the judge failed, in any event, to  give  adequate  reasons  to
    explain which provision she was  considering  when  she  dismissed  the
    appeal. At [19] she noted that the appellant's application for leave to
    remain in the UK was  refused  but  came  to  no  clear  findings  with
    reference to regulation 9(4). Although her findings at [26]  appear  to
    relate to issues outlined in regulation  9(3),  again,  it  is  unclear
    whether she found that their residence in Spain was  'genuine'  or  not
    given the respondent's concession noted at [21].

Remaking

20.   The parties agreed that if I found an error of law in relation to  the
    first ground of appeal it would be  possible  to  remake  the  decision
    without a further hearing.

21.   The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is brought  on  the  ground  that
    the decision breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties  in
    respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom. The  fact  that
    the only EU ground of appeal available to the appellant is  phrased  in
    these terms, and does not refer to a decision being "in accordance with
    the EEA Regulations 2016", is a reflection  of  the  direct  effect  of
    European law.

22.   The appellant's British citizen husband, as an  EU  citizen,  has  the
    right to move to and work in another EU Member State.  It  is  apparent
    that the couple may have preferred to remain in the UK.  The  appellant
    made an application for leave to remain through  the  proper  channels,
    which was refused. The appellant did not want to remain in breach of UK
    immigration law. The couple took the decision to move to  Spain,  where
    they have friends, so  that  they  could  continue  their  family  life
    together rather than be separated.  The  respondent  accepts  that  the
    appellant's husband, as an EU citizen, genuinely exercised  his  rights
    of free movement in Spain. The Spanish authorities were satisfied  that
    he was exercising his rights of free movement. The appellant's  husband
    was issued with a residence card and the appellant was  issued  with  a
    residence card as his family member. There is no  suggestion  that  the
    appellant's husband was not exercising his treaty rights in  a  genuine
    and effective way. The couple returned to the UK after six months.

23.   In Singh, the CJEU outlined why there was an underlying  right  of  an
    EU citizen to return to their  country  of  origin  with  their  family
    member under EU law. To refuse to allow a right of  return  with  their
    family members might discourage an EU national from  exercising  rights
    of free movement in the first place. In  Akrich,  the  CJEU  noted  the
    United Kingdom's concerns that family members may use EU law  to  evade
    the provisions of the United Kingdom's immigration rules but found that
    the motives that prompted a worker of a Member State to seek employment
    in another Member State are of no account as long as the person  wishes
    to pursue "an effective and genuine activity". This was consistent with
    the earlier decision in Levin. The court in Akrich made clear that  the
    motives for returning to the Member State of origin are  not  relevant.
    Such conduct cannot constitute an abuse within the meaning discussed by
    the CJEU in Singh even if the spouse did not have a right to remain  in
    the Member State of which the worker is a national.

24.   The factors set out in regulation 9(3) of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
    state that they are relevant to whether residence in the EEA  State  is
    or was genuine. However, it becomes  clear  from  the  summary  of  the
    relevant case law set out above that the test of  whether  the  British
    citizen's centre of life had transferred to the EEA state and the other
    factors identified in regulation 9(3) were drawn from  the  opinion  of
    Advocate General Sharpston in the case of O.

25.   When the Grand Chamber went on to decide the case in O & B it did  not
    follow or approve the test recommended by Advocate  General  Sharpston.
    The Grand Chamber emphasised that failure to confirm a derived right of
    residence on  a  family  member  on  return  to  the  Member  State  of
    nationality may create an obstacle to the exercise of  rights  of  free
    movement. At [51] the only test laid out by the CJEU was that residence
    in the host Member State as been "sufficiently genuine to as to  enable
    that citizen to create or strengthen family life in that Member State."
    In O & B the CJEU did not seek to lay down a  strict  set  of  criteria
    required to show that residence in the host Member State  was  'genuine
    and effective'. Some of the factors outlined in regulation  9(3)  might
    be relevant to that assessment, but they  cannot  be  taken  as  strict
    requirements for the issue  of  a  derivative  residence  card  if  the
    evidence shows that residence in the host Member State  was  a  genuine
    exercise of free movement rights.

26.   In this case there is no suggestion of abuse of  the  kind  identified
    in Singh. Regulation 9(4)  must  be  read  only  to  conform  with  the
    prohibition on abuse. It cannot be applied solely on  the  ground  that
    one motive for leaving the UK or returning was to establish  derivative
    rights of residence if the evidence otherwise shows  that  the  British
    national genuinely exercised rights of free movement in another  Member
    State. To apply regulation 9(4) in such circumstances would not conform
    with European law as outlined in Akrich.

27.   The appellant is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
    British citizen husband. Her husband had a right, as an EU citizen,  to
    move to Spain to exercise his rights of free movement. It  matters  not
    that their motive was to continue their family  in  Spain  because  the
    appellant was refused leave to remain under the UK  immigration  rules.
    It is not an improper motive. It is a perfectly understandable  one  if
    the alternative was separation. It is not disputed that the appellants'
    husband obtained work and genuinely  exercised  his  treaty  rights  in
    Spain. The fact that they were issued with  residence  cards  indicates
    that the Spanish authorities were satisfied that the exercise of treaty
    rights was genuine and effective. The  principles  outlined  in  Akrich
    make clear that the motive for returning to  the  UK  is  not  relevant
    either. Although they remained in Spain for a fairly  short  period  of
    six months, it was not so short to suggest that  this  was  an  act  of
    abuse. The whole purpose of going to Spain was to continue their family
    life, which strengthened during their period of residence there.

28.   I conclude it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  any  of  the  factors
    outlined in regulation 9(3) because it is accepted that the appellant's
    husband genuinely exercised his rights of free movement in Spain albeit
    only for a period of six  months.  He  exercised  his  rights  of  free
    movement immediately before returning to the United Kingdom, he resided
    together with the appellant in  the  EEA  state,  their  residence  was
    genuine and their family  life  was  strengthened  during  their  joint
    residence in the EEA state.

29.   For  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant a residence card as the family member of  a  British  citizen
    who returned to the UK having exercised treaty rights in another Member
    State breaches her rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry  to
    or residence in the United Kingdom.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on EU law grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
