
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06206/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 January 2018                    |On 24 January 2018                 |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          AZEEZAT GBEMISOLA BADMUS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                  Ms F. Obu, Fitzpatrick & Co.
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Respondent, who was born on 27 September 1992,  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. On 15 March 2016, she applied  for  a  family  permit  as  the
    extended family member of her aunt,  Iyabo  Bello,   who  is  an  Irish
    citizen exercising a Treaty right in the United Kingdom.

2.   Her application was refused and she appealed on  19  May  2016.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parker  allowed  her  appeal  in   a   decision,
    promulgated on 1 August 2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this  decision  on  8  August  2017  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted her permission to appeal on 18
    August 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
4.   Both the Respondent's solicitor and the Home Office Presenting  Officer
    applied for an adjournment of the error of law hearing.

5.    In  particular,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  requested  an
    adjournment until a decision was reached on the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department's renewed application for permission to the Supreme
    Court in the case of MK v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 and also until a judgment was handed down  by  the
    Supreme Court in the case of SM (Algeria), which had been heard  on  29
    November 2017 and in which submissions had been made in relation to the
    issues raised in Sala.

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer showed me a copy of the  order  made
    by the Court of Appeal in MK on his laptop. However, I  noted  that  in
    this order paragraphs 3 and 4 stayed the decision that in MK's case the
    decision by the Upper Tribunal  would  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and also  stayed  the  costs  order
    made in favour of the Appellant. However, it did not stay  paragraph  1
    of the order, which stated that the appeal was allowed or  paragraph  2
    of the order, which said that permission to appeal to the Supreme Court
    was refused. Therefore, in  my  view  the  substance  of  the  decision
    reached by the Court of Appeal stands, which is that Sala  was  wrongly
    decided. Therefore, I am bound by the decision in  MK  and  it  is  not
    necessary to grant an adjournment.

7.   The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  also  made  oral  submissions  in
    relation to the other issues in dispute and the Respondent's  solicitor
    relied upon written submissions and some brief oral submissions. I have
    referred to the content of these submissions,  where  relevant,  in  my
    decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
8.   In his decision, after a  hearing  on  20  July  2017,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  found  that  he  had  the  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    Appellant's appeal despite the Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). He found that  the  Appellant
    fell within an exception referred to  in  paragraph  82,  which  stated
    that:

      "There is a further example.  An  individual  may  be  issued  with  a
      'family permit' under reg. 12(2) as an  EFM  who  is  accompanying  or
      joining an EEA national in the UK.  Suppose a family permit is  issued
      on the basis of a 'durable relationship' with that EEA  national.   On
      arrival in the UK, the individual is  refused  admission  because  the
      Immigration Officer concludes (perhaps on receipt of further evidence)
      that the relationship is not 'durable'.  The individual  is  "treated"
      as a "family member" of the EEA national once he is  issued  with  the
      family permit (see reg. 7(3)).  Provided  that  he  produces  a  valid
      passport; is accompanying or joining the EEA  national;  and  the  EEA
      national has a right to reside in the UK, he "must be admitted" to the
      UK (see reg. 11(2) read  with  reg.  19(2)(a)).   The  individual  may
      appeal against that  EEA  decision  to  refuse  him  admission  as  it
      "concerns...a person's  entitlement  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
      Kingdom" (see reg. 2(1), point (a)).  Even assuming he continues to be
      "treated" as a "family member" despite it being said he does not  meet
      the required condition for being an EFM under reg. 8(4), as  we  noted
      above reg. 26(2A) would apply even if reg. 26(3)  (the  limitation  on
      appeal by a "family member") also applies.  As we noted above, the two
      provisions are not mutually  exclusive.   For  the  purposes  of  reg.
      26(2A), the individual is someone who  "claims  to  be  in  a  durable
      relationship".  That position  is  a  fortiori  if  he  is  no  longer
      "treated" as a family member because he is not considered  to  satisfy
      the EFM requirement of being in a 'durable relationship'.

9.   In my view, properly read Sala did not exclude the  Respondent  as  she
    had not already been issued with a family permit and it was not a  case
    of her being refused admission to the United Kingdom.  Therefore,  this
    part  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parker's  decision  was  wrongly
    decided.

10.  However, Sala has now been overturned by MK v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 and  extended  family  members
    are entitled to a right of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,
    therefore, the error made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parker  in  his
    interpretation of the decision in Sala is now immaterial.

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker had also  proceeded  to  consider  the
    substance of the appeal and, in particular, whether the Respondent  was
    dependent  upon  her  sponsor  for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations.

12.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  reasoning
    contained in paragraph 30 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    was inadequate and did not enable the Appellant to understand the basis
    upon which the  Respondent's  appeal  had  been  allowed.  However,  in
    paragraphs 18 to 23 of  his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    reminded himself of the leading cases relating to  this  issue  and  in
    paragraph 30 the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  referred  back  to  these
    cases.

13.  One of these cases was Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00341
    (IAC),  where  it  was  found  that  "financial  dependency  should  be
    interpreted as meaning that a person needs financial support  from  the
    EEA national...in order to meet his/her essential needs - not to have a
    certain level of income". In the current case, the bank  statements  of
    the Respondent and her sponsor, a letter from Mrs Adeyemi and a  letter
    from Niyi Adekunle indicated that her sponsor was sending her money  on
    a regular basis and that the sponsor was paying  for  the  Respondent's
    college education. Mrs Adeyemi also refers to the  sponsor  paying  for
    the Respondent's upkeep.

14.  The Respondent had also indicated  in  her  interview  with  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that her sponsor  was  responsible  for  her  upkeep,
    school and well-being.  The term "upkeep" can be equated with food  and
    lodgings. In addition, she said in reply to question 8 that her sponsor
    took over responsibility for her in 2011 as she had more funds and that
    poverty prevented her parents from doing so. This latter assertion  was
    not challenged by the Appellant and, therefore, it  was  not  necessary
    for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  require  the  Respondent  to  provide
    further details of her parent's financial situation.  In  paragraph  28
    of the decision the First-tier Tribunal also  found  that  the  account
    given by the Respondent's sponsor was very credible and  the  Appellant
    has not sought to undermine this finding.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had reminded himself in  paragraph  5  of
    his decision that the standard  of  proof  was  one  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities and the evidence read  as  a  whole  indicates  that  the
    Respondent is dependent on the sponsor as defined in Moneke.

16.  I accept that in ECO Manilla v Lim [2015] EWCA Civ 1383  it  was  found
    that financial support which was  merely  used  to  stop  an  Appellant
    eating into her capital did not amount to paying for  essential  living
    needs. But in the current case, the Respondent said  in  her  interview
    that she was living  separately  from  her  parents  and  there  is  no
    indication that she could afford to attend college without the  support
    of her sponsor. It was also not asserted  that  education  and  proving
    financial support to pay for  a  person's  upkeep  did  not  amount  to
    meeting essential needs.

17.  In paragraph 30 the First-tier Tribunal Judge agreed with  counsel  for
    the Respondent's contentions that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  of
    dependency. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  such
    reasoning was not sufficient. However, this statement must be read with
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's own analysis in paragraphs 28,  29  and
    31of his decision.

18.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also sought to rely on the  case  of
    Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC). However, it found
    that "whether a person qualifies as a dependent under  the  Regulations
    is to be determined at the date of decision on the  basis  of  evidence
    produced to the respondent or, on appeal, the date of  hearing  on  the
    basis of evidence produced  to  the  tribunal".  There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parker  did  not  follow  this
    approach.

19.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker did  not
    err in law in his decision.
DECISION
(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker is upheld.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 22 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
