

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06269/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 26 September 2018                          |on 4 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                FRANCIS DEDE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Nadeem of Burton & Burton Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. On the 26 June 2018 the Upper Tribunal found that a  judge  of  the
        First-Tier Tribunal, through no fault of her own, erred in  law  in
        relation to not considering  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        refusal of residence card as an extended family member  of  an  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
     2. Directions were  given  for  the  future  conduct  of  this  appeal
        including the provision by the appellant of additional evidence  in
        relation to this issue. Such evidence was filed  and,  having  been
        considered by Mr Mills, the respondent accepts that  the  appellant
        is in a durable relationship with Ms [AA], an Italian national.
     3. The issue of a residence card to an extended family member  remains
        at the discretion of the Secretary of State under regulation  18(4)
        of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. In an
        email to the Upper Tribunal and  appellants  representative  on  25
        September 2018, Mr Mills confirmed that the respondent's discretion
        will be exercised in the appellant's favour.
     4. Mr Mills is not in a position to  seek  to  withdraw  the  decision
        under  challenge,  wholesale,  because  of  the  rejection  of  the
        validity of the claimed proxy marriage by the  First-Tier  Tribunal
        Judge which was not found to be infected by arguable legal error.
     5. In the circumstances I allow the appeal on the basis  the  decision
        to refuse a residence card is contrary to the Community Regulations
        on the  basis  it  is  accepted  the  appellant  is  in  a  durable
        relationship, but to the extent  the  Secretary  of  State  is  now
        required  to  consider  the  exercise  of  discretion  pursuant  to
        regulation 18(4) of the 2016 regulations.


Decision

     6. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed


   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 September 2018












