Appeal Number: EA/06137/2016

 





	Upper Tribunal 

	(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)	Appeal Number: EA/06137/2016





THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





Heard at Field House

Decision & Reasons Promulgated

On the 6th February 2018

On the 3rd July 2018 









Before



DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES



Between



Zain Nadeem

(ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

Appellant



and



THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Respondent





Representation:



	For the Appellant:	Mr S Mustafa of Counsel, instructed via Direct Access

	For the Respondent:	Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

	

	

	DECISION AND REASONS

	

This is the appeal of Zain Nadeem, who had applied for a residence card on the basis that he was an extended family member under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations of 2006.

The application was refused, he appealed and that appeal was heard by Designated Judge Shaerf without a hearing at Taylor House on the 24th August last year.  In a decision promulgated on the 29th August he applied the case of Sala to the effect that there was no right of appeal under the Regulations for somebody in the Appellant’s position.  Accordingly he declined to consider the merits of the appeal and found that there was no appeal for want of jurisdiction.

The Appellant sought to appeal that decision on the basis that the case of Sala was wrongly decided.  There is now a further Court of Appeal decision.  The case of Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 confirmed that the case of Sala was incorrectly decided and that the Appellant would in circumstances such as these have a right of appeal.

Accordingly the Judge erred in law by finding as he did that there was no jurisdiction and I set aside that decision.  There has been no consideration of the merits of this appeal and accordingly I remit this decision to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Shaerf and the Appellant will have to submit further updated evidence to show what the position is at the date of the next hearing.

I apologise for the delay in the promulgation of this decision. There was an administrative issue which had not been brought to my attention until recently and which I have now corrected.

NOTICE OF DECISION



The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard on all matters, not before Judge Shaerf.



No anonymity direction is made.



	Signed							Date 22nd February 2018

	

	Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

	

Fee Award



The appeal has been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, the issue of a fee award remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal at the conclusion of the appeal.



	Signed							Date 22nd February 2018

	

	Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

	

	Re-signed                                                                             Date 1st July 2018

	

	

	Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes 

	

© CROWN COPYRIGHT 2018

2