

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: EA/06047/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons promulgated     |
|On 6 March 2018                              |On 20 March 2018                   |
|                                             |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   I O G S
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms Z Ahmed, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:        Mr D R F O'Dair, Counsel instructed by OTS
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   refusal on 13 April 2016 to refuse to revoke a deportation order made  on
   3 October 2014, which he had already breached on several occasions.   The
   claimant is a citizen of Romania and contended, inter alia, that  he  had
   been in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for
   sufficient time to entitle him to a permanent right of residence pursuant
   to Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.

Application to attend the hearing

2. Immediately before the hearing,  the  claimant  made  an  application  to
   attend the hearing and give evidence.  His application was  made  through
   his solicitors on 28 July 2017, but refused by the Secretary of State  on
   3 August 2017.  The application was erroneously  based  on  the  relevant
   provision of the 2006 Regulations but the Secretary  of  State  correctly
   applied Regulation  41(1)(a)  and  Regulation  23(6)(b)  of  the  revised
   Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (as  amended),
   citing the claimant's multiple breaches of the deportation order made  in
   2014, and his criminal history.

3. The appeal hearing took  place  on  10  August  2017  in  the  claimant's
   absence.  His second wife and his employer gave evidence and there was  a
   witness statement from the claimant, from each of his wives, and  from  a
   work colleague.

Background

4. The claimant has a poor  immigration  history.   He  entered  the  United
   Kingdom in 2007 under the Accession provisions for Romanian workers, with
   his first wife, who was also a Romanian citizen.  The couple had a child,
   a daughter, born in September 2008 who has always  lived  in  the  United
   Kingdom. In June 2010, he was cautioned for common assault. In 2011,  the
   claimant divorced his first wife.  In May 2012, the claimant is  said  to
   have met his second wife, while living in the United Kingdom.  They began
   to live together in September 2013, and in  May  2014,  they  decided  to
   marry, opting to do so in Romania,  rather  than  incur  the  expense  of
   family members travelling to the United Kingdom for the ceremony.

5. On 27 May 2014, the claimant was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court  on
   charges of unlawful wounding and threats to kill, and damage to property,
   all committed while he was intoxicated.   The  trial  Judge's  sentencing
   remarks recorded that on 7 September 2013, while under the  influence  of
   alcohol, the claimant had attacked two people:

         "Unfortunately, you then set about trying to injure and threatening
         to kill two people, one of whom was terrified and locked himself in
         a bathroom, he was so scared about what you might do to  him.   You
         ended up taking a knife and you stabbed, or attempted  to,  [name].
         He blocked the blow and as a result received two  injuries  to  his
         arm. 10 to 12 sutures to repair his arm as he  blocked,  thankfully
         from his  point  of  view,  the  knife.  ...these  are  people  you
         terrorised.   You   then   gratuitously   broke   somebody   else's
         windscreen."

   The claimant was sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment.

6. On 3 October 2014, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  deportation  order
   pursuant to Regulations 19(3) and 21 of the 2006  Regulations  and  since
   that time, the claimant has had no lawful  right  to  be  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

7. The claimant  was  removed  to  Romania  on  1  November  2014.   He  has
   committed no further offences of violence in the United Kingdom, but  has
   repeatedly breached the  deportation  order  by  re-entering  the  United
   Kingdom unlawfully, and working without permission to do so, whenever  he
   is here.

8. When he re-enters the United Kingdom in breach  of  his  EEA  deportation
   order, the claimant returns to live at the home he shares with his second
   wife, who is also a Romanian citizen.  His second wife has an adult  son,
   who was age 22 when his mother remarried.  The son lives in Romania  with
   his maternal grandmother, has completed a University course and is now in
   employment there.

9. There is disagreement between the claimant and the Secretary of State  as
   to how many times, and when, he was removed  to  Romania,  but  it  seems
   clear that the claimant was removed initially in November 2014,  then  at
   least once in 2015, and three times in 2016, the last such removal  being
   on 25 May 2016. On 16  March  2016,  the  claimant  submitted  an  appeal
   against the deportation order  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was
   rejected as out of time.

10. In their covering letter, the claimant told the Secretary of State  that
   the claimant had only indirect contact with his daughter from  his  first
   marriage, due to an acrimonious break up, but that prior  to  his  latest
   detention, he had been working  to  improve  his  relationship  with  his
   daughter and his first wife, with the help of his solicitors.

11. On 18 March 2016, the claimant applied to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   revoke the deportation order, stating through his  lawyers  that  he  had
   private life here; that he  suffered  from  depression  and  was  tearful
   whenever he spoke to his lawyers; that he had a  subsisting  relationship
   with his second wife and indirect contact  with  his  daughter  from  his
   first marriage.  On 13 April 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to
   revoke the deportation order.  It is that refusal which is the subject of
   the present appeal.

12. Following his detention in May 2016, the claimant was anxious to  appeal
   against the Secretary of State's decision not to revoke  the  deportation
   order, which could be done only once he had left the United Kingdom:  the
   claimant offered to pay his own ticket and  return  voluntarily  but  the
   Secretary of State insisted  that  he  must  be  escorted.   Removal  was
   delayed for about 2 months because the escort was  unwell.  The  claimant
   appealed promptly, once he was outside the United Kingdom and able to  do
   so.

13. It seems that since  the  hearing  in  August  2017,  the  claimant  has
   returned unlawfully to the United Kingdom and is again  living  with  his
   second wife. On 18 February 2018, he was encountered at  his  matrimonial
   home, hiding in the garden shed.  He was arrested and detained.




Refusal letter: 13 April 2016

14. On 13  April  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
   application to revoke the deportation order.  She did not accept that the
   claimant was  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
   Regulations; nor that he had ever done so for long enough to entitle  him
   to a permanent right of residence.    From  November  2014,  all  of  his
   residence was unlawful, because there was a deportation order in force.

15. The Secretary of State considered the principles set out  in  Regulation
   21(5) of the 2006 Regulations, which were the applicable  Regulations  at
   that date.  She noted that the claimant had lived in  Romania  until  the
   age of 27, his youth and formative years. His mother still  lived  there.
   When he committed his 2013 offence, the claimant  lived  with  his  first
   wife and child, but that the bond of affection between the  claimant  and
   his first family had not been sufficient to prevent him from offending.

16. The Secretary of State noted that there was no medical evidence  of  the
   claimant's alleged depression or about the treatment  for  depression  in
   Romania and that there was no evidence beyond the solicitors'  assertion,
   that the claimant had a continuing relationship with his child  from  his
   first marriage, albeit by  indirect  contact.   The  Secretary  of  State
   considered that there was no positive evidence that the claimant's  first
   wife and his daughter were still in the United Kingdom.

17. The Secretary of State reminded herself of  the  sentencing  remarks  of
   the trial Judge. She took into account the previous  caution  for  common
   assault, and considered that this  suggested  that  the  claimant's  2013
   offence was part of a pattern of violence.   There  was  no  evidence  to
   suggest that the  claimant  had  addressed  his  offending  behaviour  by
   completing an Enhanced Thinking Skills or Victim  Awareness  Course.  The
   Secretary of State considered that the claimant had a propensity  to  re-
   offend and constituted a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
   to the public to justify his maintaining his exclusion  from  the  United
   Kingdom on public policy grounds.

18. The Secretary of State considered the claimant's Article 8  ECHR  rights
   and his child's section 55 best interests, as well  as  his  family  life
   with his second wife. She was  not  satisfied  that  he  had  shown  very
   compelling circumstances for which leave to enter  or  remain  should  be
   given outside the Rules. The refusal letter informed the claimant that he
   had an out of country right of appeal against the decision not to  revoke
   his deportation order.

Appeal to First-tier Tribunal

19. The claimant was removed on 23 May 2016 and on 1 June 2016, he  appealed
   against the decision not to revoke the 2014 deportation  order.  He  said
   that he would wish to attend the hearing and  give  oral  evidence.    He
   asserted that the Secretary of State's decision  violated  his  right  to
   private and family life and was disproportionate. The grounds  of  appeal
   said that the claimant had 'suffered procedural unfairness as I  was  not
   advised [he does not say  by  whom]  that  I  could  appeal  against  the
   decision to deport me.  I was advised that I should go and can just  come
   back.  So, I did not appeal against it'.  The claimant added  a  one-line
   assertion that his human rights  were  in  play,  saying  that  he  would
   elaborate in his witness statement.

20. The grounds  of  appeal  asserted  the  claimant's  permanent  right  of
   residence, arguing that the deportation order was disproportionate;  that
   he did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
   affecting one of the fundamental interests of society; and that there was
   a change of circumstances in that his daughter from his first marriage, a
   Romanian citizen born in the United Kingdom in September 2008,  had  been
   in the United Kingdom for 7 years, and the claimant had remarried to  his
   second wife, a Romanian citizen exercising her Treaty rights here.





Witness evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

21. The claimant's witness statement dated  26  July  2017,  which  was  not
   disputed at the hearing, was that he  had  always  worked  while  in  the
   United Kingdom, that the relationship between him and his first wife  ran
   into difficulties and in 2011, they  decided  to  divorce.   He  met  his
   second wife at a party in May 2012, and married her in Romania  in  2014.
   The claimant found the separation from his daughter  and  his  wife  very
   painful and was trying to get back to them, because he  missed  them  and
   did not want his daughter or wife to suffer for the mistake  he  made  in
   2013, for which he had served his time. He had continued to pay money  to
   his first wife for his daughter's maintenance.

22. The claimant had never  applied  for  a  permanent  right  of  residence
   although  he  had  been  working  continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom.
   Regarding the index event, the claimant expressed remorse.  He  had  been
   caught in a drunken fight and  been  punished,  but  was  not  a  violent
   person.

23. There was a statement dated 25  July  2017  from  the  claimant's  first
   wife, confirming that her daughter loved her  father  and  they  used  to
   spend a lot of time together, but had not done so for a  time.   However,
   the claimant was now putting a lot of effort to be present in  her  life,
   supporting his daughter financially, supporting her summer activities and
   spending quality time with her.  His presence in the United  Kingdom  was
   important to his daughter's life and growth.

24. The claimant's second wife also provided a witness  statement  dated  21
   July 2017, in which she said that they were in a very settled  and  happy
   married relationship, and that the day of their marriage had been one  of
   the great days of her life.  The wife was working at the Intercontinental
   Hotel and was almost at the point where she could apply for  a  permanent
   right of residence. The claimant had a daughter from his first  marriage,
   whom he simply adored.  He  cared  for  her  and  had  been  contributing
   financially to her growth in the United Kingdom.

25. The second wife's understanding  of  the  index  event,  which  occurred
   before she met the claimant, was that, although he  had  been  unable  to
   prove it in Court, the claimant had been  defending  himself  from  three
   people involved in the fight.  The claimant had been under the  influence
   of alcohol.  His second wife's evidence was that her husband  was  not  a
   violent man: he was caring, loving and hard-working and his employer  was
   supportive of his return.

26. A statement from a colleague at the claimant's employers said that  they
   had been good friends since 2012 and  worked  together  from  2013.   The
   claimant was hard-working, kind,  and  always  happy  to  help.   He  was
   married, and they all used to go  out  for  dinners.   The  claimant  his
   second wife and his daughter and could not live without them: when he was
   abroad, the colleague would speak to the claimant on the telephone or  by
   skype.  The claimant was devastated, sometimes crying over all  of  these
   problems and being far away from his family.



First-tier Tribunal hearing

27. There was a preliminary issue in the First-tier Tribunal as  to  whether
   the appeal should proceed in the  absence  of  the  claimant.   The  Home
   Office Presenting Officer was not prepared to undertake to allow  him  to
   enter the United Kingdom if the appeal was adjourned  for  that  purpose.
   For the claimant, Mr O'Dair  indicated  that  he  would  be  prepared  to
   proceed, in the claimant's absence,  subject  to  reservations  which  he
   expressed following the decision in R on the application  of  Kiarie  and
   Byndloss v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42.

28.  The  hearing  proceeded  in  the  claimant's  absence.  The  claimant's
   employer told the Tribunal that the claimant had worked for  him  on  the
   construction of frames to hold the concrete mix in the structure  of  new
   buildings.  The work was hard and inherently dangerous; most of those  in
   the employer's employment who did this work  were  Romanian.   Those  who
   constructed these frames were a tight knit group.  The employer said that
   he was prepared to re-employ the claimant if he were available, and  that
   he was in telephone contact with the claimant in Romania.  They had  last
   spoken during the week before the First-tier Tribunal hearing;  they  had
   not discussed whether the claimant had employment in  Romania,  just  the
   forthcoming hearing.

29. The claimant's second wife gave evidence.  She told  the  Tribunal  that
   the claimant had elected to return to Romania during his prison  sentence
   under the Early Removal Scheme, which the couple thought would enable the
   claimant to leave prison earlier and return to work in the United Kingdom
   while he appealed the deportation decision.  She acknowledged that if she
   had to return to Romania with her husband,  she  would  have  the  family
   support of her own mother and her son from her first  marriage  who  live
   there.   The  claimant's  offence  had  been  committed   when   he   was
   intoxicated: his  second wife told the Tribunal that  her  experience  of
   him was that he did not have a drink problem and she considered he had no
   need to address his offending behaviour. Her  opinion  was  that  he  had
   committed only one offence and would not commit any more.

30. The second wife gave evidence about contact  between  the  claimant  and
   his daughter from his first marriage.  She said that the first  wife  and
   the claimant's daughter lived in Hoxton, about 40 minutes by  train  away
   from where the claimant lived with his second wife.  She and her  husband
   would make the trip together for him to visit  his  daughter,  every  2/3
   weeks.   The second wife usually  was  not  directly  involved,  but  she
   accompanied him, and she also said she spoke regularly to  the  child  on
   FaceTime.  The claimant's daughter was a very sensitive girl, a  'daddy's
   girl' who loved cuddles, always wanted to know when she  could  come  and
   stay for the weekend, and  for  whom  electronic  contact  would  not  be
   enough.

31. The second wife said that the claimant had been giving  his  first  wife
   money on a 'cash in hand'  basis  to  help  support  his  daughter:  more
   recently, it had been done by bank transfer and the second wife was  able
   to produce evidence of those transfers from the claimant's  bank  account
   to that of his first wife, the earliest being 11 July 2016, following his
   escorted removal on 25 May 2016.  There was no corroborative evidence  of
   payments before that from the first wife, other  than  the  first  wife's
   witness statement.

First-tier Tribunal decision

32. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the Secretary  of  State's
   decision to refuse to permit the claimant to return to the United Kingdom
   and be detained, for the sole purpose of attending the hearing,  was  'at
   the very least unfortunate'.  It is clear  from  his  decision  that  the
   description of the August 3 refusal decision as  being  refused  'on  the
   technical ground that it had been made by way of reference to  the  wrong
   Regulation' originated with the Home Office Presenting Officer,  not  the
   claimant's representative.

33. The Judge found that the claimant was not entitled to a permanent  right
   of residence  as  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  5  years'
   uninterrupted residence in accordance with  the  Regulations  before  his
   incarceration, and that after his release, he was  not  lawfully  in  the
   United Kingdom.   That assessment is unarguably correct.

34. The Judge then considered risk and  rehabilitation,  taking  account  of
   the absence of  the  claimant,  stating  that  he  might  have  had  more
   information on which to base his assessment  if  the  claimant  had  been
   present and subjected to cross-examination.   The claimant had wanted  to
   come and give evidence: it was  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
   refuse him permission.  The Judge had  regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
   claimant's employer that he would  re-employ  him  for  a  difficult  and
   dangerous job whenever the claimant was available, and  the  evidence  of
   his second wife that he was not a violent man and had no  drink  problem,
   and had committed no further offences since 2013.   The  absence  of  any
   formal rehabilitation training  was  neutral,  weighing  neither  in  his
   favour or to his detriment.

35. The Judge did not seek to go behind the  conviction  but  he  considered
   that if the claimant had anger or alcohol problems,  he  would  not  have
   been able to sustain his difficult  and  dangerous  employment  and  that
   there was no evidence which satisfied the Judge that the claimant  lacked
   anger management skills or had a propensity to reoffend.

36. The Judge considered the limited evidence on  both  sides,  taking  into
   account all relevant matters, and reached the conclusion that the  appeal
   succeeded under the Regulations.

37. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered in the alternative whether  the
   claimant could succeed under Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of State  had
   not challenged the validity of the claimant's second marriage  and  there
   was evidence that the second wife was exercising Treaty rights here.  The
   Judge accepted also that  the  claimant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship   with   his   daughter,   maintained   under   considerable
   difficulties, since he had been  in  prison  and/or  removed  to  Romania
   intermittently during the 9 years the claimant's daughter  had  lived  in
   the United Kingdom.  She was a  qualifying  child,  well  established  in
   primary school  education  and  probably  2  years  away  from  secondary
   transfer.  The Judge acknowledged that it  was  difficult  to  apply  the
   seven Zoumbas principles on such  limited  evidence  (from  both  sides),
   including the total absence of the claimant, but was persuaded  that  the
   impact of  the  claimant's  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
   substantial period would be unduly harsh for his child.

38. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard to the  statutory  presumptions
   in section 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act. were counterbalanced  by  other
   interests, especially those of the claimant's daughter.   He  noted  that
   between 2008 when she was born and 2014, when the deportation  order  was
   made, the claimant had been lawfully in the United Kingdom and  that  his
   relationship with his child had been established during that period.  The
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  the  claimant's  continued
   exclusion would breach his Article 8 ECHR private  and  family  life,  in
   particular with  his  daughter.  He  was  satisfied,  applying  paragraph
   117B(6) of the 2002 Act, that the relationship between the  claimant  and
   his daughter was genuine and subsisting, involving contact on  a  regular
   basis, and that it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to  leave  the
   United Kingdom and go with him to Romania.

39. The Judge allowed the claimant's appeal both under the 2006  Regulations
   and Article 8 ECHR.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

40. The matters raised in the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  were
   as follows:

    a) Ground 1.  The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  not
       giving adverse weight to the claimant's  inability  to  provide  the
       refusal of entry decision of 3 August 2017,  accepting  instead  his
       assertion that his application for entry was refused 'because  of  a
       technical error  in  the  application'.    The  Secretary  of  State
       attached the decision to her grounds and contended that if the Judge
       had insisted on seeing it, or been told what it contained, he  would
       have concluded that her decision under Regulation  41(1)(a)  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016  (as  amended)
       was lawful.

    b) Ground 2.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  direct  himself
       properly as to the claimant's poor immigration history, including  4
       removals from the United Kingdom  following  3  unlawful  re-entries
       after the deportation order had been executed

    c) Ground 3.  The First-tier Tribunal's approach to  the  evidence  and
       burden of proof was  erroneous  in  law,  unlawfully  reversing  the
       burden  of  proof  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to   explain   the
       circumstances of the undisputed caution for common assault in  2010,
       which should have been treated as adverse personal  conduct,  absent
       any explanation from the claimant to the contrary.

    d) Ground 4.  The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  have  regard  to  the
       alternative remedy available to the  claimant  in  relation  to  the
       deportation order, to apply from outside the United Kingdom  to  set
       it  aside.   Absent  that  consideration,  the  Secretary  of  State
       contended that insufficient  weight  was  given  to  the  claimant's
       conduct since his first deportation in 2014, impermissibly  reducing
       the seriousness with which the Judge viewed the  claimant's  conduct
       in the United Kingdom.

    e) Ground 5.  It was not open to the First-tier Tribunal to accept  the
       employer's evidence that the claimant had no problems  with  alcohol
       or temper, when assessing whether the claimant  remained  a  present
       risk.  There was no medical or other expert evidence to suggest that
       the claimant would be unable to function as an employee with  either
       or both of those problems.  The claimant  had  carried  out  a  very
       serious criminal act whilst intoxicated, and whether he was also  an
       alcoholic was of limited relevance.  In considering that he had  not
       been shown to have anger issues at work, the Judge  had  taken  into
       account immaterial matters.  Nor  was  it  open  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to find that if this  appeal  were  allowed,  the  claimant
       would be able to settle in  the  United  Kingdom,  absent  a  lawful
       application for the deportation  order  to  be  revoked,  made  from
       abroad.

41. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  on  the
   basis that the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  'are  lengthy  and
   clear and I will not repeat them here.  They  raise  arguable  errors  of
   law'.

Rule 24 Reply

42. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf  of  the  claimant.   That  is  the
   basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

43. Mr O'Dair for the claimant relied on his skeleton argument  of  5  March
   2018, arguing that it was a breach of the Secretary of State's duty as  a
   public authority under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998  not  to
   allow the claimant to come to the United Kingdom for  the  hearing.   The
   claimant argued that the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  Kiarie  and
   Byndloss could not be confined to section 94B of the 2002 Act,  that  the
   principles applied to any out of country right of appeal,  and  that  the
   alternative route of an application for re-admission followed by judicial
   review if that application were unsuccessful was not  an  answer  to  the
   Kiarie point. His human rights were engaged, and oral evidence as to  the
   quality of his private and family life and his character would inevitably
   have assisted the First-tier Tribunal.  There were  no  video  facilities
   available to permit him to give evidence remotely.

44. The claimant should not be penalised for not having judicially  reviewed
   the decision to refuse to allow him to attend his  appeal  hearing.   The
   Secretary of State had it in her power to prevent the claimant  appearing
   as a witness and in this case, the claimant was the party with the burden
   of proof. The First-tier Tribunal was able  to  draw  adverse  inferences
   against the Secretary of State  and  therefore  permission  for  judicial
   review have been refused, if sought.

45. The claimant disputed the assertion that the error about the content  of
   the refusal of admission came from him; the First-tier Tribunal  decision
   at [16] recorded that the assertion came from the Home Office  Presenting
   Officer at the hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had been  entitled
   to rely upon that representation, and the Secretary of State could not be
   heard now to say to the contrary. As to the factual  error  made  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal as to the number  of  times  the  claimant  had  been
   removed, that was immaterial.

46. The First-tier Tribunal had been entitled to  infer  that  the  breaches
   the claimant committed by ignoring the deportation order were not such as
   to indicate that he was likely to commit any other offences.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal had rightly directed itself that the claimant's case should
   not be weakened by the Secretary of State's decision not to allow him  to
   attend the hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal decision should be upheld.

47. The First-tier Tribunal had directed itself correctly on the  burden  of
   proof, applying Straszewski v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   [2015] EWCA Civ 1245, [2016] I WLR 1173 at [12], in the judgment of  Lord
   Justice Moore-Bick, with whom Lord Justice Davis and Lady  Justice  Sharp
   agreed, holding that, in EEA cases which prima facie would interfere with
   the exercise of such a person's Treaty  rights,  the  primary  burden  of
   proof as to the legality of removal lay on the Secretary of State as  the
   Member State making the removal decision.   It  was  for  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had   presented
   sufficient evidence such that,  absent  rebuttal  by  the  claimant,  the
   appeal would fail.  A caution for common assault,  without  any  evidence
   about the surrounding circumstances, was  not  sufficient  to  meet  that
   test.

48. In oral argument, Mr O'Dair asserted that error of law which  the  Upper
   Tribunal identified would need to be  material.   The  issue  was  always
   whether the claimant was a person who, as  a  matter  of  public  policy,
   should be excluded from the jurisdiction.   The decision to refuse  entry
   stood or fell on an out of time challenge to  the  deportation  order  in
   2014 and both parties had so treated it. Mr O'Dair relied, in particular,
   on ground 1 of his skeleton argument and contended  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge had not erred in his approach to the substantive law.  The
   decision might be surprising, but it had been open to the Judge, and  the
   Secretary of State's challenge was to the judge's findings of  fact,  not
   law.

49. The question for the Upper Tribunal was whether the First-tier  Tribunal
   had been entitled, as a matter of law, to take account of the  claimant's
   absence from the hearing as a matter in his favour.  The Judge had  dealt
   carefully and correctly with Part VA of the  2002  Act.   The  claimant's
   application to come to the United Kingdom raised human rights issues  and
   therefore engaged the  Kiarie  principle.   The  Home  Office  Presenting
   Officer, Ms Mackenzie, had explained to the Judge what the reason was for
   refusal.   The Judge had not seen the August 3 decision at the hearing as
   neither party had provided a copy.

50. For the Secretary of State, Ms Ahmed relied on the Secretary of  State's
   grounds for review.  The First-tier Tribunal had looked  at  this  appeal
   through completely the wrong prism.  The appeal should be allowed and the
   decision remade.

51. I reserved my decision, which I now give.





Discussion

52. I have been provided with a copy of the 3 August 2017  decision  by  the
   Secretary of State's to refuse leave to enter for the hearing.   It  says
   this:

         "I am writing in reply to  your  communication  of  2  August  2017
         requesting in permission for your client  to  re-enter  the  United
         Kingdom in order to make submissions in person at  the  hearing  of
         his appeal on 10 August 2017 in accordance with Regulation 41(1)(a)
         of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.
         Regulation 41(1)(a) of the EEA Regulations 2016 explains  that  the
         provision for re-admission to attend an appeal  hearing  in  person
         under regulation 41  applies  where  a  person  "is  subject  to  a
         decision to remove made under regulation 23(6)(b)".
         Regulation 23(6)(b) provides for the removal of a person  "who  has
         entered the United Kingdom"  where  "the  Secretary  of  State  has
         decided that the person's removal is justified on grounds of public
         policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in  accordance  with
         regulation 27". ...
         As  the  appeal  under  regulation  27(1)(d)  against  refusal   of
         admission under regulation 19(1A) is exercisable only from  outside
         the UK, and does not pertain to a decision to  remove  your  client
         either under regulation 23(6)(b) of the  EEA  Regulations  2016  or
         under  regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006,   the
         provisions of regulation 41 (and the previous,  similar  provisions
         of regulation 29AA)  do not apply."

53. So far as relevant to this  appeal,  Regulation  23(6)(b)  of  the  2016
   Regulations provides as follows:

         "23(6)   Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an EEA national who has
         entered the United Kingdom ...may be removed if - (b) the Secretary
         of State has decided that the  person's  removal  is  justified  on
         grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
         accordance with Regulation 27. ...

         (8)  A decision under paragraph 6(b) must state that upon execution
         of any deportation order arising from  that  decision,  the  person
         against whom the order was made is  prohibited  from  entering  the
         United Kingdom - (a) until the order is revoked; ...
         (9)  A decision taken under paragraph 6(b) or (c) has the effect of
         terminating any right to reside otherwise enjoyed by the individual
         concerned. "

54. Regulation 41 provides for temporary  admission  to  submit  a  case  in
   person in the following circumstances:

         "Temporary admission to submit case in person

         41.-(1) This regulation applies where-
             (a)  a person ("P") is subject to a decision  to  remove  made
             under regulation 23(6)(b);
             (b)  P has appealed against the decision referred to  in  sub-
             paragraph (a);
             (c)  a date for P's appeal has  been  set  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal or Upper Tribunal;
             (d)   P  wants  to  make  submissions  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal or Upper Tribunal in person; and
             (e)  P is outside the United Kingdom.

         (2)  P may apply to the Secretary of State  for  permission  to  be
         temporarily admitted (within the meaning of paragraphs 21 to 24  of
         Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, as applied by this regulation) to  the
         United Kingdom in order to make submissions in person.

         (3)  The Secretary of State must grant P  permission,  except  when
         P's appearance may cause  serious  troubles  to  public  policy  or
         public security."

55. The right to enter and be heard in an appeal  in  the  2016  Regulations
   derives from Article 31 of Directive 2004/58/EC on the right of  citizens
   of the Union and their family members to move and  reside  freely  within
   the territory of the Member States:

         "Article 31:  Procedural safeguards

         1.   The persons concerned shall have access to judicial and, where
         appropriate, administrative redress procedures in the  host  Member
         State to appeal against  or  seek  review  of  any  decision  taken
         against them on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
         public health. ...

         3.   The redress procedures shall allow for an examination  of  the
         legality of the decision, as well as of the facts and circumstances
         on which the proposed measure is based. They shall ensure that  the
         decision is not  disproportionate,  particularly  in  view  of  the
         requirements laid down in Article 28.

         4.   Member States may exclude the individual concerned from  their
         territory pending the redress procedure, but they may  not  prevent
         the individual from submitting his/her defence  in  person,  except
         when his/her appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy
         or public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a
         denial of entry to the territory."


56. The claimant in this appeal at all  material  times  was  subject  to  a
   decision to remove him from the United Kingdom on public security grounds
   (the 2014 deportation order, and a  number  of  subsequent  decisions  to
   remove him).  The Secretary of State's refusal decision on 3 August  2017
   does not engage with  the  question  whether  the  claimant  would  cause
   'serious troubles to...public security' during  the  proposed  period  of
   entry for the August 2017 hearing.  Nor did she apply her mind to the  14
   June 2017 Supreme Court decision in Kiarie and Byndloss, as  set  out  in
   the opinion of Lord Wilson JSC, with whom Lady Hale PSC, Lord  Hodge  JSC
   and Lord Toulson JSC at [61]-[63]:

         "61.     The next question is  whether,  if  he  is  to  stand  any
         worthwhile chance of winning his appeal, an appellant needs to give
         oral evidence to the tribunal and to respond to whatever  is  there
         said on behalf of the Home Secretary and by the tribunal itself. By
         definition, he has a bad criminal record. One  of  his  contentions
         will surely have to be that he is a  reformed  character.  To  that
         contention the tribunal will bring a healthy scepticism to bear. He
         needs to surmount it. I have grave doubts  as  to  whether  he  can
         ordinarily do so without giving oral evidence to the tribunal. In a
         witness statement he may or may not be  able  to  express  to  best
         advantage his resolution to  forsake  his  criminal  past.  In  any
         event, however, I cannot imagine that, on its  own,  the  statement
         will generally cut much ice  with  the  tribunal.  Apart  from  the
         assistance that it might gain from expert evidence  on  that  point
         (see para 74 below), the tribunal will want to hear how he explains
         himself orally and, in particular, will want to assess  whether  he
         can survive cross-examination in relation to it. Another strand  of
         his case is likely to be  the  quality  of  his  relationship  with
         others living in the UK, in particular with any child,  partner  or
         other family member. The Home Secretary contends that, at least  in
         this respect, it is the evidence of the adult family members  which
         will most assist the  tribunal.  But  I  am  unpersuaded  that  the
         tribunal will usually be able properly to  conduct  the  assessment
         without oral evidence from the appellant  whose  relationships  are
         under scrutiny; and the evidence of the adult  family  members  may
         either leave gaps which he would need to fill or  betray  perceived
         errors which he would seek to correct.

         62. ...It is also worthwhile to note that, even if an EEA  national
         was removed from the UK in advance of his appeal, he had,  save  in
         exceptional circumstances, a right under  regulation  29AA  of  the
         2006  Regulations  (reflective  of  article  31(4)   of   Directive
         2004/58/EC) to require the Home Secretary to enable him  to  return
         temporarily to the UK in order to give evidence in  person  to  the
         tribunal.

         63.  The Home Secretary submits to this court that the fairness  of
         the hearing of an appeal against deportation brought by  a  foreign
         criminal is highly unlikely to turn on the ability of the appellant
         to give oral evidence; and that therefore the determination of  the
         issues raised in such an appeal  is  likely  to  require  his  live
         evidence only exceptionally. No doubt this submission reflects much
         of the thinking  which  led  the  Home  Secretary  to  propose  the
         insertion of section 94B into the 2002 Act. I am,  however,  driven
         to conclude that the submission is unsound and that  the  suggested
         unlikelihood runs in the opposite direction, namely  that  in  many
         cases an arguable appeal against  deportation  is  unlikely  to  be
         effective unless there is a facility for the appellant to give live
         evidence to the tribunal."

57. Although that analysis is obiter dicta in the  context  of  the  Supreme
   Court's decision, it reminds me that the right to enter and give evidence
   is to be abrogated only in exceptional circumstances.   It is hard to see
   what those circumstances were here,  save  for  the  claimant's  repeated
   attempts to return to the United Kingdom.  He has  served  his  time  and
   committed no further offences now for almost 5 years.  His  circumstances
   have changed, in that he  is  happily  remarried  and  supported  in  his
   application by both his first and second wife, and contact has  been  re-
   established with his daughter, as well as better relations with his first
   wife.

58. I turn, therefore, to the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds.   Ground  1,
   which concerns the  absence  and  the  misdescription  of  the  August  3
   decision not to admit the claimant to give evidence at  his  hearing,  is
   unarguable.  The First-tier Tribunal records that it was the Home  Office
   Presenting Officer who so described it.  The  document  in  question  was
   available to the Secretary of State at all material times and she  cannot
   be heard to say that having  failed  correctly  to  describe  it  at  the
   hearing, that is a material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   decision.

59. As to ground 2, it is right that the Judge  directed  himself  that  the
   claimant returned unlawfully twice, when  in  fact  he  did  so  on  four
   occasions.  Nothing turns on that; the point which the Secretary of State
   makes is that the claimant disregarded the deportation  order,  which  is
   not in dispute.  The claimant has provided reasons  for  so  doing.   The
   Judge gave weight to the gravity of  that  disregard,  but  also  to  the
   explanation advanced. There is no material error of law in his approach.

60. Ground 3, regarding the common assault conviction, also is not  material
   to the outcome of the appeal.  As regards ground 4, there is no merit  in
   it and to a large extent, it duplicates the earlier grounds.   The  Judge
   gave proper, intelligible and adequate reasons for  his  findings  as  to
   whether there was a genuine, present and serious risk  arising  from  the
   claimant's temper or drink  problem,  if  he  had  one.   The  Judge  was
   entitled to find that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  permitted  the
   claimant to attend the hearing,  and  cross-examined  him,  the  position
   might have been different, but that was her decision and  she  cannot  be
   heard to complain of it.

61. For all of the above reasons, there is no material error of law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I uphold it.

DECISION

62. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law.
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date:         16 March 2018                  Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


