
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06814/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 29 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sarwar, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1989.  On 19 July 2018  she
    made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").  The
    application was refused in a decision dated 28 September 2018.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan ("the FtJ") at a hearing  on  27  February  2019
    following which the appeal was dismissed.

 3. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal with particular focus in the grant  of  permission  being
    the appellant's relationship with her  second  child  who  was  aged  3
    months at the date of the hearing before the FtJ, and the nature of the
    care that the appellant provides to her.

 4. In order to put the arguments before me into context, it  is  necessary
    to summarise the FtJ's decision.

    The FtJ's decision

 5. The FtJ referred to the fact that the appellant initially asked for  an
    oral hearing but did not attend.  However, that was because  by  letter
    dated 20 February 2019 she said that she would  not  be  attending  and
    asked that the matter be  dealt  with  'on  the  papers'.   A  Tribunal
    caseworker refused the request for the appeal to be determined  on  the
    papers because to change the hearing from an oral hearing required  the
    consent of the respondent under rule 25(1)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   It
    was noted that the appellant had received  that  response  because  she
    wrote in reply, again asking for a decision on  the  papers.   The  FtJ
    refused to accede to that request.

 6. He recorded at [5] that the submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    amounted to no more than relying on the respondent's  decision  letter,
    with no other  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   He
    recorded that nothing of substance was said and that his  decision  was
    "in reality" based on material in the documents before him.

 7. He recorded the appellant's background and the fact that  she  and  her
    partner have two children, born in May 2017 and November 2018, who  are
    both British citizens.

 8. The FtJ went on to state that the  appellant's  partner  was  a  prison
    psychologist.  He summarised the  respondent's  decision  and  at  [13]
    summarised what the appellant had to establish pursuant to reg 16(5) of
    the EEA Regulations.  He recorded that it was not in dispute  but  that
    the appellant's children were British citizens and are residing in  the
    UK.  The issue before him was whether the appellant  is  their  primary
    carer and whether they would be unable  to  reside  in  the  UK  or  in
    another EEA State if the appellant left the UK.

 9. He referred to the decisions of  Hines  v  London  Borough  of  Lambeth
    [2014] EWCA Civ 660 and Chavez-Vilchez & Ors v Raad van Bestuur (Case C-
    133/15) 10 May 2017, summarising the effect  of  those  decisions.   He
    also referred to Patel v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2028.

10. In his findings from [18] he accepted that the appellant is the primary
    carer for both children.  He referred to the appellant's partner's work
    schedule which covered a four month period from 1 February 2019  to  31
    May 2019.  He said that given that the appellant's partner is in  full-
    time work it is likely that she is  undertaking  the  role  of  primary
    carer.

11. However, analysing the work schedule, he went  on  to  state  that  the
    appellant's partner had 40 scheduled rest days over the period  of  the
    schedule which equated to a third (33.3%) of the days and that he  also
    had 16 days annual leave which equated to a  little  over  13%  of  the
    days.

12. He concluded that it was difficult to reconcile this  pattern  of  work
    and non-work days with the state of affairs asserted on behalf  of  the
    appellant to the effect that her partner had no  involvement  with  the
    children's lives other than as a provider  of  financial  support.   He
    said he recognised that the appellant's partner was working away for  a
    significant amount of time and that it was credible  that  it  was  the
    appellant who had adopted the primary responsibility for  the  care  of
    the children for that reason.  On the other hand, her partner was  also
    at home for a significant period of time.  He concluded that it was not
    credible that the children have no attachment to their father who lives
    in the same household and who is not at work for a  substantial  amount
    of time.  He said that if that were true it would be a  highly  unusual
    state of affairs and the evidence did not support  a  finding  to  that
    effect.

13. At [21] he went on to say this:

         "I also struggle to reconcile what I am told  of  [the  appellant's
         partner's] lack of parenting skills with the fact that he works  as
         a prison psychologist.  Put simply, my assumption  is  that  a  man
         undertaking such work would have to have  a  reasonable  degree  of
         intelligence, and a capacity to engage with others.   It  would  be
         worrying if that were not so.  I do not accept that a man with  the
         capacity to undertake such work would '... not know how to change a
         nappy, wash and bathe my daughter or how to feed her and change her
         clothes after she has soiled herself'".

14. He went on to conclude therefore, that the  appellant  had  exaggerated
    her role from that of primary carer to  that  of  sole  carer  and  had
    entirely negated her partner's role as father, both  as  an  attachment
    figure for the children and as someone able to provide practical care.

15. Turning to the question of whether the  children  would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK or in another  EEA  State  if  she  left  the  UK,  he
    referred to the appellant's claim that if she were forced to leave  the
    UK for Ghana the children would be forced to accompany her as they  are
    attached to her only, and her husband would not be  able  to  care  and
    look after them because of his shift patterns  and  lack  of  parenting
    skills.

16. He reiterated that  he  did  not  accept  that  the  children  have  no
    attachment to their  father  or  that  he  was  so  wholly  lacking  in
    parenting skills as the appellant would have him believe.  He said that
    he had considered whether the shift pattern  would  preclude  him  from
    caring for the children to such an extent that they would be unable  to
    reside in the UK.  He found that there would  be  difficulties  but  no
    more so than for any other single parent who has to juggle the  demands
    of  childcare  responsibilities  and   work.    He   said   that   such
    circumstances were never easy but it was managed by single  parents  up
    and down the country all the time.

17. He therefore concluded that the evidence  did  not  persuade  him  that
    there were factors  particular  to  this  case  which  meant  that  the
    appellant's partner could not do what so many  others  manage,  finding
    that he was actually better placed than many  because  he  was  holding
    down a responsible job.

18. He then turned briefly to consider Article 8  but  found  that  in  the
    light of authority the appellant was not entitled to argue Article 8.

19. At [27] he concluded with the final observation that he found it likely
    that the application was made to provide precisely the  type  of  back-
    door route to residence by non-EU citizen parents that was discussed by
    the Court of Appeal in Patel.  The appellant, he said, could apply  for
    leave under the Article 8 Immigration Rules or for leave outside  those
    Rules.

    The grounds and submissions

20. The grounds may be summarised as follows.  It is argued  that  the  FtJ
    erred in considering the application at an oral hearing  after  it  had
    been confirmed by notice to the appellant that it would be by way of  a
    paper hearing.

21. It is further argued in the grounds that  the  FtJ  had  erred  in  his
    consideration  of  the  work  schedule  and  the  role  played  by  the
    appellant's partner.  Thus, it appeared that  the  FtJ  was  suggesting
    that due to the amount of days off and leave, the  appellant's  partner
    would be able to take care of the children if the appellant was  forced
    to leave the  UK.   However,  the  appellant's  partner  was  presently
    undertaking a two-year course at university which  required  attendance
    on rest days and annual leave days, as well as undertaking research and
    written course work and assignments on those days  as  well  as  during
    most evenings.  He would be unable to assume  the  role  of  a  primary
    carer as well as working  long,  variable  shift  patterns,  especially
    nightshifts, when undertaking further educational studies.

22. The grounds go on to contend that although the FtJ did not accept  that
    the appellant's partner has no attachment to  the  children  or  lacked
    parenting skills, that was not the test  that  needed  to  be  applied.
    Furthermore, although it was concluded that there would be difficulties
    in the appellant's partner caring for the children, the FtJ  failed  to
    give sufficient or adequate reasons for his findings in that respect.

23. In addition, it is asserted that  the  FtJ  had  failed  to  take  into
    account that the children would not be able to be cared  for  overnight
    because of the varied shift patterns, especially long night shifts.

24. Paragraph 9 of the grounds contends that the FtJ failed  to  take  into
    account the ages of the two children, one being aged  1  year  and  the
    other 3 months and "both" being breastfed by the appellant.   Thus,  it
    is argued that the FtJ failed to assess  and  take  into  account  that
    there was a relationship of dependency between  these  two  very  young
    children and the appellant.

25. Lastly, it is argued that the FtJ failed to take account  of  the  best
    interests and welfare of both  children  and  had  failed  to  consider
    whether the children would be compelled to leave with the appellant  if
    she was forced to leave the UK.

26. In submissions on behalf of the appellant the grounds were  relied  on.
    It was submitted that the FtJ had made a mistake  in  saying  that  the
    appellant's partner was a prison psychologist, whereas in fact he is  a
    prison officer.  He had also failed to take into  account  the  studies
    that her partner was undertaking and there were  documents  before  the
    FtJ in that respect.

27. I raised  with  Mr  Sarwar  the  question  of  why  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's partner's studies is not mentioned in  the  appellant's  or
    her partner's witness statements. Mr Sarwar suggested that  it  may  be
    that the person who drafted the statements forgot to include it.

28. It was submitted that although childcare could be provided, that  would
    be  disproportionate  to  the  salary  of  a  prison  officer.   During
    nightshifts there would be no-one to take care of the children.   Thus,
    he could not be a carer if the appellant was forced to leave the UK and
    both children would be forced to follow her.

29. On behalf of the respondent  Ms  Jones  submitted  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the  FtJ's  decision.   Although  the  grounds
    contend that  the  appellant's  partner  was  studying,  that  was  not
    evidenced before the FtJ.  Furthermore, the FtJ had  not  accepted  the
    case put on behalf of the appellant to the effect that her partner  was
    not involved in the children's lives.

30. At [27] the FtJ had concluded that this was an attempt by the appellant
    to use a backdoor route to residence in the UK.

31. On the issue of the appellant  breastfeeding  the  youngest  child,  Ms
    Jones agreed that there was no engagement by the FtJ with that issue.

32. In reply, Mr Sarwar said that although the appellant had the option  of
    making another application under Article 8, there was no guarantee that
    that application would succeed.  The decision needed to  be  considered
    under reg 16(5) of the EEA Regulations.

33. Furthermore, even if the evidence in relation to  further  studies  was
    not before the FtJ, he had failed to address the issue of  nightshifts,
    the long hours and the appellant's breastfeeding.   Her  partner  would
    need to sleep during the day after being on a nightshift.

34. Following submissions, I indicated to the parties that I would  reserve
    my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Assessment and conclusions

35. Reg 16 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:

         "Derivative right to reside

         16.- (1) A person has a  derivative  right  to  reside  during  any
                  period in which the person-

                  (a)  is not an exempt person; and

                  (b)  satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                      paragraphs (2) to (6).

             (2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of an  EEA  national;
                      and

                  (b)  the EEA national-

                      (i)  is under the age of 18;

                      (ii)  resides  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                           sufficient person; and

                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for
                           an indefinite period.

             (3)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  any of the person's parents ('PP') is an EEA national
                      who resides or has resided in the United Kingdom;

                  (b)  both the person and PP reside or have resided in  the
                      United Kingdom at the same time, and  during  such  a
                      period of residence, PP has  been  a  worker  in  the
                      United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  the person is in education in the United Kingdom.

             (4)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)   the  person  is  the  primary  carer  of  a   person
                      satisfying the criteria in paragraph (3) ('PPP'); and

                  (b)  PPP would be unable to continue to be educated in the
                      United Kingdom if the person left the United  Kingdom
                      for an indefinite period.

             (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of a British  citizen
                      ('BC');

                  (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or
                      in another EEA State if the person  left  the  United
                      Kingdom for an indefinite period.

             (6)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is under the age of 18;

                  (b)  the person does not have leave to  enter,  or  remain
                      in, the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act;

                  (c)   the  person's  primary  carer  is  entitled   to   a
                      derivative right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
                      under paragraph (2), (4) or (5); and

                  (d)  the primary carer would be prevented from residing in
                      the United Kingdom if  the  person  left  the  United
                      Kingdom for an indefinite period.

             (7)  In this regulation-

                  (a)  'education' excludes nursery education but  does  not
                      exclude  education  received  before  the  compulsory
                      school age where that education is equivalent to  the
                      education received at or after the compulsory  school
                      age;

                  (b)  'worker' does not include a  jobseeker  or  a  person
                      treated as a worker under regulation 6(2);

                  (c)  an 'exempt person' is a person-

                      (i)   who  has  a  right  to  reside  under   another
                           provision of these Regulations;

                      (ii) who has the right of abode under  section  2  of
                           the 1971 Act (13);

                      (iii)    to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act  (14),  or
                           an  order  made  under  subsection  (2)  of  that
                           section (15), applies; or

                      (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in
                           the United Kingdom.

             (8)  A person is the 'primary carer' of another person  ('AP')
                  if-

                  (a)  the person is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian
                      of AP; and

                  (b)  either-

                      (i)  the person has primary responsibility  for  AP's
                           care; or

                      (ii) shares equally the responsibility for AP's  care
                           with one  other  person  who  is  not  an  exempt
                           person.

             (9)  In paragraph (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) or (5)(c), if  the  role
                  of  primary  carer  is  shared  with  another  person   in
                  accordance  with  paragraph  (8)(b)(ii),  the  words  "the
                  person" are to be read as "both primary carers".

             (10) Paragraph (9) does not apply if the person with whom care
                  responsibility is shared acquired a  derivative  right  to
                  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of   this
                  regulation prior to the other person's assumption of equal
                  care responsibility.

             (11) A person is not be regarded as having responsibility  for
                  another person's care for the purpose of paragraph (8)  on
                  the sole basis of a financial  contribution  towards  that
                  person's care.

             (12) A person does not have a derivative right to reside where
                  the Secretary of State or an immigration officer has  made
                  a decision under regulation 23(6)(b), 24(1), 25(1),  26(3)
                  or 31(1), unless that decision is set aside  or  otherwise
                  no longer has effect."

36. The issue identified by the FtJ as being the matter in dispute was  the
    question of whether, under reg 16(5)(c), the appellant's children would
    be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA State if the  appellant
    left the UK for an indefinite period.  There was no argument on  behalf
    of the respondent to the effect that the  children  would  be  able  to
    reside in another EEA State.

37. In terms of whether  the  appellant  was  the  primary  carer  for  the
    children, the FtJ resolved that matter in favour of the appellant.

38. Patel considered the position with reference to the  2006  Regulations,
    where the equivalent of reg 16(5) of the  2016  Regulations  is  to  be
    found at reg 15A(4A). The Court of Appeal said that  there  must  be  a
    careful inquiry into the circumstances of each  particular  case.   The
    focus must be not on whether the EU  citizen  child  or  dependant  can
    remain in legal theory but whether they can do so in practice.  I  note
    what is said at [76] to the effect that the  legislative  landscape  is
    now such that those who  marry  British  citizens  and  have  children,
    without having (or acquiring) leave to remain, do so at the  risk  that
    they may be compelled to leave the country.  There the Court said that:

         "The Zambrano principle cannot be regarded as a back-door route  to
         residence by such non-EU citizen parents."

39. As regards the argument that the FtJ failed to take  into  account  the
    appellant's  partner's  shift   patterns,   that   complaint   is   not
    sustainable. At [24] the FtJ expressly  referred  to  the  question  of
    whether his shift pattern  would  preclude  him  from  caring  for  the
    children to such an extent that they would be unable to reside  in  the
    UK.  The FtJ did not make  express  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's partner works at night but it  is  reasonable  to  conclude
    that he noted what was clear from the documents starting at page  9  of
    the appellant's bundle,  namely  that  there  were  "Night  Duties"  on
    several occasions.  It is inconceivable that the FtJ was not  cognisant
    of that fact given that at [18] there is express reference to the  work
    schedule and at [19] to its detail.

40. It is true that there is an error in the  FtJ's  decision  in  that  he
    referred to the appellant's partner as a prison  psychologist,  whereas
    it is clear from the evidence, not least the witness  statements,  that
    he is a prison officer.

41. What the FtJ had to say at [21] about "the fact" that  he  works  as  a
    prison psychologist indicating that he would  have  attributes  meaning
    that he would know how to care for an infant,  including  in  terms  of
    feeding, bathing and changing her, is in my view rather dubious  as  an
    assessment of the extent to which a father could undertake those tasks.
     It seems to me to be a matter  of  common  sense  that  no  particular
    intelligence is needed to perform those tasks and there is no reason to
    think that a person with professional qualifications such as  a  prison
    psychologist, would be any better able, or  more  willing,  to  perform
    those tasks than a father without such a professional background.

42. However, that was not an essential feature of  the  FtJ's  decision  in
    terms of his conclusion that the appellant's case as to  her  partner's
    inability to care for the  children  was  not  credible.   The  primary
    finding in that respect is to be found at [20]  whereby  the  FtJ  said
    that he found it difficult to reconcile the pattern of  work  and  non-
    work days with the contention that he had  no  involvement  with  their
    lives, other than as a provider of financial support.

43. He noted that he works away for a significant amount of time and  found
    it credible that the appellant was the one who had adopted the  primary
    responsibility for the care of the children for that reason.   However,
    her partner was at home for a significant amount of time  and  the  FtJ
    found it incredible that the children would have no attachment to  him,
    given that he lives in the same household and is  not  at  work  for  a
    substantial amount of time.

44. I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant
    had exaggerated her role from that of primary carer  to  that  of  sole
    carer, and that she was not credible  in  her  attempt  to  negate  her
    partner's role as a father,  both  as  an  attachment  figure  for  the
    children and as someone able to provide practical care.

45. In terms of whether the FtJ had failed to take  into  account  what  is
    said to be the appellant's partner's studies, as I pointed out  at  the
    hearing the witness statements do  not  refer  to  such  studies.   The
    emphasis is on his shift patterns and overnight shifts  in  particular.
    There are no documents in the appellant's bundle  in  relation  to  any
    studies.  There is on the Tribunal's file documentary evidence of study
    undertaken by her partner, but all that  documentation  post-dates  the
    hearing before the FtJ.  For example, there is a letter dated 16  March
    2019 which refers to his studying part-time for an  MSc  in  leadership
    whilst a prison officer at HMP Coldingley.  The letter says that whilst
    he did not complete the course, he did attend lecture days and complete
    a number of assignments.  Furthermore, the FtJ quoted  the  grounds  in
    full and those grounds say nothing about studies,  only  stating  that,
    amongst other things, he works in the prison  service  and  works  long
    shifts.

46. It cannot be an error of law for the FtJ to have failed  to  take  into
    account evidence that was not before him.  Indeed, the evidence itself,
    such as it is, hardly advances the contention that he was  studying  to
    such an extent that even the time he had at  home  was  taken  up  with
    things other than his responsibilities as a father.

47. As regards the FTJ's decision to  deal  with  the  appeal  as  an  oral
    hearing, I note that the First-tier Tribunal wrote to the appellant  on
    25 February 2019 stating that the appeal would  be  determined  on  the
    papers. However, directions issued on the  same  day  stated  that  the
    appeal could not be heard on the papers  without  the  consent  of  the
    respondent (as set out in the  FtJ's  decision).   Furthermore,  it  is
    apparent from the FtJ's decision that the appeal was dealt with, to all
    intents  and  purposes,  on  the  documents  only,  the   Home   Office
    representative  at  the  hearing  before  him  not  having   made   any
    submissions  and  simply  relying   on   the   respondent's   decision.
    Accordingly, there is no error of law in the FtJ having proceeded to an
    oral hearing.  Even if the appellant at  one  point  thought  that  the
    appeal would be decided on the papers, there was in fact no  unfairness
    or disadvantage to the appellant in the appeal having been  dealt  with
    at an oral hearing.

48. Although in his decision the FtJ  summarised  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    including the contention that the appellant breastfed her  (then)  only
    daughter, he did not expressly refer to this  aspect  of  the  case  in
    coming to his conclusions.  It seems to me that he  should  have  done.
    This was, and is, potentially a significant matter.  However, I am  not
    satisfied that the FtJ's omission in this respect amounts to  an  error
    of law, still less one that requires the decision to be set aside.

49. In the first place it has to be borne  in  mind  that  the  appellant's
    claim was otherwise found to lack credibility in the assertion that her
    partner  provided  nothing  other  than  financial  support.  That  was
    emphatically rejected  by  the  FtJ  for  reasons  which  are  entirely
    sustainable regardless of the error  that  he  made  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's partner's employment.  Secondly, no evidence was put before
    the FtJ in terms of the importance that the appellant and  her  partner
    attached to their now youngest child being breastfed.  At the  date  of
    the hearing before the FtJ that child was 3 months old.  Even accepting
    that she did  breastfeed  her  daughter  for  those  three  months,  in
    practical terms there was no evidence before the FtJ  to  suggest  that
    the child could not be bottle-fed.

50. In saying that  I  make  no  comment  on  the  relative  importance  of
    breastfeeding but simply  point  out  the  obvious,  namely  that  many
    infants are bottle-fed, for no doubt a variety of  reasons.  But  as  I
    have said, there was no evidence before the FtJ from the  appellant  in
    terms of the importance to her, or them as a couple, of  breastfeeding,
    or any explanation in evidence as to why her child could not be bottle-
    fed.

51. I note that in the grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's  decision
    it states at  [9]  that  both  children  are  being  breastfed  by  the
    appellant.   That  assertion  is  contrary  to  what  is  said  in  the
    appellant's witness statement in which  she  states  at  [5]  that  she
    breastfed her eldest child until November 2018.   That  coincided  with
    the date of the birth of her second daughter, on 11 November 2018.

52. In terms of any argument as to the cost of childcare  in  circumstances
    where the appellant's partner may need care for the children at  night,
    no evidence was put before the FtJ in this respect, either in terms  of
    the family's finances or in terms  of  the  cost  of  childcare  which,
    admittedly as a matter of common  knowledge,  can  be  expensive.   But
    there was similarly no evidence as to whether the  appellant's  partner
    would be able to change his shift  patterns  such  that  he  no  longer
    needed to work nightshifts because of  his  parental  responsibilities.
    The cost of childcare (in the daytime) in those circumstances would  be
    likely to be more affordable.

53. In the light of the above analysis, I am not satisfied  that  there  is
    any error of law in the FtJ's decision.

54. In relation to the observation made by the FtJ at [27] as  regards  the
    prospects of the appellant making a further application  under  Article
    8, I do agree that the FtJ was required to assess the application  with
    reference to the EEA Regulations, but his observation in  that  respect
    did not in fact form part of his assessment of the evidence.




    Decision

55. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this decision involves minors, unless and until a Tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     24/07/19

