
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                                     Appeal
Number: EA/06649/2019
     EA/06651/2019
     EA/06652/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 April 2021                             |On 19 April 2021                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                APPOLONIA OBI
                                 MIRIAM OBI
                                TREASURE OBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants: Mr Ahmed
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.  The  first  appellant
       (Appolonia Obi) has now been granted a family permit and  no  longer
       seeks  to  take  an  active  part  in  this  appeal.  The  remaining
       appellants are the sister and niece of the United  Kingdom  sponsor,
       Blessing Obi. They also seek family permits to join the sponsor  but
       were refused by a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  5
       November 2019. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which  in  a
       decision promulgated on 9 November 2020, dismissed the appeals.  The
       appellants now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    2. The appellants challenge the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
       ground that the judge has applied an incorrect test for  determining
       the application under Regulation 8 of Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
       2016. The appellants rely, inter alia, on SM (India) [2009] EWCA Civ
       1426. They submit that at  [24]  the  judge  erroneously  considered
       whether the sponsor  was  'able  to  maintain'  the  appellants  [my
       emphasis] whereas the correct test is whether the sponsor  can  meet
       the essential needs of the appellants in the state from  which  they
       have come (see SM at [22]).

    3. The respondent has filed a statement under Rule 24 which argues that
       the grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with findings
       which were available to the judge on the evidence.

    4. I have considered the decision of the judge very  carefully.  It  is
       certainly true that at [24] the judge, having analysed the income of
       the sponsor and her husband and having attached  significant  weight
       to the fact that the sponsor is in receipt  of  state  benefits  and
       faces deductions from  those  benefits  to  repay  and  considerable
       overpayment of tax credits, is unable  'to maintain' the  appellants
       if they lived with her in the United Kingdom. However, I  find  that
       the judge was well aware of the correct test of  'essential  needs';
       she uses the expression at [6] in her discussion of the terms of the
       Secretary of State's refusal  and  in  what  is  a  summary  of  her
       findings at [25]. The question is  whether,  in  between  these  two
       statements of the correct test  which  the  judge  was  required  to
       apply, she  has,  at  [24],  applied  a  different  and  wrong  test
       ('ability to maintain'). My reading of  the  decision  leads  me  to
       conclude that the judge has remained aware of and  has  applied  the
       correct test throughout and that her use of the verb  'maintain'  at
       [24] should be understood in the context  of  the  test  of  meeting
       'essential needs.' Its use does not represent the application  of  a
       different and more stringent test.

    5. Further, whilst it is  clear  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the
       appellants may become 'a burden on public funds' at [24] must  refer
       to  the  United  Kingdom  rather  than  Nigeria,  at  [25]  she   is
       unequivocally (and in the present  tense  so  referring  to  Nigeria
       where the appellants are living) 'not satisfied that the [appellants
       are] dependent on the sponsor to meet  [their]  essential  needs...'
       That is, in all respects, an application of the correct test reached
       after a careful examination of all the evidence; the Upper Tribunal,
       which has not had the  benefit  of  hearing  oral  evidence,  should
       hesitate before interfering with  the  judge's  findings.  Moreover,
       whilst the sponsor was not cross examined at the First-tier Tribunal
       hearing, the judge clearly had a problem accepting all the sponsor's
       evidence, in particular regarding remittances into  the  appellant's
       sister's bank account [25].  The  judge's  conclusion  on  essential
       needs at [25] plainly arises in part at least from that problem with
       the evidence; ultimately, the judge concluded  that  the  appellants
       had not discharged the burden of proving that their essential  needs
       in Nigeria are met by the sponsor. That conclusion was not  perverse
       and was available to the Tribunal on the evidence. Accordingly, I am
       not satisfied that the judge  has  erred  in  law  for  the  reasons
       advanced in the grounds of appeal.

    6. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

       Notice of Decision

       The appeal is dismissed.



               Signed                                                Date  7
April 2021
              Upper Tribunal Judge Lane










