

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/06016/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 11 October 2018                       |On 07 November 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                            Ernest osei fordjour
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Ranjha, of Ranjha Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Ghanaian national born on 12 February 1980.  He
          challenges  the  determination  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
          Barrowclough, promulgated on 3 July 2018,  dismissing  his  appeal
          against the respondent's refusal to issue  him  with  a  residence
          card as the former spouse  of  an  EEA  national.  The  respondent
          refused the application because  he  was  of  the  view  that  the
          marriage was one of convenience. He had regard to  the  fact  that
          enquiries into  the  EEA  sponsor's  identity  revealed  that  her
          details had been linked to an organised crime  network  which  was
          identified by the DWP,  HMRC  and  the  Home  Office  in  a  joint
          investigation and which facilitated the entry of French  nationals
          to participate in bogus proxy or customary marriages with  non  EU
          nationals. The appellant's former spouse had  been  identified  as
          being complicit in the participation of bogus  marriages  and  for
          this reason  the  application  was  refused  and  the  appellant's
          previously issued residence card had been revoked and  an  earlier
          appeal dismissed (EA/09844/2016).


       2. The complaint made by the appellant is that the  allegations  made
          by the respondent were not supported by any  documentary  evidence
          and that the judge unfairly allowed an  electronic  version  of  a
          statement from a DWP investigator to be  admitted  into  evidence.
          The contents of that statement itself were criticized and  it  was
          argued that as the  investigator  had  not  been  present  at  the
          hearing, his evidence was  not  tested  and  could  not  be  given
          weight. The appellant also maintains that he, his  brother  and  a
          friend gave oral evidence and due weight was not  given  to  their
          testimony. It is  also  argued  for  the  appellant  that  he  was
          misadvised by his previous  representatives  with  respect  to  an
          appeal against the revocation of his residence card in 2016. It is
          maintained that there was  adequate  evidence  to  show  that  the
          appellant and his spouse had cohabited and that the  marriage  was
          genuine.


       3. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Shimmin on 30 July 2018. The  matter
          then came  before  me  on  11  October  2018  when  I  heard  oral
          submissions from the parties. A full note of  the  submissions  is
          set out in my Record of Proceedings.


       4. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made.


       5. I do not find there was procedural unfairness in the admittance of
          the statement of the  DWP  investigator,  Mr  Gibson,  because  Mr
          Ranjha had seen it and did not object to  its  admittance  at  the
          First-tier Tribunal hearing although he had complained that a hard
          copy had not been provided (at paragraph 4 of the  determination).
          There is no statement of truth from Mr Ranjha and no copy  of  his
          contemporaneous notes from  the  hearing.  I  do  not,  therefore,
          accept the submission that the judge's observation  misrepresented
          the position and that Mr Ranjha had,  in  fact,  objected  to  its
          admissibility. Moreover, I note that the contents of the statement
          were already known to the appellant as they were  the  reason  why
          his residence card was had been revoked in 2016,  that  they  were
          considered by the judge at that time on appeal, that he  was  not,
          therefore, placed at any disadvantage by its  admission  and  that
          there had been no adjournment request by Mr Ranjha to take further
          instructions or obtain evidence in rebuttal. I find  there  is  no
          merit in  the  argument  that  the  statement  from  the  DWP  was
          unreliable because it was not prepared  contemporaneously.  It  is
          not suggested that the contents contradicted the factors relied on
          by the respondent in 2016. I accept that it would  have  been  far
          better practice for the respondent to have submitted a  hard  copy
          of the evidence for the parties but given  that  similar  evidence
          had been previously been made  available  to  the  appellant  (see
          paragraph 17 of the previous determination of Judge  Kempton)  and
          the lack of objection raised as to its  admittance  in  electronic
          form at the hearing, I do not find the judge erred  in  permitting
          the respondent to place reliance upon it.


       6. The second complaint of the judge's decision is that  insufficient
          weight was given to the  appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  his
          witnesses (his brother and friend). It is argued that  no  reasons
          were given  for  the  adverse  findings  made.   Contrary  to  the
          criticisms made, the judge viewed the evidence  of  the  appellant
          and his witnesses in the context of the evidence as a whole.  Part
          of that evidence was  what  had  transpired  at  the  last  appeal
          hearing in 2016. The judge noted that neither  the  appellant  nor
          his spouse had attended but witness statements had been  provided.
          These,  however,  contradicted  each  other  as  to  whether   the
          relationship was ongoing.  He  took  account  of  the  appellant's
          explanation that his solicitors had told him he did not need to do
          anything with respect to that appeal, that they  had  then  forged
          witness statements and documents and presented a  fabricated  case
          which was dismissed by the Tribunal. He noted that  the  appellant
          then further claimed that when  he  notified  the  representatives
          that he was going to complaint about them, they  offered  to  make
          another application for him free of  charge  to  atone  for  their
          errors. The appellant agreed to this and did not make  any  formal
          complaint.  The  judge  was  entitled  to   wholly   reject   this
          explanation.  As  he  pointed  out,  it  was  wholly  lacking   in
          credibility that a solicitors' firm would go to all the trouble of
          fabricating evidence for a case without the appellant's  knowledge
          and for no apparent reason, and if they had, that  he  would  then
          agree  to  them  continuing  to  represent  him   in   a   further
          application. It is simply not credible that he would have  trusted
          them to act for him after they allegedly conducted  themselves  in
          such a fraudulent and unprofessional way. Further, it is  of  note
          that the decision on that appeal  was  never  challenged.  It  was
          submitted by Mr Ranjha that the appellant was vulnerable  and  was
          taken advantage of but no reason is put forward for why he  should
          be treated as  vulnerable.  Moreover,  as  the  judge  found,  the
          appellant's claim to have known nothing about his former  spouse's
          incrimination in the scam until July 2017, was shown to have  been
          untruthful as the same reasons had been given for  the  revocation
          of his residence card in 2016. The judge was, therefore,  entitled
          to find that the appellant was a dishonest and unreliable witness.
          Given that there was no personal documentary evidence  in  support
          of the claim other than evidence of payslips and  such  like,  and
          that part of that evidence post dated the separation/divorce,  the
          judge was entitled to treat the oral evidence of  the  appellant's
          brother and friend with caution and  to  find  that  although  the
          appellant and his spouse may have shared the same  postal  address
          for a time, their marriage was one of convenience.


       7. Mr Ranjha also added fresh grounds during his submissions.  Whilst
          he sought to pass them off as being part of the criticism that the
          judge had inadequately  considered  the  evidence,  they  are  not
          referred to at all  in  the  lengthy  and,  it  has  to  be  said,
          disjointed grounds and no application to  amend  the  grounds  was
          made.  I have, nevertheless, dealt with them. The  complaint  that
          the judge misdirected himself in terms of Sadovska [2017] UKSC  54
          does not advance the claim as even if the judge  should  not  have
          assessed the evidence with a view to deciding if the  relationship
          was durable, his findings clearly show that he found the  marriage
          was one of convenience. The claim that  the  appellant's  previous
          appeal may have succeeded had his representatives not made  errors
          has no merit either as the judge did not accept that the  previous
          representatives had misadvised the appellant and  prepared  forged
          evidence as he claimed. In any event, as Mr  Melvin  pointed  out,
          the appellant had failed to make any formal  complaint  about  his
          representatives which further undermines his claim.


       8. The submission that the production of the earlier determination by
          the appellant was indicative of his integrity is not made out. The
          fact that the appellant's residence card was revoked in  2016  and
          that his appeal was dismissed was a matter already  known  to  the
          parties.


       9. Finally, the issue of the weight to be accorded to the evidence is
          a  matter  for  the  judge.  Reasons  have  been  given  for   his
          conclusions and they are sustainable. No material  errors  of  law
          have been identified.


      Decision


      10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make errors of law.  The  decision
          to dismiss the appeal stands.


      Anonymity


      11. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and see no reason to do
          so.

    Signed






      Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 22 October 2018




