
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06301/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 28 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                       Mrs Roshanbibi Huseinbhai kadir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I F
    Taylor, promulgated on 15 May 2018. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on 12 July 2018.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. The appellant was issued with a Family Permit and  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 19 May 2011 as a member of her mother-in-law's  (hereinafter
    referred to as the sponsor) household.  The  sponsor  is  a  Portuguese
    national. On 22 May 2012 the appellant  was  issued  with  a  five-year
    residence card as the extended family member  of  her  sponsor.  On  29
    December 2016, the appellant applied for a permanent residence card  as
    the family member of her sponsor. That application  was  refused  in  a
    decision made on 27 June 2017 because the Secretary of  State  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was dependent upon her  sponsor  nor  that
    she had resided with her for a continuous period of five years.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the appellant resided  with
    her sponsor for a continuous period of five years for detailed  reasons
    set out in the decision. Nonetheless, he dismissed the  appeal  because
    there was no evidence that the sponsor  financially  provided  for  the
    appellant's essential living requirements.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal argued that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  a
    permanent residence card as long as she continued to be a member of her
    sponsor's household.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "It is arguable  that  the  Judge  only  considered  the  issue  of
         financial dependency and did not consider the  alternative  of  the
         Appellant having remained in the household of  her  Sponsor  during
         the requisite five-year period."

The hearing

 7. Prior to the hearing, the appellant's solicitors wrote to request  that
    the appeal be determined on the papers. The matter remained  listed  in
    order  to  provide  the  respondent  the  opportunity  to   make   oral
    submissions.

 8. On 23 May 2019, Mr Whitwell emailed the Upper Tribunal  to  state  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge erred as  contended  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and that the appeal was not resisted.

 9. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell reiterated the contents of  the  email  and
    invited me to remake the decision, allowing the appeal, which I had  no
    hesitation in doing.





Decision on error of law

10. The First-tier Tribunal found at [14] that the  appellant  did  "reside
    with her EEA national for a  continuous  period  of  five  years."  The
    appeal was nonetheless dismissed because the judge misdirected  himself
    in finding that the appellant had not shown she was dependent upon  the
    EEA sponsor. On the uncontested findings of the First-tier Tribunal  it
    is obvious that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulation  2016)
    and had acquired the right to reside in the United Kingdom permanently.

Remaking

11. As the appellant met the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b), I  remake
    the decision by allowing her appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on the basis that the  appellant
established that she was entitled to be issued with  a  permanent  residence
card.

No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason  to  make  such  a
direction.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.  The  appellant  demonstrated  that
she met the requirements of the Regulations.


Signed   Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
