
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/06645/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 December 2017                        |On 19 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                carlvic pilla
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of the  Philippines.   She  appealed  to  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision  on
    14 July 2017 refusing her a permanent  residence  card  as  the  family
    member of Valerio Mariano Pilla, an EEA national.

2.   As the judge identified at paragraph 8 of his decision, the sole  issue
    for determination was whether the appellant could show that her husband
    and sponsor had been a qualified  person  under  Regulation  6  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  for  five  years
    continuously.  She produced a good deal  of  documentation,  which  was
    considered by the judge.

3.   At paragraph 10 of his decision the judge  noted  recent  letters  from
    the Hilton Group confirming the sponsor's  employment  beginning  on  9
    January 2012, two contracts of employment for the Hilton Group  and  in
    addition P60s for this employment and  HMRC  employment  letters.   The
    judge said that he was satisfied that this  documentation  appeared  to
    show  when  taken  together  that  the  [sponsor]  was  in   continuous
    employment for five years from January 2012 and thereafter to date.

4.   The judge however went on in the subsequent paragraph  to  refer  to  a
    number of Barclays Bank statements from September 2016 which related to
    a joint account held by the appellant and the sponsor which only showed
    salary deposits for the sponsor for the month September 2016 to January
    2017.   As a consequence he concluded that the appellant had not  shown
    that the sponsor had received an income from employment in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of five years.

5.    The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  this   decision,   and
    permission was granted by Judge Gibb on the  basis  that  arguably  the
    appellant had  been  prejudiced  by  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent  to  provide  a  bundle,  and  that  what  he  saw   as   an
    inconsistency between paragraphs 10 and  11  of  the  judge's  decision
    arguably showed that the decision was materially flawed.

6.   At the hearing the sponsor appeared in person and Mr L  Tarlow,  Senior
    Home Office Presenting Officer appeared on behalf of the respondent.

7.   The appellant produced a bundle of  documents  to  match  the  list  of
    documents set out at paragraph  8  of  the  judge's  decision.   At  my
    request Mr Tarlow went through the documents and the bundle  and  spoke
    to the sponsor about them.

8.   Thereafter Mr Tarlow made most  helpful  submissions  in  which  having
    considered the  documentation  then  noted,  as  was  accepted  by  the
    appellant, that the bank statements that  had  been  put  in  had  been
    submitted in error to the judge and did not show evidence of continuous
    employment.  However full bank statements for  the  entire  period  had
    been provided now, and Mr Tarlow was satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had
    been continuously employed in the United Kingdom for five years.

9.   I am very grateful to Mr Tarlow for the  care  he  has  taken  in  this
    case.  I find that the judge materially erred in law in  not  attaching
    appropriate weight to the  letters  from  the  employer  and  the  HMRC
    documentation in assessing the evidence as  a  whole.   In  effect  the
    judge gave separate consideration to that from the bank statements that
    were provided and  it  was  necessary  in  my  view  for  the  evidence
    considered at paragraph 10 to be balanced properly  with  the  evidence
    considered at paragraph 11.

10.  In light of the judge's material error of law I  remake  the  decision.
    In the light of Mr Tarlow's helpful evaluation of  the  evidence,  with
    which I entirely concur, I am satisfied that it has been shown that the
    sponsor has been continuously employed for  five  years  in  accordance
    with the  requirements  of  the  Regulations.   As  a  consequence  the
    appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  refusing  her  a  permanent
    residence card is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
