
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06231/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Decision &Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th October 2018                          |On 24th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                               ANTONIO GENCHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. On 19 September I wrote to the parties in the following terms:


             "I have reviewed the file in this case.


             Permission to appeal was granted in the following reasons: -


               "2. The grounds raise the issue of procedural unfairness and
                 pointed to the fact that letters were  sent  to  the  wrong
                 office  despite  the  Tribunal  being  advised   that   the
                 appellant  had  relocated   to   Glasgow   and   that   her
                 representatives were also  now  in  Glasgow.   Reliance  is
                 placed on a letter dated  January  12,  2018  sent  to  the
                 Tribunal service in which the  representatives  address  as
                 amended to reflect the fact the  Glasgow  office  were  now
                 dealing with the case and updating the appellant's  address
                 to 12 Strand Court Auchterarder PH3 1JE.


               3.  Contained on the file is an email dated May 17 in  which
                 copies of that letter are attached and  there  was  also  a
                 letter dated May 4, 2018 advising the  same  error  and  an
                 earlier letter dated April 26, 2018 which had been faxed to
                 the Tribunal service in Glasgow requested that this  appeal
                 be  listed  alongside  a  connected  appeal.   This  letter
                 questioned why no date of hearing had been issued.


             4.  It is arguable the appellant may have been prevented  from
                 having a fair hearing.  In the circumstances I also  extend
                 time."


             I propose without more ado to allow the appeal, set aside  the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal and  direct  a  fresh
             hearing before that Tribunal.  Any submissions to the contrary
             will be considered if received within 21 days of the  date  of
             this letter."

 2. There has been no reply.

 3. In these circumstances I set aside the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal for error  of  law,  and  remit  the  appellant's  appeal  for
    redetermination by the First-tier Tribunal.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 16 October 2018.
