
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number:  EA/06956/2018 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2020                   |On 9 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     YZ

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K Joshi of Joshi Advocates Ltd



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
made the decision set out below and explained in brief terms  the  rationale
of my decision but reserved my full reasons, which I  now  give.  The  order
made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, the  parties  will  be  referred  to
    below as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is an Algerian national  with  date  of  birth  given  as
    29.4.83.

 3. The Secretary of State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    29.8.19, allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 15.10.18, to refuse his application made on 20.8.18 for
    an EEA Permanent Residence Card as the  sponsoring  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national purportedly exercising Treaty rights in the  UK,  pursuant  to
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, as amended (the Regulations).

 4. The application was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant's spouse was exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

 5. The relevant background is that the appellant first entered the  UK  in
    September 2009 on a visit visa. In March 2012 he married his sponsoring
    spouse, KR, a French National, and was granted an EEA  Residence  Card,
    valid for 5 years. Their child, Z, was born in February 2013 and is now
    7 years of age. The child is also a French national.

 6. The appellant and KR subsequently separated but they are not  divorced.
    In consequence of a  Child  Arrangement  Order  made  in  August  2018,
    disclosed with the permission of the  Family  Court,  the  sponsor  has
    permission to remove their child from the jurisdiction permanently  but
    there is to be extensive contact between the child and  the  appellant,
    including staying with the father in the UK during school holidays  and
    for the father to have direct contact for overnight stays  in  Germany,
    subject to immigration status permitting him to travel to Germany.

 7. In the refusal decision, the respondent accepted that  there  was  some
    evidence that the sponsor was employed in the UK in 2012 and as a self-
    employed person in 2012 and 2013. However, no  evidence  was  submitted
    with the application to demonstrate the exercise of  Treaty  rights  in
    subsequent years. It appears that the sponsor  was  living  in  Germany
    between March 2016 and January 2017. At some stage, she returned to the
    UK but there was no evidence that she resumed exercising Treaty  rights
    in the UK. She and the child returned to live in  Germany,  where  they
    remained at the date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  in
    August 2019.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal concluded at [22]  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Regulations  for  a
    Permanent Residence Card. The judge found that the sponsor left the  UK
    in March 2016 with the legal consequence that she  was  not  exercising
    Treaty rights whilst away from the UK and the appellant  could  not  be
    the family member of a qualified person during that period.

 9. The judge agreed that following Amirteymour, the  appellant  could  not
    rely on article 8 rights in an EEA application  and  appeal.   However,
    the judge considered that the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Abdul
    (section 55 - Article 24(3) Charter)  [2016]  UKUT  106,  required  the
    Tribunal to take account of the child's best  interests  as  a  primary
    consideration, and that the right under Article 24(3) for  every  child
    to maintain on a regular  basis  a  personal  relationship  and  direct
    contact with both parents, unless contrary to  the  child's  interests,
    required the appellant to be given a right to reside in the UK  because
    otherwise he would not be able to travel to Germany to visit his son in
    accordance with the  order  of  the  Family  Court.   At  [32]  of  the
    decision, the judge concluded that "failure to resolve the  appellant's
    immigration status in a manner that will enable that  contact  to  take
    place both within Germany and England and Wales  is  a  breach  of  the
    fundamental right within Article 24  of  the  Charter.  Accordingly,  I
    allow the appeal on the basis that the decision breaches the rights  of
    the appellant (and his young son) under the EU Treaties."

10. In granting permission to the Secretary of State to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal on all grounds on  22.11.19,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered it arguable that there was no scope to allow the appellant's
    appeal against a refusal to grant a Permanent Residence Card if he does
    not qualify for the  same  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  It  was  also
    considered arguable that the appellant does not need to remain  in  the
    UK to enable contact with his son. "As was  set  out  in  the  grounds,
    there is nothing  to  prevent  the  appellant's  son  visiting  him  in
    Algeria. Contact would not however be as frequent  as  at  present  but
    presumably the appellant would be able to apply to the relevant  German
    authorities to visit Germany in order to see his son."

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was listed for an error of law hearing
    on 4.11.20. However, on or about 30.9.20,  the  appellant  was  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK under the EU Settlement Scheme. In
    consequence, the appellant's legal representatives submitted  that  the
    issue in the appeal had become 'academic' and that the appeal should be
    withdrawn. In  response,  by  email  dated  7.10.20,  the  respondent's
    representative declined to withdraw the appeal, on the basis  that  the
    case raises legal issues of importance.

12. By directions issued on 8.10.20, the Upper  Tribunal  left  the  matter
    listed for hearing on 4.11.20, noting that it will  be  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge dealing with the matter  to  determine  the  appropriate
    course of action on the procedural and substantive issues raised by the
    appeal.

13. The Upper Tribunal has received  the  appellant's  Rule  24  reply  and
    associated documents, which have been carefully considered, along  with
    the oral submissions made to me at the remote hearing.

The  Preliminary  Issue  -  Can  the  appeal  be  treated  as  abandoned  or
withdrawn?

14. The appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the
    respondent's refusal to issue him with a Permanent Residence Card.

15. It is  the  case  that  given  that  the  appellant  has  been  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain, the outcome of the EEA appeal,  allowed  or
    dismissed, is immaterial to  his  immigration  status  and  ability  to
    travel to Germany to exercise contact with his son. I do not accept  Ms
    Joshi's submissions that if the appeal is allowed the appellant will be
    issued with a Permanent Residence Card and thereby  have  two  separate
    but contemporaneous rights. In  reality,  as  Mr  Bates  confirmed,  no
    action would be taken as the appellant already has settled status.

16. For the reasons set out briefly below, I am satisfied  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal cannot treat the appeal as either abandoned or withdrawn.

17. The Secretary of State  declined  to  withdraw  the  appeal.  Ms  Joshi
    submitted that the Tribunal could treat it as abandoned and referred me
    to her Rule 24 response and Rule 17A(1)(b) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended. However, Rule 17A applies only
    to an asylum or immigration case and does not apply to an appeal  under
    Regulation 36.

18. It is clear from Ammari (EEA  appeals  -abandonment)  [2020]  UKUT  124
    (IAC), that the Upper Tribunal held that in general terms the grant  of
    Indefinite Leave to Remain will not result in  the  abandonment  of  an
    appeal.

19. In the email of 7.10.20, the respondent conceded that  it  is  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to determine if the appeal is to be treated as abandoned
    pursuant to s104(4A) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended, (the 2002 Act).

20. Section 104 provides:

         "104. Pending appeal

           (1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-

           (a) beginning when it is instituted, and

           (b) ending when it is finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned
           (or when it lapses under section 99).

           [(2) An appeal under section 82(1) is not finally determined for
           the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-

             (a) an application for permission to appeal under section 11
             or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could
             be made or is awaiting determination,

             (b) permission to appeal under either of those sections has
             been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination, or

             (c) an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of that
             Act and is awaiting determination.]

           (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
           .

           [(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
           . .

           (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he
           is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if the
           appellant is granted leave to enter or remain in the United
           Kingdom (subject to [subsection (4B)] ).

           (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far as
           it is brought on [a ground specified in section 84(1)(a) or (b)
           or 84(3) (asylum or humanitarian protection)] where the
           appellant-

             (a) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             . . .

             (b) gives notice, in accordance with [Tribunal Procedure
             Rules] , that he wishes to pursue the appeal in so far as it
             is brought on that ground.

           (4C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
           . .]

           (5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
           . .

21. Although the First-tier Tribunal found in  the  appellant's  favour  by
    allowing  the  appeal,  s104  provides  that  appeal  "is  not  finally
    determined" where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  has  been
    granted and that appeal is "awaiting determination".  However,  on  the
    face of the Statute, the provisions of s104 only  apply  to  an  appeal
    under section 82(1) which relate to either  a  protection  claim  or  a
    human rights claim. A decision in respect of a Permanent Residence Card
    is a decision made under the Regulations and not a ground listed  under
    s82(1) or s84.

22. Nevertheless, pursuant  to  Schedule  2  of  the  Regulations,  certain
    provisions of the 2002 Act have effect in relation to an  appeal  under
    Regulation 36 as though the sole permitted grounds of appeal were  that
    the decision breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties  in
    respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom ("an  EU  ground
    of appeal"). These include s82 and s84. However, the Schedule does  not
    direct that the provisions of s104 are also to  apply  in  relation  to
    abandonment of appeals.

23. As is clear from the decision in Ammari, previous incarnations  of  the
    EEA Regulations did  provide  for  s82(1)  appeals  to  be  treated  as
    abandoned where documentation was issued to the appellant confirming  a
    right to reside in the UK. However, that provision was repealed and not
    replicated or replaced in the 2016 Regulations. As the  Upper  Tribunal
    held, "It follows  that  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  following  an
    application under the EU Settlement Scheme does not result in an appeal
    against an EEA decision brought under the 2016  EEA  Regulations  being
    treated as abandoned."

24. It follows that there is no basis for the Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
    the appeal formally abandoned by  the  grant  of  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain to the appellant under the EU  Settlement  Scheme.  Further,  as
    also pointed out in Ammari, "It should be  appreciated,  however,  that
    ILR involves a grant of leave under domestic law, whereas an individual
    may well wish to assert, and  have  confirmed,  rights  under  EU  law;
    rights which  may  in  certain  respects  offer  additional  protective
    features. In respect of appeals against EEA decisions brought under the
    2016 Regulations, an individual is entitled to pursue  this  course  of
    action."

25. Addressing the substantive issues in the appeal, I  am  satisfied  that
    given that the First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  clear  finding  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Regulations  for  a
    Permanent Residence Card, an appeal against refusal to issue him with a
    Permanent Residence Card could not succeed. He simply did not meet  the
    requirements, failing to provide evidence to demonstrate that he did.

26. I am also satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misconstrued the
    nature and effect of the  Family  Court  order.  There  is  nothing  to
    demonstrate that the order requires the  appellant  to  be  effectively
    given immigration status in the UK in order to  exercise  contact  with
    his son. Such an order would be perverse. Neither  did  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge appreciate that the appellant does not need to remain in
    the UK to be able to have contact with his son; that was not the  order
    of the  Family  Court,  which  was  clearly  aware  of  his  precarious
    immigration  status.  He  could,  for  example,  apply  to  the  German
    authorities  from  Algeria  for  visiting  rights  to   his   son,   or
    alternatively, for his son to be able to  visit  him  in  Algeria.  The
    Family Court order cannot be construed as stipulating that contact must
    only take place either in the UK or Germany. The appellant  could  also
    have applied for amendment of the Family Court order,  if  jurisdiction
    were to be retained. In any event, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Family  Court  can  have  jurisdiction  over  contact  in  Germany,  or
    otherwise override the provisions of the Regulations.

27. In summary, even though having contact with his son, whether in the  UK
    or Germany, is obviously in the best interests of  the  child,  neither
    that fact nor the order  of  the  Family  Court  can  be  construed  as
    requiring the respondent to grant the appellant a  Permanent  Residence
    Card. To do so, would convert the best  interests  consideration  to  a
    'trump card' outweighing all other considerations.

28. The First-tier Tribunal also failed to  recognise  that  the  issue  of
    Permanent Residence Card is not the conferral of a right to  reside  in
    the same way as a grant of immigration status, but  rather  documentary
    confirmation of a right to reside arising under  EU  law.   It  follows
    that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  perverse   and
    irrational so that, if pursued, it cannot stand but must be set aside.

29. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  so
    that it must be set aside. Mr Bates submitted that at this stage it was
    open to the  appellant  to  withdraw  his  appeal.  However,  Ms  Joshi
    declined to  do  so,  preferring  for  the  matter  to  be  dealt  with
    immediately by the Upper  Tribunal.  In  the  premises,  I  remake  the
    decision in the  appeal  by  dismissing  it,  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant cannot qualify for the Permanent Residence  Card  he  sought.
    The respondent was correct to refuse the application.

Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside as being in error
      of law.

      I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 November 2020






Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 November 2020



