
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/03391/2015
                                                             & EA/06111/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2019                      |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                        BRYCE JAMES EDWARD MAREE (1)
                          OSARAO JAMES OSAGHAE (2)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For Mr Maree: Mr Farhat, Gulbenkian Harris Andonian
For Mr Osaghe:    Mr Layne instructed by Londinium solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Smyth, instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department (Osaghae)
                    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (Maree)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Must an individual have been a member of the household of, or dependent
    on, an EEA national relative for a continuous period of five  years  in
    order to be eligible for permanent residence?   The  respondent's  case
    is that he  must;  the  appellants  in  these  appeals,  for  different
    reasons, argue that that he need not.   It is because  of  that  common
    issue that these appeals were heard together.

 2. Both appeals arise  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, but in different situations.

    Mr Maree

 3. Mr Maree is a citizen of South Africa. He arrived in the United Kingdom
    in on 8 July 2009, at the age of 17, on the basis of  a  family  permit
    granted under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations") to  join  his  sister  and  brother-in-law  (a
    German citizen). Shortly after arrival he applied for and was granted a
    residence card as the extended family member of an  EEA  national  (his
    brother in law) valid for 5 years.  Mr Maree lived with his sister  and
    brother-in-law until 2011 when he moved out to live with fellow  church
    members. He studied and then obtained part-time and  finally  permanent
    employment in late 2012. Although employed, he  was  still  financially
    dependent on his brother-in-  law,  but  this  and  the  other  support
    diminished over time as he matured.

 4. The judge concluded that, under the 2006 Regulations, Mr  Maree  needed
    to show dependence on his brother-in-law for a period of 5 years from 8
    July 2009; and, having directed himself at paragraph  [25]  as  to  the
    meaning of dependency, concluded at paragraph [27] that  the  appellant
    had not been dependent for the required continuous five-year period.

 5. The judge  also  considered  at  paragraphs  [28]  -  [29]  Mr  Maree's
    alternative argument that, following Rahman [2012] EUECJ C-83/11,  that
    continuous dependency as set  out  in  the  2006  Regulations  was  not
    required by Directive 2004/38 but rejected it  at  paragraph  [31]  and
    went on to dismiss the appeal.

 6. In the grounds of appeal, Mr Maree does not challenge the  findings  of
    fact, nor does he dispute that the 2006 Regulations  require  5  years'
    continuous dependency or membership of the household  of  the  relevant
    EEA national. Instead, it is averred  in  the  grounds  that,  properly
    understood, the CJEU in Rahman concluded  at  paragraphs[43]-[45]  that
    the legislature (i.e. the EU) had not addressed the question of whether
    a residence card can  be  refused  to  those  who  have  ceased  to  be
    dependents and that a member state cannot make decisions  in  a  manner
    not provided for by the Directive  which,  in  this  case,  includes  a
    requirement for 5  years  continuous  dependency  or  membership  of  a
    household.

    Mr Osaghae

 7. Mr Osaghae is a citizen of Nigeria. On 8 November 2010 he was granted a
    residence card as the extended family member  of  his  uncle,  Dr  M  O
    Ehigiamusoe, an Austrian citizen.  That card was valid for 5 years.  On
    23 September 2015 he  applied  for  a  card  confirming  his  right  of
    permanent residence. That  application  was  refused  on  16  May  2016
    following a visit by immigration officers to the uncle's  house.  As  a
    result of  information  obtained  during  that  visit,  the  respondent
    concluded that Mr Osaghae was no longer dependent on or  residing  with
    his uncle.

 8. On appeal, the First-tier Tribunal concluded at  paragraph  [13]  after
    hearing evidence from both of them that Mr Osaghae was not dependant on
    his uncle and was not a member of his household at  paragraphs  [14]  -
    [15], rejecting the submission that all that the  relevant  regulations
    required were that Mr Osaghae had been continuously resident.

 9. Mr Osaghae sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision on the grounds that the judge had arguably erred in  law  with
    respect to the conclusion that Mr  Osaghae  was  not  living  with  his
    uncle, there being no proper finding on that ground; and had erred with
    respect to regulation 15 of the  2006  Regulations,  as  that  did  not
    require him to show financial dependency for five years.

    Issues arising

10. There are three issues which arise out of these appeals:

      i) Did the First-tier Tribunal fail to make a proper finding  of  fact
         in respect of whether Mr Osaghae was living with his uncle?

     ii) On a proper  construction,  do  the  2006  Regulations  require  an
         extended family member seeking permanent  residence  to  show  five
         years' continuous dependency on and/or membership of the  household
         of an EEA national?

    iii) Is the requirement to show five years' continuous dependency and/or
         membership of the household of  an  EEA  national  compatible  with
         Directive 2004/38 ("the Directive")?

11. It is only issue (iii) which is common to both appeals.

    The Law

12. The 2006 Regulations provided, so far as relevant, as follows:

         7. - Family member

         (1)   Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes   of   these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-

             (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;

             (b)  direct descendants  of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
             partner who are-

                  (i)  under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

             (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or  that
             of his spouse or his civil partner;

             (d)  a person who is to be treated as  the  family  member  of
             that other person under paragraph (3).

         (2)  A person shall not be treated under paragraph (1)(b) or (c) as
         the family member of a student residing in the United Kingdom after
         the period of three months beginning  on  the  date  on  which  the
         student is admitted to the United Kingdom unless-

             (a)  in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the dependent
             child of the student or of his spouse or civil partner; or

             (b)  the student also falls within one of the other categories
             of qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).

         (3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an  extended  family
         member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,   a
         registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
         the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
         (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
         card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked

         8. - "Extended family member"

         (1)  In these Regulations "extended family member"  means a  person
         who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions  in  paragraph
         (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2)  A person satisfies the condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
         person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse  or  his  civil
         partner and-

             (a)  the person is residing  in  [a  country  other  than  the
             United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is  a
             member of his household;

             (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a)  and
             is accompanying the EEA national  to  the  United  Kingdom  or
             wishes to join him there; or

             (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a),  has
             joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
             be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

         14. -    Extended right of residence

         (1)  A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
         for so long as he remains a qualified person.

         (2)  A family member of a qualified person residing in  the  United
         Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an EEA national with a  permanent
         right of residence under regulation 15 is entitled to reside in the
         United Kingdom for so long as he remains the family member  of  the
         qualified person or EEA national.

         15. -    Permanent right of residence

         (1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
         United Kingdom permanently-

             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period  of
             five years;

             (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an
             EEA national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with
             the EEA national in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years;

             (c)  a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

             (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person who
             has ceased activity;

13. Directive 2004/38 ("the Directive") provides, so far as is relevant:

         Recital (6):In order to maintain the  unity  of  the  family  in  a
         broader  sense  and  without  prejudice  to  the   prohibition   of
         discrimination on grounds of nationality, the  situation  of  those
         persons who are not included in the definition  of  family  members
         under this Directive, and who therefore do not enjoy  an  automatic
         right of entry and residence in the host Member  State,  should  be
         examined by the host Member State on the basis of its own  national
         legislation, in order to decide whether entry and  residence  could
         be  granted  to  such  persons,  taking  into  consideration  their
         relationship with the Union citizen  or  any  other  circumstances,
         such as  their  financial  or  physical  dependence  on  the  Union
         citizen.

         Article 2  - Definitions

         For the purposes of this Directive:

         1)   "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality  of  a
         Member State;

         2)   "Family member" means:

             (a)  the spouse;

             (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted  a
             registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation  of  a
             Member State, if the legislation  of  the  host  Member  State
             treats registered partnerships as equivalent to  marriage  and
             in accordance with the conditions laid down  in  the  relevant
             legislation of the host Member State;

             (c)  the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
             dependants and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined  in
             point (b);

             (d)  the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line  and
             those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

         Article 3 - Beneficiaries

         1.   This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to
         or reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
         national, and to their family members as  defined  in  point  2  of
         Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence
         the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member
         State  shall,  in  accordance  with   its   national   legislation,
         facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

             (a)   any  other  family  members,   irrespective   of   their
             nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2  of
             Article 2 who, in the country from which they have  come,  are
             dependants or members of the household of  the  Union  citizen
             having the primary right of residence, or where serious health
             grounds strictly require  the  personal  care  of  the  family
             member by the Union citizen;

             (b)  the partner with whom the Union  citizen  has  a  durable
             relationship, duly attested.

         The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people.

    Submissions

14. We heard submissions from all the representatives. We  also  took  into
    account written submissions from the appellants made in response to our
    directions issued on 21 May 2019.

15. Mr Layne submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  his
    approach to regulation 15(2); and had erred in his  assessment  of  the
    evidence as to whether  Mr  Osaghae  was  living  with  his  uncle.  He
    submitted also that the judge erred in his approach to regulation  8(1)
    as, on the facts, the appellant had been either a dependent or  in  the
    uncle's household at the relevant times.

16. Ms Smyth submitted that the FtT had properly analysed the evidence, and
    had properly concluded that Mr Osaghae was not living with  his  uncle,
    and had found at paragraphs [11]  and  [13]  that  there  had  been  no
    dependency; and, at paragraphs [14] to [15], that the appellant was not
    residing with his uncle.

17. Ms Smyth submitted that the appellants  had  no  rights  under  EU  law
    beyond  the right for their applications to  be  facilitated,  and  any
    associated procedural rights; anything beyond that was purely a  matter
    of domestic law, and on that basis, Reyes [2014] EUECJ C-423/12,  which
    held that Article 2(2)(c) of  the  Directive  must  be  interpreted  as
    meaning that the fact that a relative - due to  personal  circumstances
    such as age, education and health - is deemed  to  be  well  placed  to
    obtain employment and in addition intends to start work in  the  Member
    State does not affect the interpretation of  the  requirement  in  that
    provision that he be a  'dependant'  could  be  distinguished  as  that
    relates to the rights of dependents under the Directive.

18. Turning to Rahman v SSHD, Ms Smyth submitted that it was clear from the
    Advocate-General's opinion that he considered that sixth question  made
    in  the  request  for  a  preliminary  opinion  (see  [33]  below)  was
    hypothetical.

19. Ms Smyth submitted that domestic law quite properly required  continual
    dependence, as provided for in the Regulations,  relying  on  Aladeselu
    and Others (2006 Regs -  reg  8)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00253(IAC)  at
    paragraph [45] and Fatima v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 124

20. Mr Farhat submitted that the respondent's analysis of  Rahman  was  too
    narrow and that, properly  understood  it  is  ambiguous.  Further,  he
    submitted that in the light of the ECJ's approach  to  question  5,  it
    could be said that the Regulations were too  blunt  an  instrument.  Mr
    Farhat submitted also that the application of the Regulations  in  this
    case had a disproportionate effect, and that an  extensive  examination
    of the personal circumstances would result in a different  outcome.  He
    submitted that proportionality was  a  core  part  of  EU  law  and  is
    applicable.

21. Mr Duffy relied on Ms Smyth's submissions,  adding  that  the  position
    taken by the Regulations in requiring a five-year dependency  in  order
    to obtain permanent residence was proportionate

22. In response, Mr Farhat submitted that adopting a blanket  response  was
    not proportionate.

    Discussion

23. We deal with the issues in order.

    Issue (i)

24. The judge stated in Mr Osaghae's appeal at [15] that :

         "I have very real doubts as to whether or not the appellant has  in
         fact been living at that  address  [the  uncle's]  -  and  that  is
         confirmed (in my view) by the enquiries  made  by  the  Immigration
         Officers."

25. This passage must be considered in light of the decision as a whole. It
    is evident from the decision at [3] and [4] that the judge did consider
    the evidence adduced by the respondent to show that Mr Osaghae was  not
    living with his uncle, and that a copy of the record of the enforcement
    visit had been provided.  It  is  also  evident  [14]  that  the  judge
    weighed the evidence of the immigration officers with  the  documentary
    evidence. In this context, and in the  context  of  the  applicant  not
    adducing evidence from the aunt to whom the  immigration  officers  had
    spoken, and who had told them that he  was  not  living  there,  it  is
    evident that the judge found that Mr Osaghae had not been living at his
    uncle's house. While his finding could have clearer, the statement that
    he had very real doubts is, in the context of the burden  being  on  Mr
    Osaghae, the finding is sufficiently clear and sustainable. Mr  Osaghee
    had failed to show on balance that  the  factual  position  was  as  he
    claimed.

    Issue (ii)

26.  The  contention  that  2006  Regulations  do  not  require  continuous
    dependency and/or membership of a household is based on a misreading of
    reg 15. (1) (b) which stipulates that residence must be "in  accordance
    with these Regulations for a continuous period of five years".  In this
    case, Mr Osaghae's right of residence  was  conferred  by  reg14  which
    provides that it lasts only so long as he remained a family member of a
    qualified person.

27. As Ms Smyth submitted, "family member" as defined in reg 7 (3) includes
    an extended family member only for so long as he continues to meet  the
    requirements of reg. 8. In this case,  while  it  is  evident  that  Mr
    Osaghae was the extended family member of  an  EEA  national  when  his
    residence card was issued, as he met the requirements of  reg.  8  (2).
    As the First-tier Tribunal found, Mr Osaghae had not been part  of  the
    household and was not dependent - see paragraphs [13] and [14]. He  had
    therefore ceased to meet the requirements of reg. 8 (2) and  so  ceased
    to be a family member. Consequently,  as  he  ceased  to  be  a  family
    member, his right of residence under reg  14  ceased,  and  he  was  no
    longer residing in accordance with the regulations.

28. We do not accept that there is any material difference between  reg.  8
    of the 2016 Regulations and reg. 8 of the 2006 Regulations. The  former
    does, however, set out in a more comprehensible  format  the  different
    means by which an applicant can show he  meets  the  dependency  and/or
    membership  of  a  household  criteria  identified   in   Dauhoo   (EEA
    Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC).   The argument put to the
    First-tier Tribunal in Mr Osaghae's  appeal  was,  as  is  set  out  in
    paragraph [10] of the decision, that under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016, all that was required  was  continuous
    residence, not dependency or membership of a household  is  simply  not
    made out. In any event, reg. 8 (2)(b) (ii)  requires  a  continuity  of
    dependency and/or membership of a household.

    Issue (iii)

29. We accept that the 2006 Regulations must be interpreted in the light of
    EU law; the right of appeal in these appeals is expressed in  terms  of
    whether the decision breaches  the  appellants'  rights  under  the  EU
    Treaties. The question  then  arises  whether,  as  is  contended,  the
    requirement of domestic law - in this case a continuity  of  dependency
    and/or membership of a household - is contrary to EU law.

30. We note that, as was stated in SM (Algeria) [2018] UKSC 9 at [21]:

         "The purpose of the Directive is to  simplify  and  strengthen  the
         right of free  movement  and  residence  for  all  Union  citizens,
         freedom of movement being one of the fundamental  freedoms  of  the
         internal market. Having  to  live  apart  from  family  members  or
         members of the  family  in  the  wider  sense  may  be  a  powerful
         deterrent to the exercise of that freedom."

31. The Directive draws a distinction between family members as defined  in
    article 2 and beneficiaries identified in article 3.  This  distinction
    between rights accruing to workers and their  spouses/children  on  the
    one hand, and other  members  of  the  family  whose  entry  is  to  be
    facilitated, is a distinction which dates back  as  far  as  Regulation
    15/1961, the first European legislation on the issue.

32. It  is  not  in  doubt  that  the  appellants  in  these  appeals  were
    beneficiaries  within  Article  3.2  (b),  nor  is  it  in  doubt  that
    beneficiaries are to  be  in  a  better  position  than  other  non-EEA
    nationals. Equally, the requirement is not  just  to  facilitate  their
    entry but also their residence. That much is clear  from  Khan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 at [34].

33. In Rahman the CJEU considered Article 3.2 in some detail. We note  that
    the sixth question put to the court was:

         "Must the dependency on which the other  family  member  relies  in
         order to be admitted to the Member State continue for a  period  or
         indefinitely in the host State for a residence card to be issued or
         renewed pursuant to Article 10 of Directive 2004/38 ... and if  so
         how should such dependency be demonstrated?"

34. In his opinion, the Advocate-General said this:

         "26. It is clear from the order for reference (8)  that,  by  that
         question, the national  court  is  in  fact  seeking  to  ascertain
         whether adults admitted to reside in the United Kingdom  as  family
         members who  are  then  free  to  work  have  to  remain  dependent
         throughout the period of validity  of  their  residence  permit  in
         order to be able to obtain an extension of stay and entitlement  to
         permanent residence. In my view, that question is hypothetical  and
         has no bearing on the main  proceedings,  since  there  is  nothing
         whatsoever in the information contained in the order for  reference
         to suggest that the respondents in the main proceedings would be in
         a position to  apply  for  an  extension  or  a  renewal  of  their
         residence permits when they are no longer dependent on Mr  and  Mrs
         Rahman. It is not possible to answer the question  in  general  and
         abstract terms without taking into account  the  reasons  why  they
         would no  longer  be  dependent.  The  answer  could  be  different
         depending, for example, on whether  the  family  member  has  found
         employment in the host Member State or  whether  he  is  now  being
         cared for by another person living in his State of origin.

         27.  As it is not the task of the Court to  resolve,  in  a  manner
         which goes beyond the scope of the specific case which the national
         court is required to decide, all the difficulties of interpretation
         which  might  have  been  raised  by  the  provisions   transposing
         Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 in the United Kingdom, the sixth
         question must be considered inadmissible."

35. We note also what the  Advocate-General  said  at  paragraphs  [105]  -
    [107}:

         "105.    By contrast, in so far as I take the view that [article  3
         (2)(a)] does not imply the automatic grant of a right of residence,
         I cannot identify any fundamental obstacle to a Member State laying
         down particular conditions for obtaining the  right  of  entry  and
         residence  in  order  to  ensure  the  reality,  effectiveness  and
         duration of the dependency.

         106. Such  conditions  must,  however,  respect  the  principle  of
         effectiveness, which presupposes that they must not  be  framed  in
         such a way as to render practically impossible the exercise of  the
         rights conferred by the EU legal order. Accordingly, the conditions
         laid down by the Member States cannot deprive,  de  facto,  persons
         coming within the scope of that provision  of  all  possibility  of
         obtaining a right of entry and residence. For example,  a  national
         provision would be unacceptable if it provided that, in order to be
         able to benefit from a right of residence, a  national  of  a  non-
         member country had to prove that he had been dependent on the Union
         citizen for more than 20 years.

         107. Furthermore, conditions  as  to  the  nature  or  duration  of
         dependency may constitute restrictions on the  admission  of  other
         family members, which the Member States are, however,  required  to
         facilitate. Consequently, in order to  be  permissible,  they  must
         pursue a legitimate objective,  be  appropriate  for  securing  the
         attainment of that  objective  and  must  not  go  beyond  what  is
         necessary to attain it."

36. In its judgment, the court did not address this point, but it is echoed
    in Banger [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 at paragraph [40]:

         "40. In the light both of the absence of  more  specific  rules  in
         Directive 2004/38 and of the use of the words 'in  accordance  with
         its national legislation' in Article 3(2) of that directive,  each
         Member State has a wide discretion as regards the selection of  the
         factors to be taken into account. Nonetheless, Member  States  must
         ensure  that  their  legislation  contains   criteria   which   are
         consistent with the normal meaning of  the  term  'facilitate'  and
         which do not deprive that provision of its effectiveness  (see,  to
         that effect, judgment of 5 September 2012, Rahman and  Others,  C-
         83/11, EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 24).. "

37. There is thus authority for the proposition that any conditions imposed
    on the grant of entry or residence to an  EFM/beneficiary  must  comply
    with the usual EU law caveat that they must be effective, that is, they
    do not prevent the right from being exercised.

38. The Secretary of State's case is that once entry has been  facilitated,
    then the issue becomes one of domestic law. That we accept, but subject
    to the caveat that the rights which then accrue to the  EFM  must  have
    substance. We bear in mind that the purpose of the facilitation of EFMs
    is to strengthen the right of free movement.

39. It is evident from the approach of  the  CJEU  in  O.  and  B.  in  the
    passages cited above  that  its  primary  concern  is  whether  the  EU
    national would be discouraged from leaving his state of nationality  to
    exercise  his  right  of  residence  under  the  Treaty  owing  to   an
    uncertainty over whether he can continue a family life which  has  been
    created or strengthened during a genuine residence.  In  principle,  we
    accept that similar discouragements could apply in a  situation  where,
    as here, Mr Maree's  brother-in-law  may  have  been  discouraged  from
    moving to the United Kingdom were he not able to bring  Mr  Maree  with
    him.

40. It is, however, difficult to argue that there would be a discouragement
    to an exercise of free movement rights if it were known that  Mr  Maree
    would not be able to stay if he were no longer dependent, that  is,  an
    adult reliant on his own resources. If the position were otherwise,  it
    is difficult to see how or why the EU legislature would have framed the
    Directive as it did.

41. Further, it must be recalled that while the Directive  makes  extensive
    provision for the rights of family members, that  does  not  extend  to
    EFMs/beneficiaries.  That is, we consider, a deliberate choice  of  the
    legislator. We recall also that that the  Directive  does  not  in  its
    terms allow beneficiaries to acquire permanent residence  by  operation
    of law - they are omitted from Articles 16 to 21, unlike the provisions
    at Article 8, which allow for beneficiaries to be issued with residence
    cards.  The Regulations are more generous than the  Directive  in  that
    they do permit EFMs to acquire permanent residence.

42. Given the clear legislative decision to maintain a  difference  between
    beneficiaries and family members, we do not accept  that  effectiveness
    requires a beneficiary to be permitted to acquire permanent  residence;
    nor   are   we   satisfied   that   a   requirement    of    continuing
    dependency/membership of a household  is  an  obstacle  to  freedom  of
    movement.

43. Turning  next  to  proportionality,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
    continuing requirement for dependency is disproportionate in the EU law
    sense. The requirement is,  all  things  considered,  simply  that  the
    status quo persists.   We  accept  that  this  is  different  from  the
    position of family members, in particular children who reach the age of
    21 and become self-supporting as in Reyes; but  that  decision  relates
    specifically to descendants who are provided for in  the  Directive  at
    article 2 (2). The point made by the CJEU in Reyes at paragraph [32] is
    that if a person granted entry would no longer be a dependant as he  or
    she would be able to get employment, and so would not be able  to  work
    if he or she wanted to retain status would be contrary to article 23 of
    the Directive which  does  not  apply  to  beneficiaries.   It  can  be
    distinguished on that basis and it  relates  to  an  interpretation  of
    article 2 (2), not article 3 (2).

44. Returning  to  Rahman,  we  consider  that,  contrary  to  Mr  Farhat's
    submission, paragraph [47] cannot be  read  as  meaning  that  enduring
    dependence is not a requirement that can be lawfully imposed. We see no
    reason to read  the  passage  cited  from  paragraph  [47]  as  meaning
    anything more than that the  issue  falls  outside  the  scope  of  the
    Directive. That is a logical statement in the context  of  the  limited
    manner in which it  addresses  the  position  of  EFMs.  Had  the  CJEU
    intended to say that the requirement could not be imposed,  they  would
    have said so; but it is in any  event  not  clear  how  that  could  be
    deduced from the Directive.

45. To conclude, therefore, we find that the requirement to show five years
    continuous dependency and/or membership of  the  household  of  an  EEA
    national is compatible with the Directive and the EU treaties.

46. We therefore find that the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not
    involve the making of an error of law, and we uphold them.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    an error of law and we uphold them.


Signed                                  Date:  26 July 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
