
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06660/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 28 April 2021                           |On : 06 May 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between


                                Comfort Antwi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore, instructed by Gans & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant, a national of Ghana born  on  27  July  2000,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her
appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse her admission to  the  UK
under regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), as the family  member  (daughter)  of  an  EEA
national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

On 13 October 2018 the appellant was issued with a family permit  under  the
EEA Regulations, as the family member of  an  EEA  national  (Italian),  her
father Mattew Kwasi Antwi. She arrived in the UK  on  25  October  2019  and
sought admission at the airport on the basis of the family permit which  was
endorsed in her Ghanaian passport. She was not accompanied by  the  sponsor,
but it was stated that he was on  his  way  to  meet  her  at  the  airport.
Concerns were raised at immigration control  owing  to  the  fact  that  the
appellant was found to be holding a crib  sheet  containing  questions  that
may be asked about her sponsor. As a result, the appellant  was  interviewed
and the sponsor was also subsequently questioned  and  inconsistencies  were
identified between their accounts of the nature and length of her stay.

The  appellant  was  interviewed  further  on  13  November  2019  and   was
questioned in particular about the birth certificate she had used to  obtain
her passport and family permit. Following the interview, the  appellant  was
served with a refusal decision  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the  birth
certificate had been examined and had been found to have  been  fraudulently
obtained. The  respondent  could  not,  therefore,  be  satisfied  that  the
appellant was related to the sponsor as claimed and was not  satisfied  that
she was the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  As  a  result,  it  was
considered that she did not have the right to be admitted to  the  UK  under
regulation 11. Removal directions were set for the  appellant's  removal  on
18 November 2019, but she did not attend at the airport on that  day  owing,
it was claimed, to medical problems.

On 22 November 2019 the  appellant  was  given  notice  of  the  immigration
decision refusing her admission to the UK under regulation 30, on the  basis
that she did not have the right to be admitted under regulation 11,  as  the
birth certificate provided in  the  application  process  for  her  Ghanaian
passport and EEA family permit had been fraudulently  obtained  and  it  was
not accepted that she was a family member of an EEA national.

In a refusal report dated 27 January 2020 the respondent  responded  to  the
appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and  maintained  the  decision  to  refuse
admission, noting that the birth  certificate  had  been  scrutinised  by  a
forgery officer and found to have been fraudulently obtained.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thapar  on  18
February 2020. The appellant and the sponsor attended but did not give  oral
evidence. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  made  an  application  under
section 108 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  for  the
judge to investigate the forgery  allegation  on  the  basis  of  a  forgery
report in relation to the appellant's birth certificate, in camera,  in  the
absence of the appellant  and  the  appellant's  representative.  The  judge
granted the application and concluded that the document was  not  authentic.
On that basis, and in  light  of  the  report  of  the  appellant  being  in
possession of  crib  sheets  and  the  inconsistencies  in  the  information
provided by the appellant and the sponsor,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
appellant had failed to establish that she was the  biological  daughter  of
the sponsor. The judge found that the appellant could not,  therefore,  meet
the requirements of regulation 7(1)(b)  of  the  2016  Regulations  and  she
dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 9 April 2020.

The appellant sought, and was granted, permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

The grounds of appeal,  which  were  subsequently  amended  in  response  to
directions from Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer following an adjourned  hearing
on 29 September 2020, were as follows: firstly, that the appellant  had  not
received a fair hearing as the judge had failed to engage with the  relevant
issue in the appeal, namely whether  the  respondent  had  proved  that  the
appellant was not entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the  UK  under  regulation
11(2)(b)(i) and (ii), and had denied the appellant the right to  answer  the
case made in the document relied on by the judge but not disclosed  to  her;
secondly, that the judge had failed to  proceed  on  the  premise  that  the
respondent bore the burden of proof, given that there was an  allegation  of
fraud; thirdly, that the judge had failed to address her  mind  properly  or
at all to the lawfulness of issuing removal directions at a  time  when  the
appellant had a valid family permit which had not been  revoked  on  grounds
of fraud; and fourthly, that the judge had relied  on  section  108  of  the
NIAA 2002 when it was irrelevant on the  facts  of  the  case,  because  the
document relied upon by  the  appellant  in  seeking  admission  to  the  UK
pursuant to regulation 11 was her passport which contained a family  permit,
neither of which had been alleged to be forged or fraudulently obtained.

Both parties provided  skeleton  arguments.  In  the  respondent's  skeleton
argument, prepared by  Mr  Tan  of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team,  it  was
conceded that the judge had proceeded on an unfair basis as the drafting  of
the 2016 EEA Regulations did not appear to provide for  the  application  of
section 108 to appeals  lodged  under  regulation  36.  It  was  accordingly
accepted that the judge's decision contained a material  error  of  law  and
should be set aside. It was stated further that the decision of 13  November
2019 to refuse admission under regulation 30(1)(a)  was  correct  and  that,
contrary to the appellant's skeleton argument, the EEA family permit  relied
upon by the appellant had been revoked on account of  fraud.  Reference  was
made to regulation 24(6)(b) in that regard. An application  was  made  under
rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  for  the
respondent to rely upon a more recent document verification report dated  17
March 2021 in relation to the appellant's birth  certificate,  in  re-making
the decision.

At the hearing we pointed out  to  Mr  Whitwell  that,  whilst  we  were  in
agreement that Judge Thapar's decision had to be set  aside,  we  considered
it  appropriate  to  seek  clarification  on  some  matters.   We  noted  in
particular that Mr Tan's reasons for conceding the appeal did not appear  to
correlate with those actually raised by the  appellant  in  the  grounds  of
appeal, as the appellant's reason for asserting in her grounds that  section
108 was not applicable was that the forgery allegation  did  not  relate  to
the documents upon which she relied, namely her passport and family  permit.
That was not the reason given by Mr Tan  as  to  why  section  108  did  not
apply. Further, Mr Tan referred to  the  appellant's  family  permit  having
been revoked and to the appellant's admission to the  UK  being  refused  on
that basis, with reference to regulation 24(6)(b), yet the  decision  letter
made no mention of the  family  permit  having  been  revoked.  Mr  Whitwell
clarified that the respondent's position was that section 108  was  not  the
appropriate mechanism to have been used and that it was on that  basis  that
it was conceded that the judge's decision was materially flawed, on  grounds
of unfairness. However, the decision to refuse admission to  the  UK  itself
was maintained and the judge gave various reasons  for  making  the  adverse
credibility findings that she did. Mr Whitwell agreed  that  there  did  not
appear to be any specific mention of the family permit having been  revoked.


Ms Gore was in agreement with our understanding of the  various  issues  and
was of the view that the matter ought  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a de novo  hearing.  Mr  Whitwell  had  no  objection  to  that
course.

In light of the concession made by the respondent we agree that the  judge's
decision has to be set aside on  grounds  of  unfairness.  In  addition,  we
would make it clear that we have found  merit  in  all  of  the  appellant's
grounds of appeal. The judge clearly failed  to  engage  with  the  relevant
issue,  namely  the  lawfulness  of  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
admission to the appellant under regulation 11(2)(b) when she  had  a  valid
family permit which had not, it seems, been revoked  on  account  of  fraud.
Further, the judge did not acknowledge the respondent's  burden  of  proving
fraud and her reference to the appellant's submission in that regard at  [9]
was not sufficient to show that she properly engaged with the matter.

For all of these reasons we set aside Judge Thapar's decision. None  of  the
judge's findings can be preserved and the decision will need to  be  re-made
de novo by a different judge in the First-tier Tribunal. We  made  it  clear
to Mr Whitwell that the respondent may wish to clarify  the  status  of  the
appellant's family permit in  the  meantime,  since  there  is  no  evidence
before us to show that it has been revoked.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,
pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge  aside  from  Judge
Thapar.



S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  28 April 2021



