
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/07283/2016
                                                               EA/07287/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |                              |
|On 22 November 2019                           |On 22 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           EFDT (FIRST appellant)
                           AGT (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    The first appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been before this Tribunal on a number of occasions.  On
    7 November 2018 a Tribunal consisting of myself  and  Mr  Justice  Mark
    Turner found that a decision previously  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bristow sitting at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre  on  Thursday,
    26 April 2018 and Wednesday, 13 June  2018  had  contained  a  material
    error of law, such that it had to be remade and subsequently the appeal
    was relisted on a number of occasions for Case  Management  Reviews  in
    the expectation that it might be possible to resolve  the  problems  in
    this case without the need for a full hearing.

 2. The facts can be outlined succinctly, but before doing so I record that
    the second appellant, who is now around 11  years  old,  has  now  been
    granted British citizenship and so her  appeal  does  not  need  to  be
    considered because as a British citizen  clearly  she  is  entitled  to
    remain in this country.  The only live appeal therefore is that of  her
    mother.

 3. Briefly, the first appellant has been in the UK since around  2001  and
    in 2006 she married a French national in this country.   Her  daughter,
    who was the second appellant was born in 2008.

 4. The first appellant's marriage to the French  national  (who  had  been
    exercising treaty rights) did not survive  and  he  instituted  divorce
    proceedings.  Although there was an issue as  to  whether  or  not  the
    first appellant had been properly notified of these proceedings it  was
    found by Judge Bristow (and this was a finding open to the judge)  that
    the marriage had not lasted a sufficient period of time  prior  to  the
    commencement of divorce proceedings to entitle her to a permanent right
    of residence.

 5. That however has left open the question of whether  or  not  the  first
    appellant was  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under
    paragraph 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 on the basis  of
    her relationship with her daughter.

 6. The relevant parts of paragraph 15 provide as follows:

         "Right of permanent residence

         15.- (1) The following persons acquire the right to reside  in  the
                  United Kingdom permanently-

                  (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                      in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
                      period of five years;

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not an  EEA
                      national but who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom
                      with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  these
                      Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five  years
                      ...".

 7. Paragraph 16 then goes on to provide as follows:

         "Derivative right to reside

         16.- (1) A person has a  derivative  right  to  reside  during  any
                  period in which the person-

                  (a)  is not an exempt person; and

                  (b)  satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                      paragraphs (2) to (6).

             (2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-

                  (a)  the person is the primary carer of an  EEA  national;
                      and

                  (b)  the EEA national-

                      (i)  is under the age of 18;

                      (ii)  resides  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                           sufficient person; and

                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for
                           an indefinite period ...".

 8. It is not entirely clear whether or not the application that  was  made
    by the first appellant for a permanent residence card relied solely  on
    her marriage to the French national, in which case because the  divorce
    proceedings had been commenced before they had  been  married  for  the
    requisite period she would  not  have  been  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card or  whether  as  a  matter  of  proper  construction  it
    implicitly relied also on her relationship with her  daughter,  who  it
    was at all times asserted was a French national and who  clearly  could
    not have exercised any  treaty  rights  in  this  country  without  the
    presence of her mother, the first appellant,  because  her  father  had
    very early on deserted her.  It was on the basis that Judge Bristow had
    not considered this aspect of the appeal adequately that permission  to
    appeal was granted and it was partly because of this  failure  that  Mr
    Justice Turner and myself  found  that  Judge  Bristow's  decision  had
    contained a material error of law, such that it had to be remade.  This
    aspect is happily not now one  that  needs  to  be  considered  in  any
    further detail because very sensibly and properly Ms Cunha, acting  for
    and on behalf of the respondent at today's  hearing,  has  stated  that
    insofar as it could be argued that any right to a  permanent  residence
    card based on the first appellant's derivative rights from her position
    as the carer of her daughter is a new matter and she does not object to
    this Tribunal now deciding this case on the basis that the child was  a
    French national and had a right as such to remain in this country.

 9. This issue had  been  canvassed  on  a  previous  hearing  because  the
    Tribunal was concerned to establish that the second appellant, that  is
    the first  appellant's  daughter,  had  had  the  appropriate  sickness
    insurance in place and the Tribunal has been shown evidence  that  this
    sickness insurance was in fact in place and on rehearing this appeal  I
    accept that the sickness insurance was in place as established  by  the
    documents I was shown.

10. Judge Bristow had dismissed the appeal  on  this  ground  also  because
    although at paragraph 2 of her decision she had seemed to  accept  that
    the second appellant  was  a  French  national,  further  down  in  her
    decision she appeared to resile from this finding on the basis that "it
    has to be proved to the required standard that the second appellant  is
    a direct descendant of Mr M", that is the French national to  whom  the
    first appellant was married.  The judge did not  take  account  of  the
    presumption of legitimacy whereby it is to be presumed absent  evidence
    against this presumption that a child born to parents who  are  legally
    married is the child of those parents.  Furthermore,  it  left  out  of
    account the  fact  that  the  child  had  a  French  passport  and  the
    presumption there also must be that the child is a French national.  At
    no stage before this Tribunal have any of the representatives appearing
    on behalf of the respondent sought to argue that the  second  appellant
    is not the child of the French national and is not entitled  to  French
    nationality.

11. Although Judge Bristow  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  had
    adduced sufficient evidence to  show  that  the  second  appellant  had
    comprehensive sickness cover as at the date of the hearing to establish
    that she was  a  self-sufficient  person  within  the  meaning  of  the
    Regulations, as I have already noted, I am  so  satisfied  having  been
    shown evidence to this effect.

12. Accordingly, I am able to proceed on the basis that  first,  the  first
    appellant is the mother of  the  second  appellant,  who  while  now  a
    British citizen, was at all material times a French national, secondly,
    that her daughter was at all times exercising  her  rights  as  an  EEA
    citizen because the relevant sickness cover was in place  and  thirdly,
    that because she has been exercising her derivative rights for a period
    in excess of five years, she is now entitled to a  permanent  residence
    card.

13. It follows that this appeal must be allowed and I so find.



Decision

    The first appellant's appeal is allowed, under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.  For the avoidance of doubt, it is  the  decision  of
    this Tribunal that the first  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card.

    With regard to the second appellant, as she is now a British  national,
    it is not necessary to make any further decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                 Dated: 14 January 2020

