
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/07219/2018
                                                               HU/16070/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 akhtar ayub
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Tennyson Monroe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  24  March  1982.  He
       appeals, with permission, against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of 2
       October 2016 to refuse to issue him with a residence card  under  the
       Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the extended
       family member of an EEA national and dismissing  his  appeal  against
       the respondent's decision of 14 November 2017  to  refuse  his  human
       rights claim.

    2. The appellant entered the UK on 4 July 2007 with leave to enter as  a
       student until 31 August 2010 and was granted further periods of leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 student migrant, a Tier 1  post  study  migrant
       and then again as a Tier 4 student migrant, until 28 August 2015.  On
       28 August 2015 he applied for leave to remain outside the immigration
       rules and on 30 October 2015 he applied for an  EEA  residence  card.
       The application made outside the immigration rules was refused  on  1
       December 2015  with  no  right  of  appeal,  and  the  appellant  was
       subsequently refused an EEA  residence  card  on  3  April  2016.  He
       applied again for a residence card on 9  April  2016  but  was  again
       refused, on 2 October 2016.  An  appeal  against  that  decision  was
       struck out, on 19 September 2017, on the basis of Sala  (EFMs:  Right
       of Appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411, but a later appeal was  accepted
       out of time following the judgment in Khan v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department & Anor [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755  overturning  Sala.
       That is the first appeal before this Tribunal.

    3. The appellant made an application on 5 July 2017 for indefinite leave
       to remain on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence. That
       application was refused on  14  November  2017  and  the  appellant's
       appeal against  that  decision  is  the  second  appeal  before  this
       Tribunal.

    4. In the decision of 2 October  2016  refusing  the  appellant  an  EEA
       residence card as the extended family member  of  his  uncle,  Arshid
       Muhammad, an Italian  national,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
       appellant was related to the EEA national sponsor but considered that
       he had provided insufficient evidence to show that he  was  dependent
       upon him or residing with him prior to coming to the UK  or  that  he
       remained dependent upon him  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  therefore
       considered that he could not  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
       8(2).

    5. In the decision of 14 November 2017 the  respondent  considered  that
       the appellant's lawful residence in the UK ceased on 1 December 2015,
       that his application for an EEA residence card  did  not  extend  his
       leave under section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971,  that  he  had
       therefore been without leave to remain from 2 December 2015 and  that
       he had not demonstrated 10 years' lawful  residence.  The  respondent
       considered  that  the  appellant  could  not,  therefore   meet   the
       requirements in paragraph 276B(i) and (v) of  the  immigration  rules
       and also considered that he could not meet the criteria in  paragraph
       276ADE(1)  or  demonstrate  exceptional  circumstances  outside   the
       immigration rules.

    6. The appellant's two appeals were heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Malone on 6 June 2019. The evidence before the judge at  the  hearing
       was that, whilst the appellant had entered the UK in  2007,  his  EEA
       national sponsor had entered the UK in 2014 and had only acquired his
       Italian nationality in September 2014. The appellant claimed to  have
       been dependent upon his uncle when he was in Pakistan prior to coming
       to the UK in 2007 and after coming to the UK, and that  he  became  a
       member of his uncle's household after his uncle arrived  in  the  UK.
       Judge Malone considered that the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  only
       acquired his Italian citizenship in September 2014 was fatal  to  the
       appellant's application for a residence card as  an  extended  family
       member and he dismissed the first appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.
       As for the long residence and human rights claim, the judge concluded
       that the appellant could not demonstrate 10 years'  lawful  residence
       in the UK as his leave had ended at the latest in  mid-January  2016.
       The judge considered that there were no very significant obstacles to
       the appellant's integration in Pakistan for the purposes of paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi) and no compelling circumstances justifying a  grant  of
       leave outside the rules. He concluded that the respondent's  decision
       was proportionate and  that  it  would  not  breach  the  appellant's
       article 8 human rights and he dismissed the second appeal as well.

    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to the  Upper
       Tribunal on the basis that the judge had misdirected himself  in  law
       and had wrongly interpreted Regulation 8(2), as  the  fact  that  his
       sponsor had acquired his Italian citizenship prior to his own arrival
       in the UK was not fatal to his ability to meet  the  requirements  of
       the EEA Regulations; that the  judge  had  failed  to  determine  the
       substantive issues under Regulation 8(2);  and  that  the  judge  had
       failed to take into consideration, in his proportionality assessment,
       the fact that he would be eligible for an EEA family permit and  that
       the principles in  Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2008] UKHL 40 were therefore applicable.

    8. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 6 August 2019.

    9. At the hearing before me, I referred Mr Ahmed to the case  of  Moneke
       and others (EEA -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  341  which  directly
       addressed the first ground of appeal. He was not aware of  that  case
       and accordingly I gave him an opportunity to consider it.  Mr  Clarke
       also produced the case of Aladeselu & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  144  upon  which  he  relied  in
       submitting that rights flowed from EEA nationals and not from someone
       without any rights under the Treaties, and that the  appellant  could
       not establish dependency for the purposes of the Regulations  upon  a
       person who was not an EEA national.

   10. Mr Ahmed accepted that the decision in Moneke put him in a  difficult
       position in arguing the appellant's case, but he invited the Tribunal
       to  find  that  the  judge's   interpretation   of   dependency   was
       incompatible with Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC. He  submitted
       that the appellant met the past dependency requirement given that  he
       was able to show a connection to the sponsor who subsequently  became
       an EEA national. As for the Article 8 claim, the judge failed to give
       weight to his  findings  on  dependency  and  to  the  principles  in
       Chikwamba in assessing proportionality.

   11. I advised the parties that, in my view,  Judge  Malone  had  made  no
       errors of law in his decision and that I was upholding his decision.

   12. Mr Ahmed asked that I consider a request that a reference be made  to
       the ECJ on the relevant point.

Discussion

   13.  The appellant's grounds challenge the judge's decision under the EEA
       Regulations on the basis,  set  out  at  paragraph  2(b)(ii)  of  the
       grounds, that he did not provide any authority of a  higher  Tribunal
       or Court to support his findings. However the  judge's  findings  are
       entirely consistent with the decision of the President of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Moneke, whereby the headnote states that:

           "i.   A person claiming to be  an  OFM  under  Article  3(2)  of
           Directive 2004/38/EC may either be a dependant or  a  member  of
           the household of the EEA national: they are alternative ways  of
           qualifying as an OFM.

           ii.   In  either  case  the  dependency  or  membership  of  the
           household must be on a person who is  an  EEA  national  at  the
           material time. For this reason it  is  essential  that  tribunal
           judges establish when the sponsor acquired EEA nationality"

       and the President concluded at [40]  that  judges  should  adopt  the
       following approach:

           "i.   A person claiming to be an OFM may either be  a  dependant
           or a member of the household  of  the  EEA  national:  they  are
           alternative ways of qualifying as an OFM.

           ii.   In  either  case  the  dependency  or  membership  of  the
           household must be on a person who is  an  EEA  national  at  the
           material time. Thus dependency or membership of a household that
           preceded the sponsor becoming  an  EEA  national  would  not  be
           sufficient. It is necessary for the pre entry dependency  to  be
           on the EEA national and not a person who subsequently became  an
           EEA national. Thus if a sponsor has been financially  supporting
           OFMs who live abroad for many years before  he  became  an  EEA
           national, but there  was  no  such  support  after  the  sponsor
           acquired  EEA  nationality,  there  would  be  no  evidence   of
           dependency on an EEA national.

   14. Mr Ahmed invited the Tribunal to find that, despite the  findings  in
       Moneke, the judge's decision was incompatible with  Article  3(2)  of
       the Directive. Article 3(2) is set out at [9] of Moneke and  was  the
       subject of detailed analysis by the Presidential panel in that  case,
       in light of other relevant UK and European caselaw. Not only does  Mr
       Ahmed provide no proper basis for me to go behind the findings  of  a
       Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal, but I can see no basis  for
       his interpretation of Regulation 8(2) and Article 3(2). It  seems  to
       me   that   Article   3(2)   entirely   precludes   the   appellant's
       interpretation of Regulation 8(2), as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
       appeal, and I see no grounds for there to be a referral to the ECJ as
       Mr Ahmed rather belatedly  requested.  Judge  Malone  was  fully  and
       properly entitled to conclude that the fact that the appellant's  EEA
       national sponsor only acquired his Italian citizenship  in  September
       2014 was fatal to the appellant's ability to demonstrate that he  was
       an extended family member for the purposes of  Regulation  8(2).  The
       appellant simply could not demonstrate dependency upon, or membership
       of the same household, of an EEA national, prior to coming to the  UK
       and, in the circumstances, there was no need for the judge to  go  on
       to make any substantive findings on dependency and membership of  the
       same household as asserted in  the  second  ground.  Accordingly  the
       judge's decision, that the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  that
       he was the extended family member of an EEA national and was thus not
       entitled to a residence card, was fully and properly open to  him  on
       the evidence available. There are no errors of law in his decision in
       that regard.

   15. As for the third ground, that is predicated upon the appellant  being
       successful in demonstrating that he was an extended family member  of
       the EEA sponsor. I do not see any merit in Mr Ahmed's  argument  that
       the assessment of proportionality ought to have  taken  into  account
       the appellant's entitlement to apply for an EEA family  permit  under
       the  Regulations.  The  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  any   such
       entitlement and such a matter could not possibly have led  the  judge
       to conclude proportionality differently. The judge took full  account
       of the appellant's relationship with his uncle and his  other  family
       members in the UK and Pakistan and all other  relevant  circumstances
       in assessing the appellant's Article  8  claim.  He  provided  cogent
       reasons for concluding that there were no very significant  obstacles
       to integration into Pakistan and, likewise, properly  concluded  that
       there were no compelling or other circumstances justifying a grant of
       leave outside the immigration rules. The judge was perfectly entitled
       to conclude that the respondent's decision was proportionate and  did
       not breach the appellant's Article 8 rights. His decision  was  fully
       and properly reasoned. There was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
       decision on the appellant's human rights claim.

DECISION

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       an error on a point of law. I do not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
       decision to dismiss both appeals stands.


Signed:     [pic]      Dated: 23 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
