
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07859/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 24 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            valentyna andrushkiv
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rashid, Legal Representative from Smart
                    Immigration Solutions
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke ("the judge"), promulgated on 22 March 2019, in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 27 November 2018, refusing to issue her  with  a  residence
    card as a family member of an EEA national, pursuant to  Regulations  7
    and 18 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the Regulations").

 2. Having arrived in the United Kingdom in 2017, the  Appellant  intimated
    to the Respondent  a  desire  to  marry  a  Lithuanian  national  ("the
    sponsor"). A marriage interview was arranged for 23 March 2018 and  the
    couple both attended. Following this event, and  despite  the  apparent
    concerns raised by the Respondent immediately following the  interview,
    the Appellant was permitted to marry the sponsor on 6  April  2018.  An
    initial application for a residence card was then made and rejected  by
    the Respondent on 14 August 2018. A second application was  made  on  4
    October of that year. Refusing that application, the Respondent  relied
    on evidence given by the couple at interview, as apparently set out  in
    the report of an Immigration Officer, and concluded that  the  marriage
    had been one of convenience. Therefore, in light of Regulation 2 of the
    Regulations, it was said that the Appellant was not the  family  member
    of the sponsor and so could not be issued with a residence card.

 3.  The  particular  matters  raised  against   the   appellant   included
    discrepancies in the evidence given at interview and the timing of  the
    marriage itself.

 4. For reasons unknown to us, the Appellant elected  to  have  her  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision determined without an  oral  hearing.
    The grounds of appeal contained in Form IAFT read as follows:

         "I am married to my EEA national husband and our  marriage  is  not
         one of convenience. I wish to continue  my  life  with  my  husband
         legally in this country as I have a right to be in  the  UK  as  my
         husband  is  currently  in  the  UK  working  here  and   therefore
         exercising  treaty   rights.   I   have   explained   the   various
         discrepancies to the Home Office which they have ignored  and  they
         did give us the authority to get married."

 5. We note at this stage that the Appellant was legally represented at the
    time the appeal is lodged, and this  representation  has  continued  to
    date.



The judge's decision

 6. The judge confirmed that he  was  taking  account  of  the  documentary
    evidence before him, this consisting of: a bundle from  the  Respondent
    containing the decision letter, the Appellant's application  form,  and
    items of supporting evidence; and a bundle from the Appellant including
    witness statements from her  and  the  sponsor,  additional  supporting
    letters, correspondence from her representatives, and various items  of
    supporting evidence.

 7. Having included what appears to be a standard  paragraph  stating  that
    the burden of proof rested with the Appellant, the judge goes on to set
    out what he describes as the "disputed facts". In  essence,  these  are
    the points taken against the  Appellant  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  The  judge  then  summarises  the  contents  of  the   witness
    statements from the Appellant and sponsor.

 8. At [7] the judge finds that the discrepancies and other concerns raised
    by the Respondent were sufficient to "challenge  the  validity  of  the
    marriage and to refuse the application." In the following paragraph the
    judge states that the burden of proof rested with the Appellant satisfy
    him that the Respondent's conclusion was wrong. Significant emphasis is
    placed on the fact that the Appellant had chosen not to  have  an  oral
    hearing of her appeal and, as a result, none of the witness  statements
    or documentary evidence could be  tested.  The  judge  then  states  as
    follows:

         "I conclude, therefore that the Appellant has failed  to  discharge
         the burden of proof upon her, to counter the Respondent's  concerns
         and that accordingly, in the absence of satisfactory  evidence  the
         Respondent was entitled to come to the decision they did and refuse
         the application. I can only conclude, therefore,  on  the  evidence
         before me that the Appellant and  sponsor  are  in  a  marriage  of
         convenience."

 9. The appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. The grounds of appeal are handwritten, although we infer that they were
    in fact drafted by the Appellant's representatives. In the  context  of
    this appeal, it is worth setting the grounds out in full:

         "The refusal notice has been relied on by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge regarding this interview. The Respondent has not provided any
         evidence of this interview transcript  or  an  audio  recording  to
         which they refer to in their refusal notice. We have looked through
         the  Respondent's  bundle  but  we  have  merely  come  across  the
         application form,  supporting  documents  (some)  and  the  refusal
         notice. Our client is more than happy to attend an oral hearing  if
         required. We feel this appeal has been judged unfairly  and  biased
         opinion siding towards the Respondent without any evidence of  this
         interview they keep referring to in their refusal and  this  appeal
         decision. Therefore we conclude there is an obvious  error  of  law
         and we  should  be  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal."

11. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    Robertson on 24 April 2019. The grant refers to the issue  of  fairness
    and  cites  the  case  of  Miah  (interviewer's  comments:  disclosure:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).




The hearing before us

12. Ms Rashid relied on the grounds of appeal. We asked her if  there  were
    any particular reasons for the Appellant's decision not to have had  an
    oral hearing and why no request had ever been  made  by  her  firm  for
    production of the marriage  interview  record  and/or  the  Immigration
    Officer's report. In respect of the first point, she indicated that she
    had been on maternity leave and that the Appellant had wanted  her  (Ms
    Rashid) to continue to have conduct of  the  case  notwithstanding  her
    absence from the office. In respect  of  the  failure  to  request  the
    evidence, Ms Rashid informed us that she had only received Respondent's
    bundle relatively late  in  the  day  and  had  apparently  only  fully
    appreciated the fact that the marriage interview record was not  before
    the judge upon receipt of his decision. We state  our  views  on  these
    explanations, below.

13. During the course of argument, we also raised what might have  appeared
    to be an error on the judge's part in respect of the  location  of  the
    burden  of  proof  in  a  case  concerning  an  alleged   marriage   of
    convenience. Notwithstanding this, there was no  application  to  amend
    the grounds.

14. Mr Melvin relied on his  rule  24  response,  dated  30  May  2019.  In
    essence, he submitted that the allegations against the  Appellant  must
    have been obvious upon receipt of the Respondent's decision and it  was
    significant that no attempt had been  made  by  the  Appellant  or  her
    representatives to obtain the interview record. It was also  said  that
    the judge had been fully entitled to  take  the  absence  of  any  live
    evidence into account.

Decision on error of law

15. After careful consideration, we conclude that  there  are  no  material
    errors of law in the judge's decision. The judge's conclusion that  the
    Appellant's  marriage  to  the  sponsor  was  one  of  convenience   is
    sustainable.

16. At first glance, the  judge's  decision  appears  to  disclose  certain
    shortcomings. He does not make specific reference to the fact (and fact
    it was) that neither the marriage interview record nor the  Immigration
    Officer's report had been provided by the  Respondent.  Connected  with
    this first point is a failure of the judge to refer to the decision  in
    Miah, in which the relevant part of the headnote reads:

         "The making of the decision on the application

         (iii)    The Secretary of State's decision making process  includes
         a process whereby comments, or opinions, of an interviewing officer
         are conveyed to the decision maker. In  the  generality  of  cases,
         this practice will not contaminate the  fairness  of  the  decision
         making process. The duty of the decision maker is to  approach  and
         consider  all  of  the  materials  with  an  open  mind  and   with
         circumspection. The due discharge of this duty,  coupled  with  the
         statutory right of appeal, will provide the subject  with  adequate
         protection.

         Disclosure

         (iv)      However,  the  document  enshrining   the   interviewer's
         comments - Form ICV.4605 - must be disclosed as a matter of course.
         An Appellant's right to a fair hearing dictates  this  course.  If,
         exceptionally,  some  legitimate  concern  about  disclosure,   for
         example, the protection of a third party, should arise, this should
         be proactively brought to the attention  of  the  Tribunal,  for  a
         ruling and directions. In this way  the  principle  of  independent
         judicial adjudication will  provide  adequate  safeguards  for  the
         Appellant. This will also  enable  mechanisms  such  as  redaction,
         which in practice one would expect to arise with extreme rarity, to
         be considered."

17. In the present case, the adverse points taken by the Respondent in  the
    reasons for refusal letter had been based upon the relevant Immigration
    Officer's report of the marriage interview. In light of Miah, the  fact
    that the Respondent relied on this source did not of itself render  his
    decision or that the judge, unsound.

18. What then of the Respondent's failure to provide  either  the  marriage
    interview record or the Immigration Officer's report? In the grounds of
    appeal as pleaded, the Appellant takes this omission as the centrepiece
    of her case against the judge's decision. Superficially at least, there
    would appear to be merit in the challenge.

19. However, on closer examination we conclude that the judge has not erred
    in law. Our reasons for this are as follows.

20. The failure of the Respondent to provide the marriage interview  record
    did not of itself preclude the judge from  taking  account  the  points
    raised in the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter. There is nothing
    in Miah to suggest the contrary.  Furthermore,  at  para.  23  of  that
    decision, we find the following observation:

         "23.     While, there may be cases where  it  can  be  demonstrated
         that non-disclosure of this  document  [the  Immigration  Officer's
         report] did not contaminate the fairness of the tribunal's decision
         making process, one would expect these to be rare."

21. At least four considerations lead us to the conclusion that this is  an
    example of the rare cases alluded to in the passage cited above. First,
    despite the abundantly clear nature of the case against  the  Appellant
    as set out in the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter, at no  stage
    had her representatives requested a  copy  of  the  marriage  interview
    record or the Immigration Officer's report: nothing was done  following
    the Respondent's original refusal of the previous application in August
    2018; nothing was done when the second application was made  4  October
    2018; nothing was done immediately  following  receipt  of  the  latest
    decision notice; nothing was  done  after  the  notice  of  appeal  was
    lodged; nothing was done in the months following lodgement.

22. We are, frankly, somewhat astonished as to the complete inaction on the
    part  of  the  Appellant's  representatives.  We  found   Ms   Rashid's
    explanation provided at the hearing to be unsatisfactory,  to  say  the
    least. If it was being said that the interview and/or  the  Immigration
    Officer's report  contained  material  inaccuracies,  or  suchlike,  we
    simply cannot see why no attempt was ever made to obtain  the  evidence
    in question, either by way of a direct request  to  the  Respondent  or
    through a direction issued by the First-tier Tribunal.

23. Second, it is of  course  the  case  that  the  Appellant  and  sponsor
    accepted that discrepancies had arisen out of the evidence provided  at
    the marriage interview. Whilst we appreciate that explanations provided
    subsequently for these would constitute relevant evidence,  it  is  not
    the case that the Appellant was clearly  asserting  that  the  specific
    points relied on by the Respondent in the reasons  for  refusal  letter
    were based on a factually inaccurate reading of the  interview  record.
    In  turn,  the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to   take   the   admitted
    discrepancies into account when assessing the evidence  before  him  in
    the round.

24. Third, the Appellant's grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (quoted earlier in this decision) make no reference whatsoever  to  any
    alleged inaccuracies in the points relied on by the Respondent  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter (we note in passing that the same applies to
    the grounds of appeal with which we  are  concerned).  The  failure  of
    those original grounds to even raise the issue of alleged  inaccuracies
    makes it all the more difficult for the Appellant to now argue that the
    judge acted unfairly in proceeding  to  determine  the  appeal  without
    having the  marriage  interview  and/or  Immigration  Officer's  report
    before him.

25. Fourth, we  have  taken  into  account  the  contents  of  the  witness
    statements of the Appellant and sponsor, both of which were before  the
    judge. Para. 15 of the Appellant's statement asserts that she  suffered
    from anxiety and depression and this had an effect on what she said  at
    the interview. No medical evidence  has  ever  been  provided  and  any
    alleged inaccuracies contained in the reasons for  refusal  letter  are
    not particularised in any way. At para. 17 of the sponsor's  statement,
    he claims that the interview was conducted in an unfair  manner  and/or
    that evidence cited in the reasons for refusal letter  was  inaccurate.
    Again, no particulars are provided.

26. In our view, the  judge  took  the  witness  statements  into  account,
    together  with  the  rest  of  the  evidence  before  him.  The  weight
    attributable to the evidence was a matter for the judge. In making that
    attribution, he was fully entitled to take account of the fact that the
    Appellant had elected to  have  her  appeal  decided  without  an  oral
    hearing. The negative impact that  this  choice  had  on  the  evidence
    before him was a matter to which the judge was entitled to have regard.
    In addition, although the judge did not specifically refer to  the  two
    paragraphs from the statements of the Appellant and sponsor, the  clear
    implication is that he was decidedly unimpressed.  That,  we  find,  is
    entirely unsurprising.

27. Taking all of the above into account, the particular  circumstances  of
    this case do not disclose any procedural unfairness on the part of  the
    judge.

28. We  add  three  further  observations.  First,  we  found  Ms  Rashid's
    explanation for why the Appellant  had  opted  for  her  appeal  to  be
    determined without an oral hearing (or at least, why the Appellant  had
    not been dissuaded from taking this route) to be unimpressive.  A  case
    involving an allegation that a marriage is one of convenience would, on
    the face of it, clearly merit the election of  an  oral  hearing.  This
    would be the case whether or not the particular caseworker at the  firm
    of representatives was on some form of leave.

29. The second matter is this. We have already commented that on  one  view
    the judge might be said to have impermissibly placed the  legal  burden
    of proof upon the Appellant. However,  not  only  was  this  point  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal, but there was no  application  at  the
    hearing before us to amend those grounds. It is not for us to make  the
    Appellant's case for her. As such, there is no challenge on  the  issue
    of the burden of proof before us.

30. The final point to be made is this. We have found that  the  judge  did
    not make any material legal errors. We have also commented on  what  we
    consider (at least on the information before us) to be  the  very  poor
    standard of legal representation afforded to the Appellant. We make  it
    clear that we have in no way "blamed" the  Appellant  for  the  actions
    (and perhaps more specifically, inactions) of her representatives.  Our
    focus has been solely on the judge's  consideration  of  the  materials
    before him and the application of the law thereto. Any concerns held by
    the Appellant about the quality of her representation is a  matter  she
    may, if she wishes, raise with Smart Immigration Solutions.

Anonymity

31. We make no anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed      [pic]            Date: 18 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



