
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
ea/07655/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27th August 2019                      |On 10th September 2019             |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              Mrs PRANOM JONES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Rushforth


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 15th March 1967 is a citizen  of  Thailand.   The
    Appellant had made application for a residence card as the spouse of  a
    British citizen who had been exercising treaty rights in  Spain  within
    the European Economic Area.  The application had been  made  under  the
    Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016  and  that  application  had  been
    refused by  the  Respondent  on  22nd  November  2018.   The  Appellant
    appealed that decision and the appeal was heard on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Immigration Judge Mensah sitting at Bradford  on  1st  March
    2019.  The judge refused the application on the specific basis that the
    Appellant did  not  have  comprehensive  medical  insurance  which  was
    required.

 2. Application for permission to appeal was  made  by  the  Appellant  and
    granted on 5th June 2019.  It was said that it was  arguable  that  the
    judge had erred in finding that  comprehensive  medical  insurance  was
    needed given that she found that the Sponsor was seeking work from  the
    moment he entered the UK rather than being a self-sufficient person  or
    a student.

Submissions at the Hearing

 3. The  Sponsor  and  Appellant  were  present  before  me  but  were  not
    represented.  In those circumstances I  briefly  heard  submissions  on
    behalf of the Respondent in which it was said that the judge had made a
    correct decision in that she had found when examining the  decision  in
    the round that the Sponsor did not qualify as a  worker,  nor  did  his
    evidence within the documents indicate that that was  how  he  regarded
    himself on entry to the UK.

 4. I explained to the Sponsor and the Appellant the specific issue in this
    case and the Sponsor gave some information concerning how  he  regarded
    himself at that point.  At the conclusion I  reserved  my  decision  to
    consider matters and now provide my decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 5. The  relevant  provisions  governing  this  case  are  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 as amended by the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2017.

 6. The Sponsor is a British  citizen.   The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Thailand.  The Appellant and Sponsor have been married for  many  years
    and there is no question as to the genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of
    their relationship.   The  Sponsor  and  Appellant  lived  together  in
    Thailand  for  approximately  twelve  years  before  moving  to   Spain
    together, where they lived for a period of about two years before entry
    to the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor did not seek to bring the Appellant
    to the United Kingdom under the terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    rather under the terms  of  the  EEA  Regulations  under  what  may  be
    described as the Surinder Singh route.  There appears to have  been  no
    issue in respect of Regulation 9.

 7. The central question is  in  what  capacity  the  Sponsor  entered  and
    remained in the United Kingdom specifically to answer the  question  as
    to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  required  comprehensive   medical
    insurance.

 8. Regulation 7 indicates that the Sponsor as a  British  citizen  is  not
    required to have such cover but there are circumstances where it may be
    required for the Appellant.

 9. The Sponsor to be considered as a qualified person entering the UK must
    be an EEA national and in the UK as:

      a) a jobseeker;

      b) a worker;

      c) a self-employed person;

      d) a self-sufficient person; or

      e) a student.

10. The thrust of the Sponsor's evidence in documents and  that  which  was
    confirmed is that he has been for about fifteen years  a  self-employed
    person.  The Sponsor is a writer who has written a  substantial  number
    of books, many of which have been translated into other languages,  and
    also as audio books.  He publishes via  Amazon  and  potentially  other
    mechanisms.  There is no evidence of any other form of employment  that
    he undertook during his twelve years in Thailand  and  his  two  or  so
    years in Spain.

11. The Sponsor and Appellant entered  the  UK  on  13th  June  2018.   The
    Sponsor entered as a  self-employed  writer  and  with  the  intent  to
    continue in that capacity.  There was evidence produced by the  Sponsor
    demonstrating sale of e-books some months after he arrived in  December
    2018.

12. Shortly after arrival in the UK, on 3rd July 2018 the Sponsor sought to
    register as unemployed with the Jobcentre but was unable to do so as he
    had been in the UK for less  than  three  months.   He  made  a  second
    application on 12th September 2018 and it could be said therefore  that
    on that date he registered as a jobseeker.

13. By virtue of Regulation 9(7)(b) the Sponsor British citizen is required
    to show under the terms of Regulation 6 that they can  continue  to  be
    treated as a qualified person under the Regulations in one capacity  or
    another.  The Sponsor was a  self-employed  person  in  Spain  and  the
    evidence indicates that he came  to  the  UK  in  that  capacity.   The
    Sponsor's registration as a jobseeker about three months after  arrival
    in the UK indicates that the Sponsor had not worked in the  UK  for  at
    least twelve months prior to being registered as a jobseeker,  nor  can
    it be said that he had either been made voluntarily redundant, nor does
    the Sponsor point to any period of  employment  in  the  UK  since  his
    arrival in June  2018.   Further  and  perhaps  understandably  in  the
    circumstances, there has not been provided any evidence of the  Sponsor
    seeking employment or producing evidence of having a genuine chance  of
    being engaged.

14. Regulation 6(4) states  that  a  person  who  is  no  longer  in  self-
    employment must continue  to  be  treated  as  a  self-employed  person
    provided that the person;

      i) has registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment  office;
         and

     ii) satisfies conditions (d) and (e).  Condition (d) is that the person
         entered the United Kingdom as a self-employed person or in order to
         seek employment as a self-employed person,  and  condition  (e)  is
         that the person provides evidence of seeking  employment  or  self-
         employment and having a genuine chance of being engaged.

15. In summary the evidence points to the  Sponsor  being  a  self-employed
    writer for the last fifteen years and in particular residing  in  Spain
    exercising treaty rights in  that  capacity.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in that capacity as a self-employed person.  The fact  that  he
    registered at the Jobcentre does not in itself mean that he  ceases  to
    qualify or to be treated as a self-employed person and indeed  produced
    evidence that  thereafter  he  had  continued  in  his  self-employment
    capacity providing evidence of publications or income from publications
    in December 2018.  On the other hand, the Sponsor whilst in  Spain  was
    not in employment and did not exercise treaty  rights  in  Spain  as  a
    worker, nor has he had any employment in the UK since arrival,  nor  is
    there evidence that he has actively looked for such work and  has  been
    content to remain as he has been for many years a self-employed writer.



16. In those circumstances whilst he may not require comprehensive  medical
    insurance as a British citizen his spouse, the Appellant, does  require
    such  comprehensive  medical  insurance  in  order  to  qualify  for  a
    residence card, that being the application that was made.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge whilst  acknowledging  that  it  was  not
    necessarily clear what status the British citizen  was  claiming  since
    entry into the UK, her analysis disclosed no  arguable  error  and  her
    conclusion that the appeal could not  be  allowed  in  the  absence  of
    evidence of comprehensive medical insurance was the  correct  decision.
    There was therefore no material error of law made by the judge in  this
    case.

18. As an addendum I would note that I explained to  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant that the refusal of their application for  a  residence  card
    did not mean the Respondent's intent to remove the Appellant.  That  in
    part is clear from the absence of any necessity to look  at  this  case
    within the terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

19. I find that no material error of law was made by the judge in this case
    and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Leverl
