
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07411/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2020                |On 9th April 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                KULJIT SINGH
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India.  He was admitted to the UK as the
    family member of an EEA national with an EEA family permit  valid  from
    6th April 2018 to 6th  October  2018.   On  22nd  September  2018,  the
    appellant sought a Biometric Residence Card.  On 2nd November 2018, the
    respondent refused to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right
    of residence.    The  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge for reasons set out  in  a
    decision promulgated on 14th June 2019.


The background


 2. The appellant had previously applied for an EEA family permit  to  join
    Mr Harminder Pal Padda, a German national, in  the  UK.   Although  the
    Tribunal has not been provided with a copy of the application  made  by
    the appellant, or the respondent's decision, it appears the application
    was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
    3rd February 2017.  The appellant appealed that decision and the appeal
    was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley for reasons  set  out
    in a decision promulgated on 27th February 2018.   At  paragraphs  [3],
    [6] and [7], FtT Judge  Greasley  summarised  the  claim  made  by  the
    appellant in the following way:


         "3.  The appellant applied for an EEA family  permit  to  join  his
         brother-in-law Mr Harminder  Pal  Padda,  a  German  national.  The
         application,  together  with  all  supporting  documentation,   was
         considered,  but  on  3  February  2017  a  notice  of  immigration
         decision, together with the reasons for refusal letter, was  issued
         to the appellant refusing the application.


         ...


         6.   In a witness statement, the appellant stated that  he  was  an
         Indian citizen who had lived alone in India, his mother having died
         in August 2008 due to a brain haemorrhage  and  his  father  having
         died in 2013 due to a heart attack. The  appellant's  close  family
         members were his sister, brother-in-law, and  their  children,  who
         lived in the United Kingdom.


         7.   The appellant described how he had applied as a  dependent  to
         join his relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  this  had  been
         refused. The respondent claimed the appellant had failed to provide
         proof of the relationship, financial support, and  the  nationality
         of  the  sponsor.  The  appellant  stated  that  as  proof  of  the
         relationship, he had enclosed his father's  death  certificate  and
         his sister's father's death certificate, which showed that they had
         the same parents. In relation to financial support,  the  appellant
         also provided his bank statement the Punjab National Bank in  which
         money transfers were clearly identifiable from his  family  in  the
         United Kingdom. In relation  to  nationality,  the  appellant  also
         provided  the  sponsors  passport  copies,  and   the   sponsorship
         declaration, which had been made jointly by his brother-in-law  and
         sister, dated 23 November 2016."


 3. FtT judge Greasley heard evidence from the sponsor,  Mr  Harminder  Pal
    Padda.  At paragraphs [15] to [17] of his decision, FtT Judge  Greasley
    concluded:


         "15. In the absence of a Presenting Officer, I find that all of the
         evidence before the tribunal is effectively unchallenged. I  accept
         that there is credible and reliable evidence from  the  appellant's
         sponsor Mr Padda that he is genuinely related  to  them.  Mr  Padda
         provided his  original  German  passport  for  examination  at  the
         hearing. He indicated that he had lived and exercised treaty rights
         in Germany for 15 years before travelling to  the  United  Kingdom.
         There is no adverse immigration history known about the sponsors.


         16.  I also find that there is credible  and  further  unchallenged
         evidence  indicating  that  the  UK-based  sponsors  have  provided
         financial support to the appellant in India over  number  of  years
         (sic).


         17.  They have provided bank details not only in  relation  to  the
         appellant, but also their own. I also  find  there  is  a  credible
         explanation as to why they have sought to  support  the  appellant,
         not only financially, but also emotionally as well,  following  the
         death of both of his parents."


 4. The appeal was allowed by FtT Judge  Greasley  and  the  appellant  was
    granted an EEA family permit valid until 6th October 2018.


 5. In the subsequent decision of the respondent dated 2nd  November  2018,
    refusing the application for a residence card to confirm the  appellant
    is an extended family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK, the respondent claimed the appellant is  not  related
    to his sponsor (the EEA national), and his relationship is with the EEA
    national's spouse, and the appellant is unable to rely on Regulation  8
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016
    Regulations).  Furthermore, the respondent stated, without elaboration:


              " It is noted that you were issued with a EEA  family  permit
             on 06 April 2018 in order to join  your  sponsor  in  the  UK,
             however  as  this  document  was  issued   incorrectly,   this
             department is unable to confirm any current  right  to  reside
             under the EEA Regulations."


 6. The appellant's appeal was heard by FtT Judge Lodge on  5th  June  2019
    and dismissed for reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on  14th
    June 2019.  The evidence  received  by  the  Tribunal  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs [6] to [19] of the decision. There  was  considerable  focus
    upon the nature of the relationship between the appellant,  Mrs  Kuldip
    Kaur Padda and Mr  Harminder  Pal  Padda.  At  paragraph  [22]  of  his
    decision, the judge summarises the respondent's position:


         "The  respondent's  position  is  that  the   appellant   has   not
         established that he is related to the sponsor. He is related to the
         sponsor's wife. Under Regulation 8(7),  he  cannot  rely  on  their
         relationship under the 2016 regulations. The  respondent  had  that
         the  EEA  family  permit  issued  on  6th  April  2018  was  issued
         incorrectly."


 7. At paragraph [27], FtT Judge Lodge states:


         "Judge Greasley allowed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
         refusing him the grant of an EEA family permit to join his brother-
         in-law in the UK.  It  is  clear  and  not  contested  (indeed  not
         contestable) that Judge Greasley was under the impression that  the
         appellant was the brother of the sponsor's wife.  At  paragraph  7,
         Judge Greasley writes "The appellant stated that as  proof  of  the
         relationship, he had enclosed his father's  death  certificate  and
         his sister's father's death certificate which showed they  had  the
         same parents". That statement can only mean  that  the  appellant's
         father and his sister's father had the same parents.


 8. At paragraph [30] of his decision the Judge concluded  that  FtT  Judge
    Greasley was approaching the matter on the basis that the appellant was
    the brother of the sponsor's wife and not on the basis that  they  were
    cousins.  FtT Judge Lodge concluded  at  paragraphs  [33]  to  [35]  as
    follows:


         "33. Looking at the evidence, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
         obtained his  initial  EEA  family  permit  on  the  basis  of  the
         assertion that he was the brother of the  sponsor's  wife  when  in
         fact he is the cousin of the sponsor's wife. I  am  satisfied  that
         all the witnesses were being disingenuous and using  a  meaningless
         expression like cousin sister and cousin brother to  cover  up  the
         fact that they had deliberately been misleading  in  their  initial
         application. I am obliged to take note that the grounds  of  appeal
         (paragraphs 4A-4D in the appellant's bundle) speak of the appellant
         being a direct family member of the sponsor and the  sponsor  being
         the appellant's brother-in-law and his wife being  the  appellant's
         sister. Those grounds of appeal were settled on 19th November 2018.
          It would appear that even at that date, the appellant's solicitors
         were unaware of what is now said to be the true relationship.


         34.  I am satisfied that the determination of Judge Greasley cannot
         stand as it was based on the finding  that  the  appellant  is  the
         sponsor's brother-in-law and the sponsor's wife is his sister. Miss
         Rands submitted in closing that there is no  reliable  evidence  to
         establish any relationship between the appellant and sponsor. I  am
         satisfied that is the case  in  the  absence  of  Judge  Greasley's
         determination, I am not prepared to rely on the  oral  evidence  of
         the appellant and his  witnesses.  I  am  therefore  left  with  no
         evidence to establish the relationship between  the  appellant  and
         sponsor.


         35   In any event, even if the appellant had established  that  the
         sponsor is his brother-in-law, having regard to Regulation 8(7) and
         the fact that he was never issued with an EEA document prior to 1st
         February  2017,  he  is  not  entitled  to  rely  on  the  previous
         definition of an extended family member."


The appeal before me


 9. The appellant claims FtT Lodge focused extensively on  the  credibility
    issue concerning the  use  of  the  words  "cousin"  and  "brother"  to
    describe the relationship between the appellant  and  Mrs  Kuldip  Kaur
    Padda.  The  judge appears, at [33], to conclude that the appellant  is
    the cousin of the sponsor's wife (i.e. the cousin of  Mrs  Kuldip  Kaur
    Padda), and thus, although not a  direct  relative,  falls  within  the
    definition of "any other family member" as provided for in Article 3(2)
    of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of  the  Council
    ("the Citizens Directive").


10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen  Smith
    on 10th October 2019.  He noted:


         "The Judge found that the appellant was  not  an  "extended  family
         member" because he was the cousin of the spouse of the EEA sponsor;
         see [35]. Arguably, that was an error because,  as  the  respondent
         now accepts pursuant to the amendments made to Regulation  8(7)  of
         the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  by
         Regulation 2(5)(e) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         (Amendment)  Regulations  2019/1155,  Article  3(2)  of   Directive
         2004/38 EC did not restrict "other family  members"  in  that  way.
         Arguably, given those changes  were  introduced  to  implement  the
         requirements of SM v Entry  Clearance  Officer  C-129/18  (see  the
         Explanatory Note to the 2019 Regulations,  which  was  handed  down
         before this appeal, the judge fell into error by  failing  to  give
         effect  to  the  relevant  directly  effective  provisions  of  the
         Directive."


11. Mr Azmi submits the appellant and his witnesses have  never  sought  to
    deceive the Tribunal about the  way  in  which  they  are  related.  He
    submits that at the outset of the hearing before FtT Judge  Lodge,  the
    appellant confirmed that Kuldip Kaur is the daughter of the brother  of
    the appellant's father.  She is therefore his 'cousin sister'.  Mr Azmi
    acknowledges that the appellant had in the past referred to Kuldip Kaur
    as his 'sister', rather than 'cousin', because in a  cultural  context,
    that is how they would describe the relationship.  He submits  that  at
    paragraph [27], FtT Lodge proceeds upon  the  premise  that  FtT  Judge
    Greasley had allowed the previous  appeal  because  he  was  under  the
    impression that the appellant was the brother  of  the  sponsor's  wife
    (i.e. the brother of Mrs Kuldip Kaur).  FtT Judge Lodge refers to  what
    was said at paragraph [7] the decision  of  FtT  Judge  Greasley;  "The
    appellant stated that as proof of the relationship, he had enclosed his
    father's death certificate and his sisters father's death  certificate,
    which showed that they had the same parents.".   Mr  Azmi  submits  FtT
    Lodge confirms in the final sentence of paragraph [27]; "That statement
    can only mean that the appellant's father and his sister's  father  had
    the same parents.".  That is essentially an  acknowledgement  that  the
    appellant's father and Kuldip Kaur's father (who were brothers) had the
    same parents.   If that is correct, FtT Judge Greasley was  aware  that
    the appellant and Kuldip Kaur are first cousins  and  did  not  proceed
    under the impression that the appellant was the brother of Kuldip Kaur,
    the EEA sponsor's wife.


12. In any event, even as a cousin of the EEA sponsor's wife, the appellant
    falls within the category of 'other  family  members'  referred  to  in
    Article 3(2)(a) of the Citizens Directive.  Under that  provision,  the
    Grand Chamber of the European Court of Justice in SM v  ECO  (C-129/18)
    held that Member States must facilitate entry and residence  of  family
    members in Member  States  in  accordance  with  national  legislation.
    Insofar as the 2016 Regulations excluded relatives of an EEA national's
    spouse or civil partner, the FtT Judge should have given direct  effect
    to the Citizens Directive.


13. In reply, Mr McVeety submits the appellant had previously claimed to be
    the brother of Mrs Kuldip Kaur, when plainly he was  not.   He  submits
    the appellant is on any view, only related to the  spouse  of  the  EEA
    national, and the appeal was therefore bound to fail in any event, upon
    an application of the 2016 Regulations in force at the time.


Discussion


14. There was clearly some confusion  as  to  the  precise  nature  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and Mrs Kuldip  Kaur  Padda  and  Mr
    Harminder  Pal  Padda.   The  appellant  appears  to  have   previously
    described them as his 'sister' and  'brother-in-law',  whereas  he  now
    claims Mrs Kuldip Kaur is his first cousin.  It is said the appellant's
    father and Mrs Kuldip Kaur's father, are brothers.


15. I  have  carefully  considered  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Greasley
    promulgated on 27th February 2018.  At paragraph [1] of that  decision,
    the judge records that the appellant appeals against a decision of  the
    respondent refusing him the grant of an EEA family permit to  join  his
    brother-in-law, a German national, in the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    Regulations 7 and 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.   Those
    regulations, like Regulations 7 and 8 of the 2016 Regulations, identify
    the category of persons  who  are  treated  as  a  "family  member"  or
    "extended family member".  At paragraph [7] of his decision, FtT  Judge
    Greasley, records that "..The appellant stated that  as  proof  of  the
    relationship, he had enclosed his father's death  certificate  and  his
    sister's father's death certificate, which showed  that  they  had  the
    same parents.".  It is not clear whether the  death  certificates  were
    seen by FtT Judge Greasley, and Mr Azmi was  unable  to  direct  me  to
    copies of the death certificates in the appellant's  bundle.   However,
    at paragraph [15] of his decision, FtT Judge Greasley states:


         "... I accept that there is credible and reliable evidence from the
         appellant's sponsors Mr Padda  that  he  is  genuinely  related  to
         them..."


16. It is not clear whether FtT judge Greasley  proceeded  upon  the  basis
    that the appellant is the brother or cousin of Mrs Kuldip  Kaur  Padda,
    but in the end, he accepted that they are genuinely related.  FtT Lodge
    appears to have concluded at paragraph [33] of his  decision  that  the
    appellant is the cousin of Mrs Kuldip Kaur Padda.  He states:


         "Looking at  the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
         obtained his  initial  EEA  family  permit  on  the  basis  of  the
         assertion that he was the brother of the  sponsor's  wife  when  in
         fact he is the cousin of the sponsor's wife ..."


17. However, in the following paragraph, at [34], FtT  Judge  Lodge  states
    that he is "... left with no evidence  to  establish  the  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor ...".  It is difficult  to  reconcile
    that with what he said in  the  extract  from  paragraph  [33]  of  his
    decision that I have set out above.  It is not therefore clear  whether
    the judge found the appellant is the cousin of the EEA sponsor's  wife.
    If, as it appears he did from what is said at  paragraph  [33]  of  his
    decision, the judge did accept the  appellant  is  the  cousin  of  Mrs
    Kuldip Kaur, it was incumbent upon the judge to  consider  whether  the
    appellant is an 'extended family member'.  To that  end,  at  paragraph
    [35] of his decision, the judge appears to  proceed  upon  the  premise
    that in any event, even if the appellant is the  brother-in-law  of  an
    EEA national, he  gains no assistance from Regulation 8(7) of the  2016
    Regulations as in force at that time.


18. From 1st February 2017, when the 2016 Regulations came into force,  the
    rights of extended family members only applied to relatives of the  EEA
    national and not to relatives of the EEA national's spouse.  That meant
    that  an  extended  family  member  could  no  longer  rely  on   their
    relationship to  the  EEA  national's  spouse  in  order  to  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 8.  Here, the appellant was therefore unable
    to rely upon his relationship with Mrs Kuldip Kaur, the EEA  national's
    spouse.


19. However, on 26th March 2019, in SM v ECO (C-129/18) the  Grand  Chamber
    of the European  Court  of  Justice  addressed  issues  concerning  the
    practical  application  of  the  2016  Regulations.    Following   that
    decision,  The  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   (Amendment)
    Regulations 2019, amended the 2016 Regulations, amending  Regulation  8
    of the 2016 Regulations by inter alia making it clear that the category
    of extended family member can include relatives of  an  EEA  national's
    spouse or civil partner.  Although the amendments came  into  force  on
    15th August 2019 after the decision of FtT Judge Lodge was promulgated,
    the decision in SM v ECO (C-129/18) was handed down on 26th March 2019.
     There is some force in the submission made by the  appellant  that  in
    reaching his  decision,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant falls within the definition of "any other family  member"  as
    provided for in Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive.  I  should  add
    that in fairness to the judge, the grounds of appeal that  were  before
    the FtT did not make a claim that  the  respondent's  decision  was  in
    breach of Article 3 of the Citizens Directive notwithstanding the  2016
    Regulations.  Perhaps unsurprisingly, the issue was not  considered  by
    the judge in that way.


20. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision of FtT judge
    is vitiated by a material error of law and must be set aside.


21. As to disposal, I am urged by the  parties  to  remit  the  matter  for
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  There remains an issue  as  to
    whether the appellant is related to  the  EEA  sponsor's  wife  and  no
    findings were made by FtT Judge  Lodge  as  regards  any  'dependency'.
    Having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement of 25th September 2012, in my judgment, the nature and extent
    of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


22. The parties will be advised of the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


23. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Lodge promulgated  on
    14th June 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter for  re-hearing  de
    novo in the First-tier Tribunal.



         V. Mandalia


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


         30th March 2020
        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

