
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07856/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th April 2019                  |On 15th April 2019                 |


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


                                   Between

                                 Arben Gjura
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:  Mr Wilcox, instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors Ltd
Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

The appellant, a national of Albania born on 16th May 1989 appeals against
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated on 2nd August
2018 which refused his appeal.  That appeal was against the Secretary of
State's refusal dated 25th July 2017 of his application for a residence
card on the basis that he had engaged in a marriage of convenience contrary
to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford confirmed prior to her conclusions that she
had considered the documents in the bundle including photographs and
medical reports [34].  She acknowledged the child of the appellant and his
said spouse at the outset.

In her decision the judge made the following observations and findings; -

    (i)    she was guided by Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and Rosa v SSHD EWCA Civ 14
    as to the burden and standard of proof [9].  'The evidential burden may
    shift by proof of facts which justify an inference that the marriage is
    not genuine, ... but there must be more than suspicion' [11].

    (ii)   the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof in
    showing that the marriage between the appellant and Anna Drudzova was a
    marriage of convenience to a high degree of probability.

    (iii)  the appellant had failed to adduce evidence to show that the
    marriage was not intended wholly or mainly for the purpose of the
    appellant gaining immigration advantage [34].

    (iv)   the couple claimed to have been married and in a relationship
    for 4 years and were still giving highly inconsistent answers about
    their respective families and the appellant wife was acting as if she
    were his sole carer, 'making an application for a Slovakian passport on
    his behalf without the appellant's knowledge and planning to take him
    out of the United Kingdom without the appellant's knowledge' [35].

    (v)    the appellant had a good knowledge of their child's medical
    difficulties but did not attend GP appointments because of work but the
    company he worked for was said to be owned by his wife [36].  (This
    contrasted with the wife's evidence that he did attend GP appointments)

    (vi)   the wife did not work in the business and knew nothing about it
    despite deriving some income from it. There was no evidence of any
    consideration passing for the transfer of the business into her name in
    2015.

    (vii)  significant discrepancies remained unresolved from the marriage
    interview and the judge found 'the evidence I heard at the appeal
    hearing only added to the inconsistencies'. The judge added 'I that
    (sic) the appellant and his wife are cohabiting as a genuine couple in
    an ongoing relationship.  They both have relations in the United
    Kingdom but I heard no evidence from any of them'.

    (viii) 'the appellant has admitted to deliberately withholding
    information from the immigration authorities at interview in order to
    improve his chances of securing a residence card.  I find he lied at
    the appeal hearing in a self-serving manner.  He knew perfectly well
    that the car wash business was previously owned by his uncle but lied
    in telling me that it was 'some Kurdish guy' [39].

    (ix)   'Even allowing for the appellant's paternity of Daniel and for
    what must have been a stressful time of the appellant and Daniel's
    mother around the time of his birth and then his illness the evidence
    shows to a high degree of probability that this marriage was entered
    into for the sole or main purpose of the appellant securing a Residence
    card to which he was not entitled because he was never a genuine family
    members of the EEA national.  He has married her and fathered Daniel
    solely to get immigration status' [40].

The grounds of appeal advanced that

    (i)    the judge noted at paragraph 17 that Social Services shared the
    misunderstanding about the appellant's and wife's address but that on
    investigation this was satisfactorily addressed.  However, at paragraph
    25 the judge assumed the parties would have been asked by the Registrar
    verbally.  The appellant's wife only had limited English and had
    recently changed address. The judge failed to consider that it was an
    error shared by Walsall Council Social Services.

    (ii)   at paragraph 18 the judge, when considering the intention of
    forming a genuine relationship prior to the marriage, failed to give
    consideration to any other factor than their difficulty in
    communicating with each other. She did not consider that the
    appellant's wife was expecting their child. This was material.  The
    judge also failed to consider the medical notes, at 19-20 and
    correspondence addressed to him and his wife [21-27].  The error on the
    birth certificate was considered in isolation from the evidence.
    Further the appellant was not asked if he was aware that a passport had
    been applied for without his knowledge. The judge provided an
    explanation for not accompany his wife to the GP appointments. The
    judge erred in concluding that there had been no genuine transfer of
    the business and this was not in issue. The appellant could have
    provided documentary evidence on this point.

The judge's approach failed to follow the correct approach of Papajorgji
(EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) and
Rosa v SSHD EWCA Civ 14, including factors such as the length of their
relationship, the fact that they have a child together, evidence of
cohabitation, and the several applications by the appellant seeking a
residence card.

The grant of permission stated that the grounds complained of (1) the
approach to the evidence [17],[18] and [25], (2) a non evidence based
assumption [35], (3) not considering the evidence and not giving the
appellant a chance to comment on an adverse point not in the refusal
letter, but that the first 3 grounds were primarily in the factual arena
and 'unlikely to justify a grant of permission on their own'.

The grant of permission concluded that Ground (4), however, rested on the
proper approach to the abuse of rights involved EEA national which was
considered in Sadovska & Anor v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 54.  The
judge was stated not to have included this in her legal summary and it was
not mentioned in the grounds, but it was arguable that the judge should
have applied it in any event.   The standard was the balance of
probabilities, but the judge referred to a 'high degree of probability' in
[34] and [40].  Sadovska held that too much weight should not be given to
inconsistencies which should be in the context of all of the evidence and
the circumstances of the interview. It was accepted that the couple have a
child, and both are involved in the upbringing of the child. The deceit
should have been the purpose of both parties.

At the hearing Mr Wilcox accepted that the legal approach was the 'hinge'
to the appeal and there needed to be an error of law in relation to this
aspect of the permission to found any challenge on the prior three grounds
in the application for permission to appeal.

There was no clear evidence that the judge had grappled with the motive of
the wife. There was carelessness in the decision and a degree of laxness,
and I was referred to paragraph 38 where there appeared to be a word
missing. Mr Wilcox relied on but also expanded on the written grounds of
appeal.  The Secretary of State's refusal had not taken issue with the wife
exercising treaty rights.  There was an anomalous finding at [25] in
relation to the addresses particularly when compared with the finding at
[35].  There was a failure to consider the wife's pregnancy notes.
Sadovska clearly focussed on the intention of both parties. There should
not be merely incidental benefit, but it must be the predominant purpose of
the relationship to subvert the Immigration (European Economic Area)
Regulations 2016.   The evidence was not approached with the relevant legal
test or considered in the round.

Mr Tufan argued that the evidence was indeed considered in the round.  He
accepted that there was a child and the DNA report was not challenged and
that the judge did not mention Sadovska, but she nonetheless applied the
correct ratio and legal matrix. The judge realised that the evidential
burden shifted.  The onus was on the Secretary of State to show that the
marriage was one of convenience. The observation in relation to the wife in
the business was not material. What was material was that the evidence was
littered with inconsistencies.  The judge heard detailed oral evidence and
had the opportunity to see the way in which the appellant and witnesses
respondent to the questions.

Analysis

Sadovska is clear that the burden rested with the Secretary of State and at
[31] confirmed

         'It was quite simply incorrect to deploy the statement that "in
         immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant",
         correct though it is in the generality of non-EU cases, in her
         case'.

At [28] Sadovska approved Papajorgji which is the judgement that the judge
applied by stating

         'That must mean, as held in Papajorgji, that the tribunal has to
         form its own view of the facts from the evidence presented. The
         respondent is seeking to take away established rights. One of the
         most basic rules of litigation is that he who asserts must prove.
         It was not for Ms Sadovska to establish that the relationship was a
         genuine and lasting one. It was for the respondent to establish
         that it was indeed a marriage of convenience'.

At paragraph [29] in relation to the purpose of both parties the Supreme
Court held

         'Furthermore, except in cases of deceit by the non-EU national,
         this must be the purpose of them both. Clearly, a non-EU national
         may be guilty of abuse when the EU national is not, because she
         believes that it is a genuine relationship.

In relation to the advantage Sadovska noted at [24]

         "the notion of 'sole purpose' should not be interpreted literally
         (as being the unique or exclusive purpose) but rather as meaning
         that the objective to obtain the right of entry and residence must
         be the predominant purpose of the abusive conduct."

    and

         "On the other hand, a marriage cannot be considered as a marriage
         of convenience simply because it brings an immigration advantage,
         or indeed any other advantage (for example the right to a
         particular surname, location-related allowances, tax advantages or
         entitlement to social housing for married couples)."

A careful reading of the decision under challenge demonstrates that the
judge did not depart from this approach.  The judge realised the approach
was that as set out in Papajorgji and explained that the burden of proof
initially rested with the Secretary of State.  Albeit she did not identify
that decision specifically, I am not persuaded in her analysis of the
evidence the judge departed from the guidance in Sadovska.  The judge
recorded that at [10] and again at [34].

The grant rested on the finding of an error with regard the legal approach
and acknowledged that the remaining findings were weak. I shall,
nonetheless, refer to them. I have continued in my decision to demonstrate
that the judge not only adopted the correct legal approach at the start of
her determination but also applied it.

The judge identified numerous and significant discrepancies between the
appellant's and the witness' evidence in the interview.  These are recorded
between paragraphs 13 and 33.  There was scant evidence of them living
together and at the onset of their relationship and at the time of the
marriage they gave different addresses to the registrar when recording the
birth of their child. They were inconsistent about how long their child had
remained in hospital (the appellant said he was discharged in May 2015 and
the wife 1st July 2015) [14], they could not easily communicate when they
first met [18] and there were discrepancies regarding the deposit and rent
on the flat [24].

Clearly the judge did not find the explanation as to why they each gave a
different address to the Registrar when recording the birth for the
certificate. The explanation of moving was rejected because the wife who
was said to have lived at Dudley park with the appellant for two years
could not even remember the number, [25].   There was also inconsistency as
to when the wife last visited Slovakia - he said 2017 and she 2016.  The
issue in relation to the passport was that the appellant stated Daniel
would not be making the trip to Slovakia whereas she stated that Daniel
would, and she had applied for a passport for him. There was also variance
between the appellant and his wife as to the medical appointments he
attended. The judge found, because of the variance of the evidence that the
appellant had lied in the appeal hearing [39].

Nevertheless, the judge acknowledged that the appellant and wife had a
child but owing to the nature of the evidence and the sheer volume of
contradictory statements made it was open to the judge to draw the
conclusions that she did.  The observation about the wife's involvement
with the business (said by the wife to be owned by the appellant's uncle)
was just that rather, in the face of the evidence received, than
contributory to the nature of the relationship or the decision on the
marriage of convenience.

Sadovska does not state that no weight should be attached to discrepancies
but holds that: -

         'But in considering those discrepancies, the circumstances in which
         the interviews took place and the statement was made must be borne
         fully in mind'.

It is not evident that the judge failed to take into account all of the
evidence and recorded at the outset of her deliberations that the documents
and medical reports had been considered.  In the light of the evidence as
it was when the parties were married the judge was entitled to make the
findings she did.  With regard the typographical error in [38] the context
of the decision makes it plain that the judge was making an adverse
finding.  As the judge stated in the previous sentence 'Significant
discrepancies remain unresolved from the marriage interview and the
evidence I heard at the appeal hearing only added to the inconsistencies.

I am not persuaded that Sadovska refers to both parties being engaged int
eh deceit although on the findings of the judge, she would be able to make
that deduction.

In relation to the standard of proof it is correct that the judge referred
to the 'high degree of probability' but because the burden of proof rested
with the Secretary of State, the disadvantage was to the respondent and
thus not material to the decision.

It is clear that the judge did not consider that there was mere immigration
advantage after considering all the evidence but found that the 'sole' or
'main' purpose, despite the child, was for the appellant to secure a
residence card [40].  The judge was entitled to make those findings and
gave cogent reasons for doing so.  The decision contains no material error
of law and will stand.




    Helen Rimington


    Upper Tribunal Judge                     Dated 8th April 2019


