
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07364/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                              |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                  Metin [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 15  January  1981.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 November 2000.  He unsuccessfully
    claimed  asylum  and  two  appeals  were   dismissed   by   Immigration
    Adjudicators on 18 September 2003 and 4 November 2004 respectively.

 2. On 10 March 2017, the appellant applied for a  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national, [MS] who is a citizen of  Hungary  and  whom
    the appellant married on 27 February 2017.  The  application  was  made
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052) (the  "2016
    Regulations").

 3. On 16 August 2017, the Secretary of State refused that  application  on
    grounds of public policy under reg 24 (read with reg 27)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.  The basis  for  that  decision  was  that  the  appellant
    represented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
    affecting [a] fundamental interest of  society"  as  a  result  of  his
    conviction under s.20 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 on 29
    May 2015 at Cardiff Crown Court for which he was sentenced to a term of
    24 months' imprisonment.  The Secretary of  State  concluded  that  the
    refusal of the appellant's residence card  was  proportionate  applying
    reg 27(5).

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal  was
    heard by Judge A E Walker on 12 January 2018.   Having  heard  evidence
    from both the appellant and his wife, Judge Walker dismissed his appeal
    on the basis that the  refusal  to  issue  him  a  residence  card  was
    "justified on grounds of public policy and is proportionate as  defined
    in the regulations" (at para 52).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lambert) on 11 June 2018.



 6. The appeal was initially heard in the Upper  Tribunal  on  20  November
    2018 by UTJ King TD.  In a decision promulgated on  13  December  2018,
    UTJ King set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law.

 7. The appeal was adjourned in order to be relisted for a resumed hearing.
     A transfer order was made and the appeal initially was  listed  before
    me on 15 February 2019.  However, that  hearing  had  to  be  adjourned
    because, at that time, both the appellant and his  wife  were  to  give
    evidence and the necessary interpreters were not available.

 8. The appeal was again  listed  before  me  on  11  April  2019.   Again,
    unfortunately, a  Turkish  interpreter  was  not  available.   However,
    following  discussions  between  Mr  Howells   (who   represented   the
    appellant) and Mrs Aboni (who represented  the  respondent)  both  were
    content that the hearing should proceed on submissions only.  Mrs Aboni
    indicated that she did not wish to cross-examine either  the  appellant
    or sponsor.

 9. The appeal hearing, therefore, proceeded on that basis.  I  heard  oral
    submissions first from Mrs Aboni and secondly from Mr Howells.

The Law

10. Regulation 24(1) of the 2016 Regulations provides that:

         "The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke  or  refuse  to
         renew a registration certificate,  a  residence  card,  a  document
         certifying permanent residence or a permanent residence card if the
         refusal of revocation is justified on the grounds of public policy,
         public security or public health, or on grounds of misuse of rights
         in accordance with Regulation 26(3)."

11. Regulation 27 sets out the basis upon which an EEA  decision,  such  as
    the one under challenge in these  proceedings,  may  be  taken  on  the
    grounds of "public policy, public security or public health".   So  far
    as relevant, reg 27 provides as follows:

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
         public health

         27.-(1)  In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             ....

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             ....

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
                  of this regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)  have
                  regard to  the  considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1
                  (considerations of public policy, public security and  the
                  fundamental interests of society etc.)."

12. Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations, referred to in reg 27(8),  provides
    as follows:

         "SCHEDULE 1

         CONSIDERATIONS  OF  PUBLIC  POLICY,   PUBLIC   SECURITY   AND   THE
         FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member  States  enjoy  considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

         6.   It is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including-

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
                  values."

13. It was common ground before me that the  burden  of  proving  that  the
    decision taken against the appellant  is  justified  on  public  policy
    grounds lies upon the Secretary of State to establish on a  balance  of
    probabilities (see, Arranz  (EEA  Regulations  -  deportation  -  test)
    [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC) (McCloskey P and Supperstone J)).

The Issues

14. It was common ground between the parties that the two issues I have  to
    determine are:

      1) whether the appellant's personal conduct  (arising  from  his  s.20
         conviction in 2015) establishes  that  he  represents  a  "genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not  need  to  be  imminent"
         (reg 27(5)(c)); and

      2) if his conduct does represent such a threat, whether  the  decision
         to refuse him a residence  card  complies  with  the  principle  of
         proportionality (reg 27(5)(a)).

15. At the previous adjourned hearing, the issue had been  floated,  as  it
    had been raised by UTJ King in his determination, whether the appellant
    was entitled to rely upon the "serious grounds" of public policy  based
    upon the fact that his relationship with his (now) wife extended for at
    least five years although they had only married in February  2017.   At
    that hearing, I drew to the parties' attention the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Mcastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1558.  In  that  case,  the
    Court of Appeal held that an individual could not acquire the necessary
    five years' residence to establish a permanent right of residence in EU
    law, such that a decision had to be justified on "serious  grounds"  of
    public  policy,  by  accumulating  an  earlier  period  in  a  "durable
    relationship" prior to the period of  marriage  (and  see  now  SSHD  v
    Aibangbee [2019] EWCA Civ 339).  In the  light  of  that  decision,  Mr
    Howells did not pursue the argument that the appellant could  establish
    a permanent right of  residence  and,  therefore,  the  decision  under
    appeal could only be justified on "serious grounds" of public policy.

Discussion and Findings

16. In reaching my findings, I have had regard to all the material to which
    I was referred by both representatives.  Neither the appellant nor  his
    spouse gave oral evidence before me and Mrs Aboni  indicated  that  she
    did not wish to cross-examine  either  of  them.   Their  evidence  is,
    therefore, set out in their respective witness statements at pages 5-14
    of the first bundle and 1-6 of the supplementary bundle (the appellant)
    and pages 15-20 of the first bundle and pages 7-10 of the supplementary
    bundle (the appellant's spouse).  In addition, the record of their oral
    evidence given at the First-tier Tribunal hearing is  contained  within
    the determination of Judge Walker at paras 50-18.

17. I turn now to deal with the first issue, namely whether  the  appellant
    represents  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".

18. The appellant was convicted at the Merthyr Crown Court on 25  May  2015
    of the offence contrary to s.20 of the Offences Against the Person  Act
    1861 of wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm.  He was  sentenced
    by the Recorder of Cardiff  (HHJ  Rees)  to  a  sentence  of  seventeen
    months' imprisonment.  He pleaded guilty  to  the  offence  on,  it  is
    accepted, a "full facts basis".  The circumstances of the  offence  are
    set out in HHJ Rees' sentencing remarks as follows:

         "You had been in a relationship  with  this  [C].   You  had  lived
         together at that address, as I understand.  But by 4th December the
         relationship was at an end, and she had a new partner,  the  victim
         in this case, [Mr H].  There was some kind of party at the  address
         and perhaps because of that, and it would appear in a jealous rage,
         you went to the premises.  You were denied entry.  In fact she  had
         gone to bed and so had [Mr H].  [Mr H] was  asleep  in  fact.   You
         smashed the front door to gain entry.  She asked you to leave.  You
         took a knife from the kitchen, pursued her  to  the  bedroom.   She
         could not stop you coming in.  You grabbed her by  the  throat  and
         she felt something against her neck.  [Mr H], who had been  asleep,
         awoke, and you attacked him, swinging around with the knife, and he
         was stabbed to the abdomen and then to the leg.

         You said to her, 'If I can't have you no  one  will.'   Then  in  a
         cowardly way you fled the country.  Then for  [C]  the  impact  was
         such that she felt obliged to leave the flat, lost the  bond.   She
         was too frightened to go back.  Fortunately for [Mr H] the injuries
         were not as serious as they might have been.  But I make  it  clear
         there are so many aggravating features in this case the  fact  that
         the injury was not serious or  permanent  is  outweighed  by  those
         aggravating features.  This was the early  hours  of  the  morning.
         The man was in his bed.  You forced your entry into  the  premises.
         You went and fetched a knife and he  was  attacked.   There  is  no
         doubt that this falls within Category 1, and given those number  of
         aggravating features it goes towards the  top  of  that  particular
         category.

         I take into account that you have no previous convictions.  I allow
         you full credit for the plea.  Taking all those  into  account  the
         sentence is one of 27 months' imprisonment.  Half way  through  the
         sentence you would normally be released on licence, but  I  have  a
         letter  here  from  the  police  indicating  that  the  Immigration
         Enforcement (?) Department will seek to deport you, and it  may  be
         that you will not be immediately released at that point.  That is a
         matter for them.  That concludes the matter.  Thank you."

19. As I have said, the appellant pleaded to that offence on a "full  facts
    basis" and was sentenced on that basis.

20. Subsequently, however, the appellant sought to put forward a  different
    account recorded in the OASys Report of 2 September  2015  and  in  his
    evidence before Judge Walker.  This is recorded at paras 38-42  of  her
    determination as follows:

         "38. The  02.09.2015  OASys  report  states  that  the  information
             supplied by the appellant was that he and his then  girlfriend
             argued and as a result he left the property and went  to  stay
             with friends for a few days.  On the night of the offence  the
             girlfriend had gone out clubbing with  some  friends  and  had
             taken a male and  several  others  back  to  her  property  to
             continue partying.  The appellant claims that  the  girlfriend
             rang him and he went to the property to pick up  some  clothes
             that he had  left  there.   When  he  arrived  people  at  the
             property had become abusive towards him so he had gone to  the
             kitchen to arm himself with a knife for his own protection and
             had gone to the bedroom to collect his clothes  but  had  been
             unable to enter.  When he eventually  was  able  to  enter  he
             found his girlfriend in bed with the victim who the  appellant
             states  was  extremely  intoxicated  and  who   attacked   the
             appellant and at that point the appellants had used the  knife
             to stab the victim in self-defence.  The  report  states  that
             the author assessed the appellant as angry when he  went  into
             his ex-girlfriend's bedroom when he  found  her  in  bed  with
             another man and the  victim  had  been  unarmed.   The  report
             author noted s that the offence had occurred in 2005  with  no
             further offending in the intervening time.  The report  author
             noted that there seemed to be no concerns  about  violence  in
             the appellant's relationship with the sponsor.  It  was  noted
             that had the report been compiled at the time of  the  offence
             then there would have  been  concerns  about  the  appellant's
             thinking  skills   and   impulsivity,   temper   control   and
             aggression.  However because of his low scores he did not meet
             the criteria for the thinking skills programme in custody  but
             that he could have  some  one-to-one  work  in  the  community
             during his licence period.  Overall  his  attitudes  were  not
             assessed as linked to offending or risk.  His overall risk  of
             reoffending was low.  The report author considered that  there
             was a risk in confrontational situations where  the  appellant
             suspected that his partner was being unfaithful  or  where  he
             perceives that someone is threatening  or  attacking  him  and
             that if his partner were to be unfaithful  and  the  appellant
             were to find out then  this  would  increase  the  risk.   The
             report author states that the offence seems to  have  been  an
             isolated  incident  of  a  violent  outburst.    Overall   the
             appellant was considered to be at low risk  but  there  was  a
             medium risk to a known adult.  This assessment means that  the
             appellant has the potential  to  cause  serious  harm  but  is
             unlikely to do so unless there is a  change  in  circumstances
             for  example  relationship  breakdown.   The   report   author
             recorded that the appellant said that he stresses very  easily
             and gets angry when under stress.

         39.  In the mitigation it was said on the appellant's  behalf  that
             he was a love struck 24 years old and he had gone to the house
             where is ex-girlfriend was in order to find  out  if  she  was
             seeing someone else.  By the time  that  he  got  to  his  ex-
             girlfriend's bedroom he was aware that there  were  a  lot  of
             people sleeping over in the lounge and  when  he  reached  the
             bedroom he found [Mr H] there with the  ex-girlfriend  and  so
             the appellant had gone back to the kitchen to  fetch  a  small
             kitchen knife because he thought that [Mr H]  was  bigger  and
             stronger than he was and so the appellant had decided  to  arm
             himself with a knife.  [Mr H] was woken by  the  ex-girlfriend
             screaming hysterically and that [Mr H] traded punches and  had
             even got the better of the appellant.  The appellant swung the
             knife around him.  [Mr H] was stabbed in the  stomach  and  in
             the leg.  It is  said  that  the  appellant  had  entered  the
             bedroom because he wanted to talk  to  his  ex-girlfriend  and
             effect a reconciliation.  In spite  of  the  location  of  the
             injury [Mr H] was not seriously injured.

         40.  In his sentencing remarks His Honour Judge Rees said  that  on
             the  date  of  the  assault  the  relationship;  between   the
             appellant and [C] was at an end and she  had  a  new  partner.
             There was a party at [C's] address and perhaps because of that
             the appellant in a jealous rage had gone to the premises.  The
             victim was asleep in fact and the appellant smashed the  front
             door to gain entry.  [C] asked him to leave and he had taken a
             knife from the kitchen and pursued her to the bedroom and  she
             could not stop him from coming in.  The appellant had  grabbed
             her by the throat and she had felt something against her neck.
              The victim had then woken up and the appellant attacked  him,
             swinging around with the knife which resulted  in  the  victim
             being stabbed in the abdomen and in the  leg.   The  appellant
             had said "If I can't  have  you  no  one  will".   Then  in  a
             cowardly way the appellant had fled the country.  As a  result
             of this incident [C] had felt the need to leave the  flat  and
             was too frightened to return.  The victim's injuries were  not
             as serious as they might have been.  The  Learned  Judge  said
             that there were so many aggravating features in the case  that
             the fact that the injury  was  not  serious  or  permanent  is
             outweighed  by  the  aggravating  features.   The  attack  had
             occurred in the early hours of the morning and the victim  had
             been in bed and the appellant had  forced  his  way  into  the
             premises.  He had fetched a knife and the knife had been  used
             by the appellant in the attack.

         41.  Of course the version of events given in the OASys reports  is
             also inconsistent with  the  mitigation  put  forward  at  the
             sentencing hearing because in the latter it was  said  on  the
             appellant's behalf that the girlfriend  had  been  asleep  and
             this is not consistent with her having invited  the  appellant
             around as  was  said  in  the  OASys  reports.   It  is  moist
             certainly at odds with the sentencing remarks.

         42.  I found the appellant to be a less than satisfactory  witness.
             He clearly has no insight into his actions which  led  to  him
             being given a 27 month sentence.  All through he has sought to
             minimise his actions as can be seen by examining  the  version
             of events given to the OASys authors and  the  mitigation  put
             forward on his behalf.  He continues to say that he had  acted
             in self-defence.  At no point in time did the appellant  state
             that he had attacked his ex-girlfriend and  he  had  not  said
             that he had got her by the throat and  had  said  that  if  he
             could not have her then no-one could.  The OASys report author
             states that at  the  time  of  the  offence  they  would  have
             assessed the appellant as having significant deficits  in  his
             thinking skills,  particularly  in  relation  to  impulsivity,
             temper control and aggression but that in the  intervening  10
             years there had been no further similar incidents.  I consider
             that as it is clear that he left the country as stated by  HHJ
             Rees it is not possible to know what may have  happened  at  a
             time when he was not in the UK so the conclusion that  he  had
             not been involved in any further incidents in the  intervening
             10 years is an unsafe conclusion based as it is on a  lack  of
             knowledge.  I find  that  if  the  appellant  had  learned  to
             correct the erroneous thinking skills that he had exhibited in
             the incident then he would  have  been  able  to  give  a  far
             better,  more  insightful  account  of  the  incident  and  in
             particular he would not have sought to minimise  what  he  had
             done.  The attack on his girlfriend when the door  was  forced
             open by him  and  he  pursued  her  upstairs  to  the  bedroom
             wielding a knife at the time is far removed from  the  account
             that the appellant gave at the hearing and to  other  agencies
             following his arrest.  He did not mention that he  had  forced
             his way into the premises and he attempted to place  blame  on
             the victim by saying that he had been very intoxicated whereas
             HHJ Rees states that the victim had  been  asleep.   The  fact
             that the victim sustained two wounds is an indication that  it
             was not some sort of slip that resulted in him getting injured
             and it is clear that the appellant deliberately went to get  a
             weapon not to defend himself but to attack  his  ex-girlfriend
             and her new partner."

21. One point that arises from para 42 concerns HHJ Rees' comment that  the
    appellant had left the UK after the commission of the offence which was
    in 2005 before giving himself up in 2015.  It was accepted before me by
    Mrs Aboni that that was a mistake.  The appellant had not gone  abroad.
    Instead, he had gone to live in England.  His evidence was that he  had
    not learnt about the interest that the police had in  him  until  2015,
    when he surrendered  to  the  police,  was  prosecuted  and  ultimately
    convicted of the s.20 offence.  I see no  reason  not  to  accept  that
    evidence and I do so.

22. The position is, therefore, that the appellant committed a  significant
    and serious offence of violence in what must have been quite terrifying
    circumstances for those others involved in  2005.   He  has,  at  least
    until most recently, not fully accepted the true circumstances  of  his
    offending.  However, his  plea  of  guilty  on  a  "full  facts  basis"
    recognises, in my judgment, the circumstances  of  his  offending.   Mr
    Howells told me, and I accept this, that the appellant has undergone  a
    victim awareness programme after being released from custody  in  April
    2016.

23. The appellant has only ever, on the evidence before me, committed  this
    single offence.  The OASys Report states that his offence was  somewhat
    "out of character" and, Mr Howells submitted, committed in the heat  of
    passion.  His risk of reoffending is stated to be low but  there  is  a
    medium risk of harm to a known individual if he  does  reoffend.   This
    reflects, in  my  judgment,  the  recognition  that  the  risk  of  the
    appellant's offending exists in the domestic or personal  context.   In
    assessing whether he represents a "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat" I must have  regard  to  both  the  likelihood  of  his
    reoffending and the seriousness of the consequences  if  he  does  (see
    Kamki v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1715 at [18]).  Mr Howells submitted that,
    on the basis of the OASys Report, I should accept that he represents  a
    low  risk  of  reoffending  and  that  this  does   not   represent   a
    "sufficiently serious threat" to a fundamental interest of society.

24. I do not agree.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  represents  a  low
    risk of reoffending in the context of a personal or domestic  situation
    where he is, perhaps, challenged by the circumstances and  "loses  it".
    The harm that he may cause, however, in such a situation is  a  "medium
    risk" and I bear well in mind the circumstances of the index offence he
    committed in 2005.  However, I also  have  regard  to  the  fact  that,
    despite his earlier denial, he has come to  accept  the  circumstances.
    He has undergone  a  victim  awareness  programme  after  release  from
    custody in April 2016 and there is no evidence that  he  has  committed
    any further offences since 2005.  I also accept that he  is  now  in  a
    stable relationship with his wife and, as I will turn to shortly, he is
    her carer.  I also note, and accept, the evidence of Tracey  Graham  in
    her report dated 12 February 2019.  It was accepted that, on the  basis
    of her experience, she was an appropriate expert to  give  evidence  in
    respect  of  domestic  violence  and  abuse.   Having  carried  out  an
    assessment of both the appellant and his wife she states that:

         "Nothing ... alerted me to any concern in  Mr  [K]  and  Mrs  [S]'s
         relationship."

25. She continued that:

         "I completed formatted risk assessments  ...  with  both  of  them.
         There were very few indicators of risk and I am confident that they
         were being truthful about themselves and their relationship.

         Mrs [S] appears to have a full and comprehensive  understanding  of
         what constitutes abuse within a  relationship.   On  completing  my
         assessments there appeared to be  no  identifiable  domestic  abuse
         within the relationship between Mrs [S] and Mr [K]."

26. In her conclusions, Tracey Graham states that:

         "I assess him of being Standard (Low) Risk of being  a  perpetrator
         of domestic abuse."

27. Taking into account all the evidence, including the OASys  Report,  the
    report of Tracey Graham and the appellant's  conduct  since  the  index
    offence in 2005, I nevertheless am satisfied that he does  represent  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of  society"  even  though  that  threat  is  not
    imminent given the relationship he is currently in with his wife.   The
    low risk of reoffending that, I  accept,  he  represents,  nevertheless
    crosses the threshold in reg 27(c) read with Schedule  1  to  the  2016
    Regulations.  Having said that, and without  diluting  in  any  way  my
    finding in that regard, I do accept Mr Howells'  characterisation  that
    the appellant is a "borderline case" in this regard and  that  that  is
    relevant when assessing whether his removal would be proportionate.

28. I now turn to that second question.

29. The appellant is 28 years of age.  He has lived in the UK  since  2000.
    His claims for asylum were dismissed in appeals in 2003 and 2005.

30. He is married to his spouse, a Hungarian national.  They  met  in  July
    2012, started living together in April 2016, and married on 27 February
    2017.  The sponsor has lived in the UK since 2007 except for  a  period
    between October 2012 and September 2013 when she went back  to  Hungary
    because her father was unwell.

31. I  accept  that  their  relationship  is  a  genuine  and  loving  one.
    Everything in the evidence, to which my attention was  drawn,  sustains
    the conclusion that they are in a mutually supportive relationship.

32. The bulk of the  submissions  before  me  concern  the  health  of  the
    appellant's wife and the role that he plays  in  caring  for  her.   Mr
    Howells relied upon the evidence as establishing that his care was,  in
    effect, essential or vital to  her  as  she  has  been  diagnosed  with
    Parkinsonism or Parkinson's disease.  Mrs Aboni,  on  the  other  hand,
    whilst accepting that the appellant's spouse does have health  problems
    and  that  she  does  rely  on  him  for  some  care,  submitted   that
    nevertheless it was not as great or as essential as was being  claimed.



33. It is clear from reading the medical evidence submitted that since June
    2018,  the  appellant's  wife  has  undergone  assessments  which   has
    ultimately led to  a  diagnosis  of  "probable  idiopathic  Parkinson's
    disease" (see letter of 28 January 2019 prepared by Mrs Debbie  Davies,
    Clinical Nurse Specialist - Parkinson's disease) or "Parkinsonism" (see
    letter of Dr Fady Joseph,  Consultant  Neurologist  dated  12  February
    2019).  It is equally clear that since the appellant's wife  was  first
    admitted to  hospital  in  June  2018  with  a  suspected  stroke,  the
    diagnosis of the appellant's spouse has emerged over that time.

34. Mrs Aboni  submitted  that  the  claimed  support  that  the  appellant
    provided for his wife was inconsistent.  In particular,  she  submitted
    that the expert report of Professor Graham dated 30  January  2019  put
    the support to a higher level.  At para  2.5  Professor  Graham  stated
    that:

         "Mrs [S] requires assistance for all activities of daily living."

35. Then at para 3.4 and para 3.5 (mistyped as a second para 3.4)  he  said
    this:

         "Mrs [S] informed me that her husband, Mr [K] assists her with  ADL
         (that is activities for daily living): assistance with dressing and
         undressing;  all  housework,  including   cooking,   cleaning   and
         shopping.

         Mrs [S] was unable to perform simple complex tasks  involving  fine
         motor skills."

36. At para 7.2 Professor Graham went on to state that the sponsor's wife:

         "requires constant care and supervision in  routine  activities  of
         daily living ... This is currently provided by her husband ..."

37. Mrs Aboni pointed out that this report was based upon an examination on
    23 November 2018.  She relied upon a letter  from  the  GP  at  the  St
    David's Clinic dated  28  November  2018  which  placed  her  needs  as
    somewhat less when it stated:

         "There have been days where she has needed support with  activities
         of everyday living, but more recently her  symptoms  have  improved
         slightly and she is considering trying to get back to work on light
         duties."

38. The letter goes on:

         "She occasionally needs some support dressing and with help getting
         shopping into the house and other everyday tasks."

39. Mrs Aboni submitted that Professor Graham was stating the  'worst  case
    scenario'.

40. In response, Mr Howells pointed out that Professor Graham had a copy of
    the GP's letter of 28 November 2018 when he prepared  his  report.   He
    specifically makes reference to it at the beginning of his  report  (at
    page 27 of the supplementary bundle).  He also submitted  that  it  was
    unclear from the GP's letter when she had  last  seen  the  appellant's
    spouse.

41. In reading the GP's letter, it is important to  note  that  her  health
    problems are stated as:

         "no doubt having an impact on her mobility in  her  arms  and  also
         ability to work."

    It also states that the appellant's spouse has:

         "had a significant amount of time off work due  to  these  problems
         and we are also investigating to ensure she does not have arthritis
         in her hands themselves."

42. These reports have also to be seen, and considered, in the light of the
    more recent letters dated 28 January 2019  and  12  February  2019  (to
    which I have already made reference) subsequent  to  her  diagnosis  as
    suffering from Parkinson's disease or Parkinsonism.

43. The letter of 28 January 2019 from the Clinical Nurse Specialist is  in
    the following terms:

         "I met Ms [S] with her husband today in the clinic today.   [Ms  S]
         comes from Hungary, her husband comes from Turkey.  They have  both
         lived in the UK for a number of years.  Her history  goes  back  to
         June 2018 when she was admitted to hospital with concerns that  she
         may have had a stroke.  At this time she had  problems  with  right
         sided limb dysfunction, with rigidity and bradykinesia and impaired
         dexterity affecting her right arm and right leg.  She did not  give
         a good history about gradual onset.  This seemed  to  happen  quite
         quickly for her.  She had the usual scans in hospital  and  it  was
         deemed then that she did not have a  stroke.   She  saw  Dr  Malik,
         neurology registrar whilst on the ward  who  thought  her  symptoms
         were more consistent with Parkinsonism.  She has since developed an
         intermittent tremor which was not obvious today.  She has  impaired
         sense of smell.  Taste is preserved.  She struggles with her  right
         arm and stiffness and is struggling to use it.  She is currently on
         the sick as she works in a paper printing industry  which  is  fast
         pace and she has been unable to continue  and  cannot  see  herself
         continuing in the future.  She is  worrying  about  her  long  term
         future and her work  as  presently  she  feels  she  is  unable  to
         maintain any form of work due to her current symptoms.  There is no
         family history to note.

         On examination she had lack of arm swing on her right  side  whilst
         walking.  She was rigid and had bradykinesia  affecting  her  right
         side more than her left.  There was dexterity difficulties  on  her
         right side and bradykinesia present.

         Dr Joseph started her on Sinemet in November however  she  has  not
         seen a great response as she has been taking it morning,  afternoon
         and night time which I have discouraged her from using it this  way
         however she did develops some lumps on her back and  has  not  felt
         that it has really helped but has also reduced her dose due to  the
         side effects.

         I have explained symptoms of Parkinson's today and  tried  to  help
         reassure her.  She has asked me about Lyme's Disease.  She  is  not
         convinced that she has Parkinson's disease.  She does however  have
         symptoms consistent  with  Parkinson's  disease  on  reviewing  her
         today.

         I have decided to stop Sinemet and replace with Madopar to try  and
         rebuild her confidence to see if medication will be  helpful.   She
         will need to increase the dose.  We have discussed long term use of
         Dopamine agonist and the use of Rasagiline for  future  management.
         I will arrange some physiotherapy to  see  if  we  can  build  some
         confidence with her gait and her  walking  her  ability  to  regain
         using her right side with the addition of medication which I  think
         will both be helpful.

         I  will  see  her  again  in  two  months  to  see  the  effect  of
         medication."

44. The impact of her illness is readily apparent.  It is not difficult  to
    see that she requires support in her daily living activities and  that,
    not unnaturally, this is provided by her husband, the appellant.

45. The second letter, dated 12 February 2019, also speaks to her  everyday
    difficulties and that the appellant is providing "significant  support"
    for her:

         "She currently lives with her husband who  is  providing  her  with
         significant support.

         Mrs [S] has struggled in coming to terms  with  the  diagnosis  and
         also physical effect that it has had upon  her.   Her  husband  has
         been most useful in this respect and I would be  very  grateful  if
         you could consider this in his application to remain in the UK."

46. Mr Howells also referred  me  to  the  report  of  the  social  worker,
    Angeline  Seymour  dated  21  December  2018  (at  page   34   of   the
    supplementary bundle) where at pages 42  and  43  she  dealt  with  the
    circumstances of the appellant's spouse as follows:

         "Since the onset of her symptoms, Mrs [S] told me that her  husband
         has taken on the role of her carer.   When  asked  how  her  recent
         diagnosis and symptoms are affecting  her  daily  living,  Mrs  [S]
         explained that as soon as she wakes in the mornings she experiences
         pain and stiffness in her  right  side.   Owing  to  the  pain  she
         experiences, Mrs [S] struggles to get out of bed and on occasion Mr
         [K] has to assist her to transfer from the  bed  and  walk  to  the
         bathroom.  Mrs  [S]  also  explained  that  in  the  past  she  has
         experienced crippling back pain, which has meant that she has  been
         unable to walk, resulting in her resorting to  crawling  along  the
         floor.  In addition to this, Mrs [S] told me  that  she  now  feels
         unsteady on her feet and so relies on Mr [K] being around to assist
         and support her when walking.

         Mrs [S] described being able to make herself a hot drink as long as
         the kettle is only half full so she can safely  lift  it.   She  is
         also able to make herself a small snack, as long as  she  does  not
         have to handle sharp or hot utensils.  Mrs [S] informed me that she
         is unable to use the cooker; owing to her poor dexterity she cannot
         safely hold hot or heavy pans.  She also told me  that  she  cannot
         open the oven door safely.  Her poor dexterity and balance has left
         her feeling unsafe and too scared to  use  the  cooker  as  she  is
         afraid dropping hot substances on to herself.  The  poor  grip  and
         dexterity in her hand has also left Mrs [S] being unable to look or
         unlock their front door, something that leaves her at risk if  left
         alone in the property.

         Mrs [S] told me that she has lost her confidence since the onset of
         her symptoms and owing to this she only goes out of the  flat  with
         her husband.  When out, Mrs [S] described struggling to  get  notes
         and small change  from  her  purse  and  is  unable  to  walk  long
         distances, needing to rest frequently.  She also described walking,
         'very slowly owing to dizziness,' is unsteady on her  feet  as  she
         struggles, 'to move them.'

         When I arrived at the couple's flat Mrs  [S]  was  resting  in  the
         bedroom.  I was able to observe Mrs  [S]'s  difficulty  in  walking
         when she joined me in the lounge area.  I observed her to walk very
         slowly with a stiffness in her limbs  and  rigidity  in  her  legs.
         When I shook her hand, her grip was very weak.

         While discussing her current symptoms, Mrs [S]  presented  as  very
         tearful and low in mood.  She  described  feeling  frightened,  her
         sleep being of poor quality as she is constantly  ruminating  about
         her diagnosis and she estimated only sleeping up to three  hours  a
         night.  She described that initially her poor sleep pattern was due
         to the pain she was experiencing, however, more  recently  this  is
         due to worrying.  She told me that she is now worrying about Mr [K]
         being removed from the country  and  being  unable  to  look  after
         herself in his absence.  She said that the thought of  this  leaves
         her feeling hopeless, helpless and depressed."

47. The appellant's spouse, herself, deals with the  support  she  receives
    from her husband at paras 8 and 9 of her  witness  statement  dated  28
    January 2019 as follows:

         "8.  The reality is that I cannot function correctly  without  him.
             He is my husband  and  carer.   He  has  also  found  suitable
             employment in the evening allowing him to care for  me  during
             the day and deal with the medical appointments, then work  the
             evening shift to cover the costs of living.

         9.   I am unable to function without my husband should he be  taken
             away, it would be the end of my  marriage.   I  am  unable  to
             carry out basic task at present.   The  Doctors  diagnosed  my
             condition as Parkinson Disease which is permanent.  As I would
             get older the more care an attention I will require and I wish
             this to be from my husband."

48. On a balance of probabilities, I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    spouse requires significant and substantial daily  support  because  of
    the consequences of her Parkinson's disease or  Parkinsonism  and  that
    that is provided by her husband, the appellant.  I was not addressed on
    the availability of alternative care if  the  appellant  were  removed.
    Mrs Aboni did not submit that, if  the  appellant  were  providing  the
    required care, that could be equally provided by others.  No doubt some
    care and  support  could  be  provided,  but  the  level  of  care  and
    sensitivity of the need for support  for  her  Parkinson's  disease  or
    Parkinsonism, makes it, in my judgment, most appropriately provided  by
    her husband.  The implication of removing that  support  would,  in  my
    judgment, have a substantial and deleterious impact upon the  wellbeing
    and health of his wife.

49. There was no  suggestion,  in  the  submissions  before  me,  that  the
    appellant's spouse could or should  go  to  Turkey  to  live  with  the
    appellant.

50. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant,  although  he  has  family  in
    Turkey (namely parents and two siblings), he is only  in  contact  with
    his sister.

51. In assessing the proportionality of refusing the appellant a  residence
    card on the grounds of public policy,  I  take  into  account  all  the
    circumstances: in particular, his low risk of  offending;  his  conduct
    and behaviour since committing the offence in 2005; that he  has  lived
    in the UK since 2000 and, since  2007,  has  been  married  to  an  EEA
    national; that he has family in  Turkey  but  that  he  has  little  or
    limited contact with them; and I take  into  account  that  he  is  the
    primary carer and person providing  support  to  his  spouse  (the  EEA
    national) in her struggle  to  manage  her  health  on  a  daily  basis
    suffering from Parkinson's disease or Parkinsonism.   I  accept,  as  I
    have already said, that his support is the most appropriate and without
    it the  impact  upon  his  spouse  is  likely  to  be  significant  and
    substantial given that there is no real possibility (and it  could  not
    seriously be contemplated given her circumstances), that she should  go
    to Turkey with him.

52. Balancing, therefore, the "genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat" which the appellant represents against all the circumstances, I
    am not satisfied that the Secretary of State has established  that  the
    decision is proportionate to achieve that aim.

53. For these reasons, the Secretary of State has failed to establish  that
    the decision to refuse the appellant a residence card on the grounds of
    public policy is justified under EU law.  Accordingly, the  appellant's
    appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

Decision

54. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal was set aside by the decision of  UTJ  King  dated  13  December
    2018.

55. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 15 May 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I make a fee award in respect of any fee  paid
or payable in respect of the appellant's application.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 15 May 2019
