
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/07729/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Oral Determination given following       |On 08 March 2019                   |
|hearing                                  |                                   |
|On 21 January 2019                       |                                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR LULZIM RAMIQI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms J Rothwell, Counsel instructed by Bureau for
Migrant Advice

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Morgan, in which the judge allowed the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the respondent refusing  to  grant  him  a
    permanent residence card.  Although technically the respondent  is  the
    appellant in this appeal, for ease of convenience I shall refer to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  is  to  Mr
    Ramiqi as "the appellant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    respondent".

 2. The appellant in this case is a national of Kosovo who first arrived in
    this country in November 1998.  He applied for asylum  but  that  claim
    was refused in 2000.  He remained in this country without leave but  in
    2005 he met Ms Stefanikova with whom he lived for a  number  of  years.
    They started living together in early 2005 and had a  son  born  on  30
    November 2007.  I am told that the son is now a British  citizen  which
    although not directly relevant to this appeal is  relevant  as  regards
    the appellant's status in this country,  as  will  be  apparent  below.
    Very soon after the birth of their child the appellant  applied  for  a
    residence card as the extended family member of Ms Stefanikova who  was
    as a Slovakian national working in the UK an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in this country.  That application was successful and  in
    2009 the applicant was granted a residence card and that residence card
    was transferred into his passport, and a further residence  card  valid
    from February 2010  to  February  2015  was  granted.   Unhappily,  the
    couple's relationship (which no-one has suggested  was  anything  other
    than genuine) did not survive and the  couple  separated  in  September
    2010.  The couple, however. had remained in contact (and I note that Ms
    Stefanikova appeared with the appellant before this Tribunal today) and
    the appellant has remained in regular contact with his son and the  son
    lives with him on weekends.  The  appellant  applied  for  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a permanent right to reside under the
    EEA Regulations on the basis that he had been exercising treaty  rights
    in the UK for a continuous period of five years.   The  basis  of  this
    application was that he had been living with Ms Stefanikova  from  2005
    to 2010 and that the time spent living with her prior to 2009 was  time
    which ought to be treated as counting towards that five year period.

 3. The application was refused by the respondent  because  the  respondent
    considered that on a correct construction of the  Regulations  although
    the appellant was an extended family member that did not of itself give
    him a right to reside in the country pursuant to  the  EEA  Regulations
    unless and until he was granted a  residence  card  pursuant  to  these
    Regulations.  That would only happen  after  the  respondent  had  been
    given an  opportunity  to  investigate  the  application  and  reach  a
    decision.  The appellant appealed against this decision and his  appeal
    was determined by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 10 October 2018, at which regrettably the respondent
    was not represented.  In a decision  promulgated  on  17  October  2018
    Judge Morgan allowed the appeal.  The respondent  now  appeals  against
    that decision, leave having been granted on 16 November 2018 by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien.

 4. The sole issue before this Tribunal is whether or not a period of  time
    spent with a partner prior to the grant of a residence permit counts as
    time spent pursuant to the EEA Regulations  as  is  necessary  for  the
    grant of permanent residence.  In order to qualify for such a grant  an
    applicant is required to have  been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

 5. As already  indicated  above,  unfortunately  the  respondent  was  not
    represented and so the legal arguments were not fully canvassed  before
    the judge.  Appearing on behalf of the appellant before this  Tribunal,
    Ms Rothwell, who appeared below, indicated that the judge did not  wish
    her to address him on case law and so she was unable to ensure that the
    Tribunal was in as full a position to understand the case law as  would
    have  been  desirable.   She  appreciated,  however,  that  there  were
    difficulties within her defence of this decision for reasons which will
    appear below.

 6. The difficulty which in the judgment of this Tribunal Ms  Rothwell  has
    in defending the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal is that  this
    issue has been considered by the Court of Appeal in  Macastena  v  SSHD
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1558,  which  has  decided  this  point.   Although  Ms
    Rothwell has attempted to distinguish this decision on the  basis  that
    the facts were a little  different,  in  reality  the  basic  issue  is
    indistinguishable.  In that case the issue before the Court  of  Appeal
    was set out starkly at paragraph 1 of its decision:

         "1.  This appeal raises the question whether time spent by a man in
             a durable relationship with a woman who  is  an  EEA  national
             with a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom  can
             be  added  to  subsequent  time  as  a  spouse  to  meet   the
             requirement of five years' continuous lawful residence  before
             the man can himself acquire a permanent  right  of  residence.
             The answer is that time so spent cannot be  added  unless  the
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  has  (or  perhaps
             ought to have) issued the man with  a  residence  card  as  an
             'extended  family  member',  pursuant   to   the   Immigration
             (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   ('the   2006
             Regulations').  The answer to this question is  important  for
             foreign criminals with ordinary rights of  residence  who  can
             only be deported 'on grounds of public  policy  or  security';
             if, however, they have a permanent right of residence they can
             only be deported on  'serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
             security'".

 7. Although obviously that was a case involving deportation, the issue  is
    identical to the issue in this case, and the reasoning applied  by  the
    Court of Appeal is the same as would need to be applied in  this  case.
    In its decision the Court  of  Appeal  deal  with  what  amounts  to  a
    "permanent right of residence" which is dealt with in Regulation  15(1)
    which

         "provides that both an EEA national who has resided in  the  United
         Kingdom for a continuous period of five years, and a family  member
         of an EEA national who has resided with that  EEA  national  for  a
         continuous period of five  years,  acquire  a  permanent  right  of
         residence in the United Kingdom".

    In the particular case the Court of Appeal was considering in Macastena
    the period of time spent as the wife of the EEA national (that is  when
    he became technically a "family member" of  that  national  until  when
    that period ended) was just under five years and so in  order  to  have
    the status of a permanent resident he needed to have added  the  period
    when he was an "extended family member" because he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with a lady who subsequently became his wife.   The  basis
    of the Court of Appeal's decision was that the extended family  members
    did not have a right of residence but only an  entitlement  to  require
    the Secretary of State to  exercise  her  discretion.   Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker in the Upper Tribunal had upheld a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to the effect that because the parties in that  case  had
    been in a durable relationship before they had married,  the  Secretary
    of State could not in her discretion have decided that  that  applicant
    was not entitled to a permanent right of residence and therefore he had
    to be treated as having exercised his EEA rights  during  that  period.
    The Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  on  the
    basis that a partner to a durable relationship will only be issued with
    a residence card  once  the  Secretary  of  State  has  undertaken  "an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the  applicant".
    This can only happen after an application for a residence card has been
    made.  Accordingly, until at the very earliest  an  application  for  a
    residence card has been made,  there  is  no  right  of  residence  and
    accordingly time spent in the UK is not spent in  accordance  with  the
    EEA Regulations.

 8. I have summarised the decision very briefly but essentially the reasons
    given by the Court of Appeal for  allowing  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal against the Upper Tribunal's decision in Macastena apply equally
    in this case, and I am bound by that decision.  Ms Rothwell  has  asked
    me to note in this decision  that  a  Deputy  Judge  of  this  Tribunal
    allowed an appeal on similar grounds to those advanced in this case but
    that the Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal  that
    decision to the Court of Appeal and that appeal is to be heard shortly.
     In the event that that appeal was to succeed, she  would  wish  to  be
    able to rely on such subsequent judgment.

 9. Be that as it may, as I have already indicated, I am bound  by  current
    jurisprudence and not by what an applicant  hopes  a  Court  of  Appeal
    might decide in the future and it follows that  this  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside because it is wrong in law.

10. As this appellant's appeal cannot succeed on the basis of the law as it
    now is, I will re-make the decision dismissing the appeal.

11. I should, however, make one other point in passing in fairness  to  the
    appellant and it is this.  This application is essentially an  academic
    one because it seems that the appellant would be bound to succeed  were
    he to make an application for leave to  remain  under  Article  8  both
    under the Rules and also outside the Rules.  He  should  succeed  under
    the Rules because he has been residing in this country for over  twenty
    years now and other than the fact that for part of  that  time  he  has
    been here without leave he has  not  been  convicted  of,  nor  has  he
    committed any offence and there does not appear to be  any  reason  why
    permission (albeit that the leave would not be indefinite leave) should
    not be granted.  Further, he has a British citizen son who  lives  with
    his mother in this country and it would seem clearly to be the position
    that it would not be reasonable to expect that child to leave  the  UK,
    even were his father to leave,  because  the  family  would  not  leave
    together as  the  appellant  and  his  former  partner  are  no  longer
    together.  Accordingly, pursuant to Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  inserted  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014, it is not in the public interest  to  require  the  appellant  to
    leave.  So, although I am bound by precedent  to  dismiss  this  appeal
    from the appellant, there is another basis upon which he should now  be
    entitled to leave to remain.  However, so far as the current appeal  is
    concerned, it must be dismissed.





Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan  as  containing
a material error of law and re-make the decision as follows:

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision refusing  to  grant
him a permanent residence card is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                      Date: 27 February 2019















