
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/07242/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 14th February 2018                 |             On 20th February 2018    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                        mr mahmoud fatouh abdalla eid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms R Frantzis (instructed by Susan Croft)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  Judge  Herlihy,
    determined on the papers at the Appellant's request,  on  9th  November
    2017. Judge Herlihy dismissed the appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt who sought a residence card as  the
    spouse of a British national who had been exercising treaty  rights  in
    Malta where he resided with her.

 3. The Judge was not satisfied on the papers before her  that  the  couple
    had in truth genuinely relocated to Malta and transferred the centre of
    their lives there.

 4. The grounds argue that in determining the appeal the  Judge  failed  to
    take into account evidence that was contained in the bundle  which  was
    material to her findings.  In particular the Judge  found  no  evidence
    that the couple had paid rent in Malta when there was such evidence  in
    the bundle. Similarly the Judge said that there was no evidence of  the
    couple's immigration history when  such  evidence  was  in  the  bundle
    (contained in their passports).

 5. Ms Petterson conceded that there were material errors  of  law  in  the
    Decision and Reasons and that it should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing on the issue of Internal Relocation by a  Judge,  other
than Judge Herlihy.

The Appellant now wishes to have an oral hearing and so the file  should  be
returned first to Arnhem House for the fee to be collected.
The remitted hearing should take place at  Bradford  and  an  Arabic  (North
African) interpreter will be required.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14th February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin










