
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/07684/2018
                                                               EA/07690/2018
                                                                         (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2021                   |On 07 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                   adesuwa daniela ajayi (first appellant)
                 osadebamwen george ajayi (second appellant)
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by JDS Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are linked appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cohen ("the judge"), promulgated on 12 July and 2019, by which he
    dismissed the appellants' appeals against the respondent's  refusal  of
    their applications for a residence card under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations").

 2. These proceedings have not been affected by the revocation of the  2016
    Regulations on 31  December  2020  as  result  of  the  expiry  of  the
    transitional period relating to the  United  Kingdom's  exit  from  the
    European Union.

 3. The two appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are sister and  brother.
    The first appellant was born on 27 December 1996 and the  second  on  8
    October 1994. They are both the biological children of Ms Eunice Otabor
    ("Ms Otabor"),  a  Nigerian  citizen  who  currently  has  a  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom as the spouse of  British  citizen,  Mr
    Johansson Johnson ("Mr Johnson").

 4. In November 2011, Mr Johnson left the United Kingdom and went  to  live
    and work in Spain. It is common ground that he exercised Treaty  rights
    whilst in that country. During this period of residence, Mr Johnson met
    Ms Otabor and they married. Ms Otabor was issued with a residence  card
    by the Spanish authorities as the family member of an EU  citizen.  The
    couple returned to the United Kingdom in December 2013. Ms  Otabor  was
    issued with a residence card in the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  the
    Surinder Singh principle (R v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  ex  parte
    Surinder  Singh  C-370/90;  [1992]  Imm  AR  565,  hereafter  "Surinder
    Singh").

 5. The appellants did not join and reside with their mother and stepfather
    in Spain. They continued to reside in Nigeria.

 6. On 7 November 2017 the appellants were issued with an EEA family permit
    and they arrived in this country  25  November  of  that  year.  On  20
    September 2018 the appellants made an application for a residence  card
    as the direct family members of Mr Johnson.

 7. This application was refused  by  the  respondent  on  the  basis  that
    neither of the appellants had resided with Mr Johnson in Spain and that
    it followed that the appellant's could not have established  a  genuine
    residence in that country, with reference to regulation 9(2)(b) and (c)
    of the 2016 Regulations.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. On the basis that none of the essential factual issues appeared  to  be
    in dispute, and with the agreement of the representatives, the  hearing
    proceeded by way of submissions only.

 9. The judge quoted regulation 9 of the Regulations  and,  having  applied
    the undisputed facts to what  he  regarded  as  the  appropriate  legal
    framework, he concluded that the appellants failed in their appeals.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. Two grounds of appeal were put forward.  First,  the  judge  failed  to
    address the argument put forward at the hearing that regulation 9(2)(b)
    of the 2016 Regulations was inconsistent with Article 21 of the  Treaty
    on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU"). Second, it was  said
    that  the  TFEU  did  not  require  that   dependent   family   members
    (specifically children) to have resided  in  another  EU  state  ("host
    state") with the British citizen  in  order  to  fall  within  Surinder
    Singh.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  a  residence  requirement  was
    justified in respect of a spouse/partner, this  was  not  the  case  in
    relation to family members because:

              a) it would impose stricter  requirements  on  the  appellants
                 than those imposed on any other dependent of an EU  citizen
                 exercising Treaty rights;




              b) it would render Mr Johnson's and Ms  Otabor's  rights  less
                 effective;




              c) it would discourage the exercise of free movement.

11. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane on 10 March 2020.

12. Following the grant of permission, the respondent provided  a  rule  24
    response, dated 6 July 2020. Further written submissions, dated 8  July
    2020 and 22 July 2020 were subsequently provided by the appellants.

13. Finally, a very brief skeleton argument, dated 21 October 2020, came in
    from the respondent.

Relevant legal framework

14. Although a number of authorities have been referred to, at this stage I
    confine myself to quoting from relevant passages in the Surinder  Singh
    judgment itself:

           "11  The  question  submitted  by  the  national  court  for   a
           preliminary ruling concerns the issue whether Article 52 of  the
           Treaty and  Directive  73/148,  properly  construed,  require  a
           Member State to grant leave to enter and reside in its territory
           to the spouse, of whatever nationality, of a  national  of  that
           State who has gone with that spouse to another Member  State  in
           order to work there  as  an  employed  person  as  envisaged  by
           Article 48 of the Treaty and returns  to  establish  himself  or
           herself as  envisaged  by  Article  52  of  the  Treaty  in  the
           territory of the State of which he or she is a national.

           ...

           19 A national of a Member State might be deterred  from  leaving
           his country of origin in order  to  pursue  an  activity  as  an
           employed or self-employed person as envisaged by the  Treaty  in
           the territory of another Member State if, on  returning  to  the
           Member State of which he is a national in  order  to  pursue  an
           activity there as  an  employed  or  self-employed  person,  the
           conditions  of  his  entry  and  residence  were  not  at  least
           equivalent to those which he would enjoy  under  the  Treaty  or
           secondary law in the territory of another Member State.

           20 He would in particular be  deterred  from  so  doing  if  his
           spouse and children were not also permitted to enter and  reside
           in the territory of his Member State of origin under  conditions
           at least equivalent to those granted them by  Community  law  in
           the territory of another Member State.

           21 It follows that a national of a Member State who has gone  to
           another Member State in order  to  work  there  as  an  employed
           person pursuant to Article 48  of  the  Treaty  and  returns  to
           establish himself in order to pursue  an  activity  as  a  self-
           employed person in the territory of the Member State of which he
           is a national has the right, under Article 52 of the Treaty,  to
           be accompanied in the territory  of  the  latter  State  by  his
           spouse, a national of  a  non-member  country,  under  the  same
           conditions as are laid down by Regulation No 1612/68,  Directive
           68/360 or Directive 73/148, cited above.

           ...


           25 The answer to the question referred for a preliminary  ruling
           must therefore be that Article 52 of the  Treaty  and  Directive
           73/148, properly construed, require  a  Member  State  to  grant
           leave to enter and reside in its territory  to  the  spouse,  of
           whatever nationality, of a national of that State who has  gone,
           with that spouse, to another Member State in order to work there
           as an employed person as envisaged by Article 48 of  the  Treaty
           and returns to establish himself  or  herself  as  envisaged  by
           Article 52 of the Treaty in the territory of the State of  which
           he or she is a national. The spouse must enjoy at least the same
           rights as would be granted to him or her under Community law  if
           his or her spouse  entered  and  resided  in  the  territory  of
           another Member State."


                                             (Emphasis added)

15. The Surinder Singh principle was given  legislative  effect  in  United
    Kingdom by way of regulation 9 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"), which,  until  it  was
    amended on 25 November 2016 and then  replaced  entirely  by  the  2016
    Regulations on 1 February 2017, provided as follows:

           "9.- Family members of British citizens

           (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
           Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a
           British citizen as if the British citizen ("P") were an EEA
           national.

           (2)  The conditions are that-

           (a)  P is residing in an EEA State as a worker or self-employed
           person or was so residing before returning to the United
           Kingdom;

           (b)  if the family member of P is P's spouse or civil partner,
           the parties are living together in the EEA State or had entered
           into the marriage or civil partnership and were living together
           in the EEA State before the British citizen returned to the
           United Kingdom; and

           (c)  the centre of P's life has transferred to the EEA State
           where P resided as a worker or self-employed person."

16. Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regulations provided, as at the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision in these proceedings, as follows:

           "9.- Family members of British citizens

           (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
           Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F") of
           a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.

           (2)  The conditions are that-

           (a)  BC-

           (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-employed
           person, self-sufficient person or a student, or so resided
           immediately before returning to the United Kingdom; or

           (ii)  has acquired the right of permanent residence in an EEA
           State;

           (b)   F and BC resided together in the EEA State;

           (c)   F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine;

           (d)  F was a family member of BC during all or part of their
           joint residence in the EEA State; and

           (e)  genuine family life  was  created  or  strengthened  during
           their joint residence in the EEA State."

17. Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regulations provided, as at the point in  time
    of its revocation on 31 December 2020, in so far as relevant:

           "9.-  Family members and extended family members of British
           citizens

           (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
           Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F") of
           a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.

           (1A)  These Regulations apply to a person who is the extended
           family member ("EFM") of a BC as though the BC were an EEA
           national if-

           (a)  the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied; and

           (b)  the EFM was lawfully resident in the EEA State referred to
           in paragraph (2)(a)(i).

           (2)  The conditions are that-

           (a)  BC-

           (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-employed
           person, self-sufficient person or a student, or so resided
           immediately before returning to the United Kingdom; or

           (ii)  has acquired the right of permanent residence in an EEA
           State;

           (b)  F or EFM and BC resided together in the EEA State;

           (c)  F or EFM and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine[;6

           (d)  either-

           (i)  F was a family member of BC during all or part of their
           joint residence in the EEA State;

           (ii)  F was an EFM of BC during all or part of their joint
           residence in the EEA State, during which time F was lawfully
           resident in the EEA State; or

           (iii)  EFM was an EFM of BC during all or part of their joint
           residence in the EEA State, during which time EFM was lawfully
           resident in the EEA State;

           (e)  genuine family life was created or strengthened during F or
           EFM and BC's joint residence in the EEA State ; and

           (f)  the conditions in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) have been
           met concurrently."

18. At all material times, Regulation 7 of the 2016 Regulations provided as
    follows:

           "7.- "Family member"

           (1)  In these Regulations, "family member" means, in relation to
           a person ("A")-

           (a)  A's spouse or civil partner;

           (b)  A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants of A's
           spouse or civil partner who are either-

           (i)  aged under 21; or

           (ii)  dependants of A, or of A's spouse or civil partner."

19. Articles 2 and 3 of the Citizens' Directive 2004/38/EC state:

           "Article 2

           Definitions

           For the purposes of this Directive:

           1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a
           Member State;

           2) "Family member" means:

           (a) the spouse;

           (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
           registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a
           Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats
           registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in
           accordance with the conditions laid down in the relevant
           legislation of the host Member State;

           (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
           dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined in
           point (b);

           (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and
           those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

           ...

           Article 3

           Beneficiaries

           1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to
           or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a
           national, and to their family members as defined in point 2 of
           Article 2 who accompany or join them.

           2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
           the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host
           Member State shall, in accordance with its national legislation,
           facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

           (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
           not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in
           the country from which they have come, are dependants or members
           of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right
           of residence, or where serious health grounds strictly require
           the personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;

           (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
           relationship, duly attested.

           ..."

20. Article 21(1) of the TFEU provides that:

           "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in the Treaties and
           by the measures adopted to give them effect."

The hearing

21. Both representatives relied  on  the  written  arguments  and  expanded
    thereon. In light of my indication that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
    failed to address the core submissions put forward by  the  appellants,
    Mr Collins focused on the second of  his  grounds  of  appeal.  Without
    intending any disrespect,  I  will  only  briefly  summarise  the  oral
    submissions here as I will seek to deal with particular aspects of  the
    relevant jurisprudence to which I was referred, below.

22. Mr Collins quite fairly acknowledged that  there  were  no  authorities
    expressly supporting his argument. However, he submitted  that  nothing
    in the case-law was fatal to the appellants' case. Specific passages of
    within the various authorities were referred to. The  essential  thrust
    of the argument was that these appeals, children should not be  subject
    to a residence requirement in a host state. To do so would, in  effect,
    inhibit and discourage the exercise of free movement rights  by  an  EU
    citizen, here, Mr Johnson.

23. Mr Avery submitted that the absence  of  any  case-law  to  support  Mr
    Collins' argument was notable. The reason for the absence was that  the
    appellants' contention was highly tenuous. He submitted that regulation
    9 of the 2016 Regulations was consistent with EU law. On the facts, the
    appellants simply could not succeed.

24. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion and conclusions

25. I have little hesitation in concluding that the judge erred in  law  by
    failing to engage with the argument put forward by the appellants as to
    what was said to be the  correct  application  of  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle  and  the  contested  aspects  of  regulation  of  the   2016
    Regulations. It is clear that the judge simply relied on  regulation  9
    as constituting a correct statement of the law and  did  not  begin  to
    address the wider submissions that I am satisfied were properly put  to
    him.

26. The question is then whether the judge's error is such  that  I  should
    exercise my discretion under section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 and set his  decision  aside.  Answering  this
    requires an assessment  of  the  appellants'  overall  submission  that
    certain family members, in particular children, should not  be  subject
    to a residence requirement in the host state in which  the  EU  citizen
    has exercised Treaty rights.

27. There is nothing in the wording of Article 21 of the TFEU itself  which
    assists the appellants'  argument.  That  is  unsurprising,  given  the
    generality of the provision.

28. It is then appropriate to look at the terms of the Citizens'  Directive
    to see what this might have to say. Articles 2 and 3 clearly cover  the
    position of EU citizens who move to a host state and to  their  "family
    members". No distinction is drawn between spouses;  relevant  partners;
    direct descendants under the age of  21  or  who  are  dependents;  and
    dependents in the ascending line.

29. That the position  of  third  country  family  members  falling  within
    Surinder  Singh  should  be  analogous  to  that  under  the  Citizens'
    Directive was confirmed by the Court of Justice of the  European  Union
    ("CJEU") in O and B C-456/12; [2014] 3 WLR 799 ("O and  B"),  which  at
    the same time emphasised the importance of residence of an  EU  citizen
    and a family member together in the host state. At paragraphs 50-56 the
    Court concluded as follows:



          "50 So far as concerns the conditions for granting, when a  Union
          citizen returns to the Member State of which he is a national,  a
          derived right of residence, based on Article  21(1)  TFEU,  to  a
          third-country national who is  a  family  member  of  that  Union
          citizen with whom that citizen has resided, solely by  virtue  of
          his being a Union  citizen,  in  the  host  Member  State,  those
          conditions should not, in principle, be more  strict  than  those
          provided for by Directive 2004/38 for the grant of such  a  right
          of residence to a third-country national who is a  family  member
          of a Union citizen in a case where that citizen has exercised his
          right of freedom of movement by becoming established in a  Member
          State other than the Member State of which he is a national. Even
          though Directive 2004/38 does not cover such a return, it  should
          be applied by analogy to the conditions for the  residence  of  a
          Union citizen in a Member State other than that of which he is  a
          national, given that in both cases it is the Union citizen who is
          the sponsor for the grant of a derived right of  residence  to  a
          third-country national who is a member of his family.


          51 An obstacle such as that referred to in paragraph 47 above
          will arise only where the residence of the Union citizen in the
          host Member State has been sufficiently genuine so as to enable
          that citizen to create or strengthen family life in that Member
          State. Article 21(1) TFEU does not therefore require that every
          residence in the host Member State by a Union citizen accompanied
          by a family member who is a third-country national necessarily
          confers a derived right of residence on that family member in the
          Member State of which that citizen is a national upon the
          citizen's return to that Member State.


          52 In that regard, it should be observed that a Union citizen who
          exercises his rights under Article 6(1) of Directive 2004/38 does
          not intend to settle in the host Member State in a way which
          would be such as to create or strengthen family life in that
          Member State. Accordingly, the refusal to confer, when that
          citizen returns to his Member State of origin, a derived right of
          residence on members of his family who are third-country
          nationals will not deter such a citizen from exercising his
          rights under Article 6.


          53 On the other hand, an obstacle such as that referred to in
          paragraph 47 above may be created where the Union citizen intends
          to exercise his rights under Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38.
          Residence in the host Member State pursuant to and in conformity
          with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) of that directive is,
          in principle, evidence of settling there and therefore of the
          Union citizen's genuine residence in the host Member State and
          goes hand in hand with creating and strengthening family life in
          that Member State.


          54 Where, during the genuine residence of the Union citizen in
          the host Member State, pursuant to and in conformity with the
          conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38,
          family life is created or strengthened in that Member State, the
          effectiveness of the rights conferred on the Union citizen by
          Article 21(1) TFEU requires that the citizen's family life in the
          host Member State may continue on returning to the Member of
          State of which he is a national, through the grant of a derived
          right of residence to the family member who is a third-country
          national. If no such derived right of residence were granted,
          that Union citizen could be discouraged from leaving the Member
          State of which he is a national in order to exercise his right of
          residence under Article 21(1) TFEU in another Member State
          because he is uncertain whether he will be able to continue in
          his Member State of origin a family life with his immediate
          family members which has been created or strengthened in the host
          Member State (see, to that effect, Eind, paragraphs 35 and 36,
          and Iida, paragraph 70).


          55 A fortiori, the effectiveness of Article 21(1) TFEU requires
          that the Union citizen may continue, on returning to the Member
          State of which he is a national, the family life which he led in
          the host Member State, if he and the family member concerned who
          is a third-country national have been granted a permanent right
          of residence in the host Member State pursuant to Article 16(1)
          and (2) of Directive 2004/38 respectively.


          56 Accordingly, it is genuine residence in the host Member  State
          of the Union citizen and of the family member  who  is  a  third-
          country  national,  pursuant  to  and  in  conformity  with   the
          conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and Article 16(1)  and
          (2) of Directive 2004/38  respectively,  which  creates,  on  the
          Union citizen's return to his Member State of origin,  a  derived
          right of residence, on the basis of Article 21(1) TFEU,  for  the
          third-country national with whom that citizen lived as  a  family
          in the host Member State."
                                             (Emphasis added)

30. What is of note here is that the Court  made  a  clear  link  not  only
    between Article 21(1) of the TFEU and the Citizens' Directive, but also
    with the need for the relevant family member to have resided  with  the
    EU citizen  in  the  host  state,  where  family  life  may  have  been
    strengthened or established. The judgment in O and B  does  not  assist
    the appellants' argument, but runs contrary to it.

31. The judgment in Eind C-291/05 also assists the  respondent's  position.
    The CJEU concluded that the Surinder Singh principle could  be  applied
    to children (in that case the daughter of the applicant)  and  that  an
    inability to reside with such a  family  member  in  their  country  of
    nationality could act as a deterrent to free movement (see paragraph 33-
    36). However, and importantly, the Court  proceeded  from  the  premise
    that the residence in the country of nationality would be a continuance
    of the family life which had existed in the host state  (see  paragraph
    36). This basic premise is also apparent in paragraph 45:

           "In the light of all the above  considerations,  the  answer  to
           Questions 2 and 3(b) must be that, when a worker returns to  the
           Member State of which he is a national,  after  being  gainfully
           employed in another Member State, a third-country  national  who
           is a member of his family has a right under Article 10(1)(a)  of
           Regulation No 1612/68, which applies by analogy,  to  reside  in
           the Member State of which the worker is a national,  even  where
           that worker does not carry on any effective and genuine economic
           activities. The fact that a  third-country  national  who  is  a
           member of a Community worker's family did not,  before  residing
           in the Member State where the worker was employed, have a  right
           under national law to reside in the Member State  of  which  the
           worker is a national has no bearing on the determination of that
           national's right to reside in the latter State."

                                             (Emphasis added)

32. In light of the above, I reject Mr Collins' submission that (a) EU  law
    does not recognise  any  requirement  for  family  members  other  than
    spouses/partners to have resided  in  the  host  state  before  the  EU
    citizen  returned  to  their  country  of  nationality;  and  (b)  that
    regulation 9 of the 2016 regulations is inconsistent  with  either  the
    TFEU or the Citizens' Directive.

33. As to (a), it is clear  enough  from  the  jurisprudence  of  the  CJEU
    (including the judgments I have already referred to) that residence  by
    the relevant family member with the EU citizen in  the  host  state  is
    recognised as effectively a condition precedent to the ability to  fall
    within Surinder Singh. It seems to me as though this has been the basic
    premise from which the Court has proceeded in all the  relevant  cases.
    This premise is  consistent  both  with  the  need  to  avoid  possible
    deterrence to EU citizens exercising Treaty rights in host  states  and
    with the concept of being able to continue or establish family life  in
    these states during the course of exercising Treaty rights.

34. In respect of (b) and regulation 9 of the 2016  Regulations,  I  accept
    the respondent's submission (as set out in paragraph 7 of the  rule  24
    response) that, rather than being more generous, the  2006  Regulations
    were in fact too restrictive as they only took account of  spouses  and
    civil partners. I conclude that the amendments  brought  about  by  the
    2016 Regulations corrected the position so as to bring the  Regulations
    in line with CJEU case-law.

35. None of the cases cited by Mr Collins in respect of regulation 9 of the
    2016 Regulations provide material assistance  to  the  appellants.  The
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in OB (EEA Regulations 2006-Article 9(2)-
    Surinder Singh spouse)  Morocco  [2010]  UKUT  420  (IAC)  addresses  a
    separate issue (that of gaps between the exercising of Treaty rights in
    the host member state and a return to the country of  nationality)  and
    has no material bearing on these appeals.

36. Rehman (EEA Regulations 2016-specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 195  (IAC)
    makes the uncontroversial point that relevant domestic legislation must
    be interpreted light of and consistently with EU law. It did  not  deal
    with any of the specific issues arising in the present appeals.


37. The judicial headnote of ZA (Reg 9. EEA Regs; abuse of rights)
    Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 281 (IAC) ("ZA") reads as follows:

           "The requirement to have transferred the centre of one's life to
           the host member state is not a requirement of EU law, nor is it
           endorsed by the CJEU.

           (ii) Where an EU national of one state ("the home member state")
           has exercised the right of freedom of movement to take up work
           or self-employment in another EU state ("the host state"), his
           or her family members have a derivative right to enter the
           member state if the exercise of Treaty rights in the host state
           was "genuine" in the sense that it was real, substantive, or
           effective. It is for an appellant to show that there had been a
           genuine exercise of Treaty rights.

           (iii) The question of whether family life was established and/or
           strengthened, and whether there has been a genuine exercise of
           Treaty rights requires a qualitative assessment which will be
           fact-specific and will need to bear in mind the following:

                 (1) Any work or self-employment must have been "genuine and
                 effective" and not marginal or ancillary;

                 (2) The assessment of whether a stay in the host state was
                 genuine does not involve an assessment of the intentions of
                 the parties over and above a consideration of whether what
                 they intended to do was in fact to exercise Treaty rights;

                 (3) There is no requirement for the EU national or his
                 family to have integrated into the host member state, nor
                 for the sole place of residence to be in the host state;
                 there is no requirement to have severed ties with the home
                 member state; albeit that these factors may, to a limited
                 degree, be relevant to the qualitative assessment of
                 whether the exercise of Treaty rights was genuine.

           (iv) If it is alleged that the stay in the host member state was
           such that reg. 9 (4) applies, the burden is on the Secretary  of
           State to show that there was an abuse of rights."

38. ZA was  concerned  with  regulation  9  of  the  2016  Regulations  and
    considered a number of authorities, including O  and  B.  The  specific
    issue with which the  Upper  Tribunal  was  concerned  related  to  the
    requirement that the EU citizen's  residence  in  the  host  state  was
    "genuine" with reference to regulation 9(2)(c). As is made clear in the
    headnote, aspects of regulation 9(3) were found wanting  when  analysed
    in the context of EU law.

39. Regulation 9(2)(b) was not in issue  in  ZA.  However,  it  is  readily
    apparent from what is discussed in considerable detail in that decision
    that the Upper Tribunal took it as read that there  had  to  have  been
    residence in the host state by both the EU  citizen  and  the  relevant
    family member prior to return to the United Kingdom (see,  for  example
    paragraph 43). There is no support in ZA  for  the  contention  that  a
    distinction can be drawn  between  spouses/partners  and  other  family
    members, specifically children, as regards the  need  to  have  resided
    with the EU citizen in the host state.

40. Banger C-89/17; [2018] Imm AR 1205 extended the scope of  the  Surinder
    Singh principle to unregistered partners in a durable relationship with
    an EU citizen. What is clear from the Court's ruling on the preliminary
    questions was the assumption that the partner would be returning to the
    member state of which the EU citizen was a national (see paragraphs  35
    and 41).

41. The Court of Appeal's judgment in Christy [2018] EWCA Civ 2378;  [2019]
    WLR 2017 does not advance the appellants case. The point being made  in
    paragraph 40 was that the family member had to have resided with the EU
    citizen in the host state, although there did not need to have  been  a
    specific decision under the Treaty and the Citizens' Directive from the
    authorities of that state.

42. Having concluded that the authorities do not provide any support for Mr
    Collins central argument, I now turn to consider whether, as  a  matter
    of  principle,  a   distinction   can   properly   be   drawn   between
    spouses/partners  on  the  one  hand  and  dependent   family   members
    (specifically children) on the other.

43. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that there cannot.

44. First, the  jurisprudence  of  the  CJEU  incorporates  the  underlying
    principles of free movement and also the ability  of  EU  citizens  who
    exercise that freedom to continue to enjoy,  or  to  establish,  family
    life in a host state. If a category of family members (in  the  present
    cases, dependent children over the  age  of  21)  is  exempt  from  the
    residence condition, it undermines or entirely circumvents an essential
    component of the Surinder Singh principle and the well-established case-
    law of the Court.

45. The facts of the present appeals are instructive. The appellants  never
    joined their mother or Mr Johnson in Spain. As a result, no family life
    as between the appellant's and Mr Johnson was established. There was no
    question of any family life between the appellants and Ms Otabor  which
    may have pre-existed continuing or being strengthened in that  country.
    Indeed, if anything, the period of separation might  be  said  to  have
    weakened any family life.

46. Second, Mr Collins' rationale for why a distinction  should  be  drawn,
    and the example given in support thereof, is unpersuasive.  It  may  be
    said that dependent children residing in the United Kingdom or a  third
    country who were in school or receiving medical treatment should not be
    required to go and join an EU citizen in the  host  state.  To  disrupt
    their lives in this way may create a deterrence to the EU citizen  from
    exercising free movement Treaty rights in the first place.

47. In my view, however, the same considerations - or similar - could apply
    to a spouse/partner. They too may be  receiving  medical  treatment  or
    completing an educational or professional course in the United  Kingdom
    or a third country. Requiring them to cease such an activity  in  order
    to go to a host state could potentially act as a deterrent  to  the  EU
    citizen. Yet it is not suggested that they are, or  should  be,  exempt
    from a residence condition. Therefore, no principled distinction can be
    drawn between different classes.

48. I acknowledge that the hypothetical scenario put forward by Mr  Collins
    may have greater force if  the  family  members  concerned  were  minor
    children (although of course neither of  the  appellants  were  at  any
    material time).  Nonetheless,  this  does  not  persuade  me  that  the
    Surinder Singh principle should be extended in the  significant  manner
    sought.

49. Third, the points made at paragraph 13c of the grounds of  appeal  are,
    with respect, misconceived. It  is  there  accepted  that  a  residence
    requirement for spouses/partners is justified because of  the  need  to
    show  a  link  between  the  exercise  of   Treaty   rights   and   the
    formation/continuance  of  family  life.  I  have  addressed  this   in
    paragraphs 44 and 45, above.

50. It is said that  the  requirements  imposed  on  the  appellants  by  a
    residence condition in the host state are stricter than  those  imposed
    on any other dependent of an EU citizen exercising Treaty rights,  this
    being contrary to the principle of equivalence as set out in O  and  B.
    This is not correct. The residence requirement would apply  equally  to
    any dependent family member of any other EU citizen who was relying  on
    the Surinder Singh principle. To say that there should be no  residence
    requirement at all for family members who are not  spouses/partners  is
    to ignore the fundamental point that third country nationals who gain a
    derivative right of residence only do so because  of  the  exercise  of
    free movement by the EU  citizen  concerned.  The  EU  citizen  who  is
    resident in a host state can seek to have family  members  joined  them
    from a third country because the former is  exercising  Treaty  rights,
    pursuant to the Citizens' Directive.

51. On the facts of these appeals, Mr Johnson's exercise of  Treaty  rights
    was clearly in no way inhibited by  a  residence  requirement  for  the
    appellants. He in fact exercised those rights in Spain. He  established
    family life with Ms Otabor there and they continued to reside  in  that
    country for a period. There was no attempt to have the appellants  join
    them. There is no reliable suggestion that that was anything other than
    a choice made by the couple.

52. That the appellants did not join their mother and stepfather  in  Spain
    meant that the only family life that Mr Johnson could have  "continued"
    on return to the United Kingdom was that with his wife.

53. It seems to  me  that  the  ultimate  consequence  of  the  appellants'
    contentions in these appeals is that once a citizen  of  one  EU  state
    exercises Treaty rights in another  and  then  returns  to  their  home
    state, they will thereafter always retain some form of status as an  EU
    citizen in that state in  respect  of  whom  all  rights  and  benefits
    accruing from the original exercise of free movement will apply. In  my
    judgment, such a position is unsupported by  the  TFEU,  the  Citizens'
    Directive, case-law, or any principled arguments.

54. In light of the foregoing, a residence requirement for  family  members
    other than spouses/partners does not disclose discrimination or a  lack
    of equivalence as regards the protections afforded to those EU citizens
    who exercise Treaty rights in a host state.

55. I acknowledge that the appellants  were  issued  with  family  permits,
    which they used  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  in  2017.  The  entry
    clearance contained in the appellants'  passport  which  confirmed  the
    family permit described them as being family members of Mr  Johnson.  I
    have not been provided with any further information as to the basis  on
    which the permits were issued. On my  analysis  of  the  correct  legal
    position, it would appear as though the permits should  not  have  been
    issued because the appellants had not resided in Spain. Whether or  not
    the respondent proceeded in error, I am bound to apply  the  law  as  I
    find it to be, in the context of the facts of the appeals before me.

56. In summary, I conclude that the inclusion of a residence requirement in
    regulation 9(2)(b) of the 2016 Regulations is  in  accordance  with  EU
    law. On the facts of  these  appeals,  the  appellants  clearly  cannot
    satisfy that requirement. The appellants  cannot  therefore  be  family
    members of Mr Johnson. In turn, they do not enjoy derivative rights  of
    residence in the United Kingdom and the respondent's refusal  of  their
    applications to be issued with a residence card were not in  breach  of
    any EU law rights.

57. Whilst the judge erred in law by failing to deal with  the  appellants'
    core submission, he was entitled to rely on regulation 9(2)(b)  of  the
    2016 Regulations as providing a complete  answer  to  their  case.  The
    error was not material to the oucome.

58. In light of this, I  do  not  set  aside  the  judge's  decision.  That
    decision shall stand.

Anonymity


59. There is no good reason for making an anonymity direction in these
    appeals and I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

60. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


61. I  do  not  exercise  my  discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and I do not set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

62. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand in respect of  both
    appeals.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 30 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





