
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
ea/07999/2017

                                                 EA/08000/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 November 2019                      |On 20 December 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               BIBI OMARKHAIL
                          MOHAMMAD ULLAH OMARKHAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:       Mr R de Mello and Mr T Muman, instructed by
                     Guildhall Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016
    against a decision of the respondent made on 8 September 2017 to refuse
    to issue them with residence cards on  the  basis  that  they  are  the
    dependent relatives of a British citizen who had  previously  exercised
    treaty rights in Poland.   Their appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against those decisions were dismissed but, for the reasons set out  in
    our decision promulgated on 25 July 2019, a copy of which is  attached,
    we set aside the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal, having concluded
    that some of the findings of fact were in error, and directed that they
    be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is no real dispute as to the basic factual scenario of this case.
     The appellants' son, Mr Omarkhail ("the sponsor"), travelled to Poland
    and he was joined by his parents. He  worked  there  for  a  period  in
    running his own business and the parties were all duly issued with  the
    relevant residence cards by the Polish authorities.  The appellants say
    that they lived with their son in rented accommodation from 27  January
    2016 until 20 December 2016; a tenancy agreement was provided  to  that
    effect.

 3. On return to the United Kingdom, the appellants applied  for  residence
    cards under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 4. The respondent was not satisfied that the  sponsor  had  in  fact  been
    exercising treaty rights in  Poland  nor  was  he  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of Regulation 9(2) and 9(3) were met in  that  in  summary
    the sponsor had not transferred his centre of life to Poland.

 5. In his skeleton argument dated 15 November 2019,  Mr  Deller  expressly
    conceded at [8] that  the  respondent  no  longer  contended  that  the
    sponsor had not properly exercised his Treaty  Rights  in  Poland.   He
    also observed at [11] that in the light of that concession, it was  not
    necessary for us to determine whether, as the appellants  submit,  that
    on a proper understanding of article  5  of  Directive  2004/38   ("the
    Directive") as interpreted by McCarthy  [2014] EUECJ C-202/13  it is in
    fact not open to the deciding authority or the judge for that matter to
    go behind the issue of the residence card. We agree.

 6. No purpose is served in the Upper Tribunal considering points which are
    academic. That is contrary to the overriding objective, and  no  proper
    reason has been given to us why judicial time should be devoted to such
    an exercise.

 7. The respondent stated also in the skeleton that although  her  position
    on the principles set out in ZA  (Reg.9  EEA  Regs;  abuse  of  rights)
    Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 281 is reserved, the appeal is not resisted.

 8.  In the circumstances, we are satisfied on the basis  of  the  evidence
    before us, that  the  appellants  did  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations and that accordingly their appeals are to
    be allowed.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 9. We remake the decisions by allowing the appeals under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 11 December 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW FINDING

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/07999/2017
                                                               EA/08000/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2019                               |..............................|
|                                              |...........                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               BIBI OMARKHAIL
                          MOHAMMAD ULLAH OMARKHAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:       Mr R de Mello and Mr T Muman, instructed by
                     Guildhall Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

10. The appellants appeal with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C E Burns promulgated on 4  May  2018  dismissing  their
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  issue
    them with residence cards on the basis  that  they  are  the  dependent
    relatives of a British citizen  who  had  previously  exercised  treaty
    rights in Poland.

11. There is no real dispute as to the basic factual scenario of this case.
     The appellants' son, Mr Omarkhail ("the sponsor"), travelled to Poland
    and he was joined by his parents. He  worked  there  for  a  period  in
    running his own business and the parties were all duly issued with  the
    relevant residence cards by the Polish authorities.  The appellants say
    that they lived with their son in rented accommodation from 27  January
    2016 until 20 December 2016; a tenancy agreement was provided  to  that
    effect.

12. On return to the United Kingdom, the appellants applied  for  residence
    cards under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the EEA Regulations").

13. The respondent was not satisfied that the  sponsor  had  in  fact  been
    exercising treaty rights in  Poland  nor  was  he  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of Regulation 9(2) and 9(3) were met in  that  in  summary
    the sponsor had not transferred his centre of life to Poland.

14. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor and found  that  he  was  not
    credible given an inconsistency identified at paragraph [37].  She also
    considered the documentary evidence in the round, finding at  paragraph
    [40] that she was not satisfied given the evidence that he had in  fact
    properly been in business, noting that the  invoices  produced  were  a
    type of document that can be manufactured on a word processor, and also
    a lack of detail of the work done, finally concluding that he  had  not
    undertaken genuine self-employment.

15. The judge then went on to find that Regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations
     could not be used to penalise a Union citizen but that this fell  away
    because she was not satisfied the sponsor had exercised treaty  rights.
    She also found that he had not transferred his residence to Poland  nor
    was his residence there genuine, habitual and permanent, his  permanent
    residence being the marital home in the UK.  She also  considered  that
    as the Polish authorities had issued residence cards to the  appellants
    this could not prevent her making her own assessment as to whether  the
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights based on the evidence before  her.



16. The appellants sought permission to appeal on three principal grounds:

    (i)  that the judge had erred in the fact-making  exercise  in  finding
    that the  self-employment  was  not  genuine  and  effective  but  only
    marginal and ancillary, this being predicated on an  improper  approach
    to the evidence set out at ground 3;

    (ii) that  in  reaching  her  decision  the  judge  took  into  account
    irrelevant matters, in addressing the sub-Articles of  Regulation9  (3)
    as regarding the transfer of the centre of life,  the  centre  of  life
    test being unlawful and contrary to European law, and

    (iii) that the judge erred in concluding that her  decision  would  not
    interfere with  the genuine enjoyment of the  rights  conferred  on  EU
    citizens which it in fact did.

17. The respondent did provide a Rule 24 notice but this adds little.

18. On 18 April 2019 I issued directions in this matter with which  neither
    party has seen fit to comply.  That has in view of the panel  made  our
    job more difficult today as there were specific questions put which  is
    why we set out the directions in the first place and  why  we  directed
    production of a skeleton argument.

19. In submissions Mr de Mello  raised  another  issue  which  is  somewhat
    different from that which has been prefigured in the grounds of  appeal
    and that is, in short, that on a proper understanding of article  5  of
    Directive 2004/38  ("the Directive") as interpreted by McCarthy  [2014]
    EUECJ C-202/13  it is in fact not open to the deciding authority or the
    judge for that matter to go behind the issue of the residence card  and
    thus the judge had compounded the errors in her approach.

20. Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had reached findings  of  fact  which
    were open to her and had not misdirected herself in  law  or  otherwise
    failed properly to apply the law.

21. In reaching our decision we bear in mind that the sole ground of appeal
    is  whether  the  decision  was  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
    obligations under the  EU  treaties.   We  say  that  because  much  of
    Regulation 9 is not underpinned by the Directive and is reliant on  the
    case law interpreting the Treaties.

22. We turn first to the issue of the findings of fact.  We  consider  that
    there are several points at which the findings of fact are questionable
    and are in error.  First, there appears to be no engagement in the last
    two sentences of paragraph [40] with  the  witness  statement  and  the
    evidence produced by the appellant in that he did give  an  explanation
    as to how he was able to conduct his business without speaking  Polish.
    This has not been properly  taken  into  account  by  the  judge.   The
    explanation recorded by her is not the sole explanation.

23. The suggestion that documents can be manufactured on a  word  processor
    is with the greatest of respect irrelevant.  It is difficult  to  think
    of invoices that are not produced with the aid of  a  "word  processor"
    and nothing can turn on that.  There is no indication  that  the  judge
    did ask the appellant to give more detail about the  work  he  did  but
    equally there appears to be no engagement with  what  he  said  in  his
    witness statement about that.

24. Leaving that to one side, we consider also that the  findings  of  fact
    cannot be separated from what is said in ground 2.   We  consider  that
    there is merit in the observation that the centre of life test  has  no
    basis in European law, it does not appear in the Directive, it does not
    appear in the case law and would, if anything, appear to be contrary to
    what the Advocate General said in O and B at paragraphs 100 to 104.

25. In particular, there is no requirement that someone should  have  their
    sole residence in the host member state, nor  is  there  a  requirement
    that any move to that  state  should  be  permanent,  nor  is  there  a
    requirement that somebody should integrate.  Taking these  two  factors
    together we consider that the errors made by the judge with  regard  to
    the findings of fact on the issue of first whether there  had  been  an
    exercise of treaty rights on the facts, and, secondly.  as  to  whether
    that was sufficient in terms of O and B and subsequent  case  law  such
    that the Surinder Singh principles invoked are flawed and must  be  set
    aside.

26. For these reasons we are satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and needs to be  set
    aside.  That  is  irrespective  of  any  issues  to  whether  the  mere
    possession of the residence cards is a sufficient basis such that  that
    would be determinative of the outcome of the application.   That  is  a
    matter which may or may not become necessary depending on how the facts
    are found again, and was a matter which we consider is best dealt  with
    on re-making when the facts are properly established.

    Directions

 1. This appeal will be relisted to be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  As
    agreed with the parties, it will be listed in  Field  House.  The  date
    will be fixed in consultation with counsels' clerks.

 2. The appeal will be listed for 3 hours. It is assumed that there will be
    no further oral evidence and so no interpreter will be booked.  If  the
    appellant wishes to adduce further evidence, oral or otherwise, he must
    make an application pursuant to rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 at least 21 days before the  hearing,  such
    application to be accompanied by the evidence upon which it  is  sought
    to rely.


 3. The appellant must serve on the respondent and on the Upper Tribunal  a
    skeleton argument at least 10 working days prior to the hearing  to  be
    accompanied by an indexed and paginated bundle of authorities


 4. The respondent must serve on the appellant and on the Upper Tribunal  a
    skeleton argument at least 5 working days before the hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 25 July 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
