
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07176/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8th October 2019                 |On: 14th October 2019                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Tanvir Mirza
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Shah, 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  the  13th  January
       1963. He appeals with permission against the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal (Judge Hobson) dated the 7th February 2019  to  dismiss
       his appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
       2016. The Appellant asserts a Surinder Singh right of residence under
       Regulation 9 as the family member of his British wife.

    2. Given the facts I can be brief.  Although Judge Hobson accepted  that
       the Appellant and his wife did live  and  work  in  the  Republic  of
       Ireland between 2015 and 2016 he dismissed the appeal on the  grounds
       that the couple had not "genuinely" transferred their  lives  to  the
       member state.

    3. The Appellant appealed on the grounds that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       had erred in law in its interpretation of the relevant regulation, or
       rather the underlying  provisions  of  the  Directive.   The  written
       grounds of appeal placed reliance on the decision in O and  B  v  The
       Netherlands C456/12, but by the time that the appeal came  before  me
       the Appellant was also able to rely on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in ZA (Reg 9 EEA Regs, abuse of rights)  Afghanistan  [2019]
       UKUT 281 (IAC).

    4. Before me Mr McVeety accepted that ZA is  a  reported  decision,  and
       that if it  is  correct,  the  Appellant  must  win  his  appeal.  He
       nevertheless informed me that the ratio of ZA, if not ZA itself, is a
       matter presently before the Court of Appeal, listed  for  hearing  in
       mid-December. Accordingly the Secretary of State requests  that  this
       appeal  be  adjourned.   Mr  Shah  for  the  Appellant  resisted  the
       application for an adjournment, on the grounds,  presumably,  that  a
       bird in the hand is better than two in the bush. He did so it  having
       been explained to Mr and Mrs Mirza that the Respondent may well apply
       for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against my  decision.



    5. I determined that the appeal should proceed. ZA  is,  at  present,  a
       reported UT decision which is consistent with the authority of O & B.
         As the law stands at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  me,  the
       Appellant must succeed in his appeal, since his 14  months  residence
       in Ireland, where both he and his wife lived and worked,  constituted
       real, effective and substantive residence in that host  member  state
       such that the Surinder Singh criteria  are  fulfilled.   Whether  the
       Secretary of State wishes to appeal is a matter for her.




       Decisions

    6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material  errors  of
       law and it is set aside.

    7. The decision in the appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
       allowed under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
       2016.

    8. There is no order for anonymity.


    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            8th October 2019
