
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/07390/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 March 2018                           |On 13 March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between


                             SEBASTIAN PASTORINI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Knight, Counsel, 1 Pump Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by Mr. Pastorini against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Anthony, promulgated on 24 November 2017, in  which  she
     dismissed Mr. Pastorini's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds allege that the Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal; the Judge applied the wrong  burden  and
    standard of proof and failed to consider proportionality.  Further, the
    refusal to allow or stay the case before a  decision  in  the  case  of
    Cielecki amounted to procedural unfairness.


    I have carefully considered the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  Judge's
    decision, which was made on the papers, as requested by the  appellant.
    The Judge dismissed the appeal in the absence of any evidence from  the
    appellant but without identifying how the respondent had established  a
    prima facie case (save for a reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    respondent's encounter with  the  appellant)  and  without  considering
    proportionality.  I am satisfied that this amounts to an arguable error
    of law.  I can see no application to adjourn, on the  Tribunal's  file,
    pending the decision  in  Cielecki  and  do  not  find  the  Judge  was
    procedurally unfair in failing to adjourn or allow the appeal.


    There is arguable error of law in the decision.  Permission  to  appeal
    is granted."


 3. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

 4. One of the issues discussed related to the papers on the Tribunal  file
    which the Judge had before her.  There is  no  Respondent's  bundle  on
    file, and Mr. Nath did not have a copy before him.  He did not give any
    reason for why he did not have the file before him, but requested  that
    the hearing be adjourned for the Respondent's bundle  to  be  obtained.
    However, given that this was an error of law hearing, and therefore the
    material that was before the Judge when she made her decision  is  what
    is relevant, I considered that it was in the interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the error of law hearing, particularly given the nature of
    the grounds of appeal.


Error of law


  5. I have carefully considered the  grounds  and  the  decision.   I  will
     commence with ground  4  which  states  simply  that  the  Judge  acted
     procedurally unfairly in considering the case.   Contrary  to  what  is
     stated in the grant of permission, there was a request  to  adjourn  at
     the start of the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
     states as follows:


     "Adjourn the Appellant's appeal until the conclusion  of  the  judicial
     review proceedings in the case of R (oao Mariusz Cielecki) v  Secretary
     of State for the Home Department, due to be heard 21-23 November  2017,
     which has been granted permission to apply for judicial review."


  6. At [22] of the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal it refers to the fact
     that the policy under which the decision was made is under challenge in
     the Administrative Court.


  7. There is no reference in the decision to any adjournment request.   The
     Judge gave no consideration to this request  which,  as  stated  above,
     appears right at the start of the grounds of appeal.  It was  submitted
     by Mr. Knight that this had denied the Appellant an opportunity to make
     further submissions as he was  unaware  that  his  application  for  an
     adjournment had been refused, and that the appeal would proceed  to  be
     determined.


  8. The appeal was listed for paper determination.  As stated above,  there
     is no Respondent's bundle on the Tribunal file, and therefore there was
     no Respondent's bundle  before  the  Judge.   The  Judge  proceeded  to
     determine the appeal based on the information provided by the Appellant
     when he lodged his appeal.  As emerged at the hearing  before  me,  the
     IS.151A was not in the bundle before the Judge, although  the  relevant
     part had been copied verbatim in the grounds of appeal at [4].


  9. I find that the failure to consider the request to adjourn made by  the
     Appellant on the grounds that the policy under which the  decision  was
     made was under review, is compounded by the fact that the Judge did not
     have the Respondent's bundle before  her.   It  was  submitted  by  Mr.
     Knight that, in the  many  cases  like  this  that  he  has  seen,  the
     Respondent has not produced anything more than the  type  of  documents
     produced by the Appellant here, i.e. the IS.151A, IS.151B, IS.151D  and
     the IS.96.  What occurs in other  cases  is  of  some,  albeit  limited
     relevance, but in relation to the Appellant's own case, as there is  no
     Respondent's bundle on  file,  I  cannot  make  any  comment.   It  was
     submitted that the Respondent had not provided  any  evidence  to  show
     that grounds existed for taking away EU rights, but it is difficult for
     me to find that no evidence  was  provided  when  the  Judge  made  the
     decision without having a Respondent's bundle on  file,  and  when  she
     made no reference to the lack of Respondent's bundle before her.


 10. The fact that the Judge  proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  in  the
     absence of any Respondent's bundle, given that a request had been  made
     in any event to adjourn, and given that  the  grounds  of  appeal  made
     clear that the burden of proof lay on the Respondent, has arguably  led
     the judge to make further errors in her decision.   In  particular,  at
     [12] she states "It is plain that the circumstances of the respondent's
     encounter with the appellant led the respondent  to  believe  that  the
     appellant was not someone who was engaged in pursuit of  effective  and
     genuine economic activities."  However, there was  no  evidence  before
     her from the Respondent regarding the circumstances  of  the  encounter
     with the Appellant.  There was no evidence  before  the  Judge  of  the
     basis on which the Respondent made her decision.


 11. Further, as pointed out by Mr. Knight, in the IS.151A,  which  although
     was not before the Judge was set out in the grounds of  appeal,  it  is
     unclear whether the Respondent  herself  knew  why  she  had  made  the
     decision, and therefore the lack of her bundle is arguably  still  more
     significant.  It states "you are unable to  provide  evidence  of  your
     arrival date in the United Kingdom/ have been  present  in  the  United
     Kingdom for longer than three months".


 12. I find that the failure to consider the request to adjourn the hearing,
     and the failure thereby to give the opportunity  to  the  Appellant  to
     provide further evidence or submissions prior to the  determination  of
     the appeal, especially given that the Judge did not have a Respondent's
     bundle before her, is a material error of law.


 13. Given that I have found that the Judge made a material error of law  in
     failing  to  adjourn  the  hearing,  and  thereby   the   decision   is
     procedurally unfair, I do not need to proceed to consider grounds 1  to
     3 in any more detail.  The decision in the case of Gureckis [2017] EWHC
     3298 has  now  been  promulgated  quashing  the  Respondent's  guidance
     insofar as it relates to decisions made under  regulation  23(6)(c)  of
     the 2016 Regulations.  The decision in the Appellant's  case  was  made
     under  regulation  23(6)(a).   However  decisions   under   regulations
     23(6)(a) and 23(6)(c) were both covered by the policy guidance, and the
     case of Gureckis is therefore of relevance to this appeal insofar as it
     relates to discrimination and "systematic verification".  This  can  be
     fully examined on a rehearing of the  case,  when  the  Respondent  has
     considered her position.  Should the Respondent decide to withdraw  her
     decision in the light of Gureckis,  it  is  open  for  her  to  do  so.
     However, given that I have found that the failure to adjourn means that
     the Appellant  has  not  had  a  fair  hearing  before  the  First-tier
     Tribunal, having regard to the overriding objective, I therefore  remit
     this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Decision


 14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


 16. On the request of Mr. Knight who is  acting  pro  bono,  it  is  to  be
     remitted to Taylor House for oral hearing.


 17. Any further evidence which the Respondent has relating to the Appellant
     can be provided by her for the remitted hearing.



Signed                                  Date 9 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

