
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07335/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2 August 2019                    |On: 15th August 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              nadeem akbar gill
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Rainbow Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This appeal is linked to another appeal, EA/03221/2018, to the  extent  that
the decisions in both appeals relate to the same  appellant  and  were  both
heard, together, before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow  on  9  November
2018. This appeal relates to the first of the respondent's decisions,  dated
17 August 2017, to remove the appellant from the UK  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 in accordance with section  10  of
the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, by virtue of regulations  23(6)(a)  and
32(2), and pursuant to  regulation  36  of  the  Regulations.  EA/03221/2018
relates to a subsequent decision of the respondent, dated 12 April 2018,  to
refuse to issue the appellant with an  EEA  residence  card  as  the  former
family member of an EEA national who had retained a right  of  residence  in
the UK upon divorce. For reasons which are apparent from  the  decisions  we
have made, we have issued separate decisions for each appeal.  Both  should,
however, be read together.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 10 June 1982. He arrived  in
the UK on 5 October 2010 with leave to enter as a  Tier  4  student  migrant
valid until 22 February 2012. He was granted further leave to  remain  until
10 April 2015 on the same basis, but that leave was  subsequently  curtailed
to expire on 27 September 2014. The appellant met his EEA sponsor,  [GV],  a
Hungarian national, in February 2013 and they were married  on  21  February
2014. On 11 April 2014 the appellant applied for an EEA  residence  card  as
the family member (spouse) of an EEA national. His application  was  refused
on 18 July 2014 on the basis that he was not the family  member  of  an  EEA
national, since  he  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience.  That
decision was based upon the outcome of a  visit  to  the  appellant's  given
address by immigration officers which concluded that neither  the  appellant
nor his spouse had ever resided there.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal  was  heard  on  11
February  2015  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro.  Neither   the
appellant nor his spouse attended to give oral evidence  but  they  provided
written statements, in which the appellant claimed to have moved to  another
address with his spouse shortly after making his application, in June  2014,
and had forgotten to inform the respondent of  his  change  of  address.  He
produced evidence of their residence at both addresses. The judge  accepted,
from that evidence, that the  appellant  and  his  spouse  had  been  living
together at the former address in February and March 2014  and  at  the  new
address since at least 4 July 2014. The judge  concluded  on  the  basis  of
that evidence that the appellant's marriage was genuine and she allowed  the
appeal.

There is no evidence before us to show that the respondent sought to  appeal
that decision and a residence card was issued to the appellant  on  5  March
2015, valid for five years until 5 March 2020.

On 17  August  2017  a  visit  was  made  by  immigration  officers  to  the
appellant's  home.  The  notes  of  that  visit  have  been  produced.   The
immigration officers noted no evidence of the  EEA  national's  presence  in
the property. They noted that the appellant was sharing a room with  another
male and there was no evidence of any female clothing or belongings  in  the
room. The immigration officers considered that messages on  the  appellant's
mobile telephone from his wife were not affectionate and did not  appear  to
be messages between partners but gave the impression of an arrangement.  The
appellant claimed that his wife had gone to Hungary for a visit and was  due
back on 22 August 2017 and that they were still  together.  The  immigration
officers considered there to be no satisfactory  evidence  of  a  subsisting
relationship. They arrested the appellant and took him into  detention.  The
appellant was served with removal papers under section 10 of  the  1999  Act
on the basis that he did not have, or had ceased to have, a right to  reside
under the 2016 Regulations.

The notice of liability to removal served on the  appellant  confirmed  that
removal was considered on the basis that he was:

    "A)    by virtue of regulations 23(6)(a) and 32(2) a person in  respect
         of whom removal directions may be given in accordance with  section
         10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as:

             a person who does not have or who has ceased to have  a  right
             to reside  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2016."

The "Specific Statement of Reasons" given in  the  notice  of  liability  to
removal served on the appellant stated as follows:

         "You are specifically  considered  a  person  who  has  engaged  in
         conduct which appears to be intended to circumvent the  requirement
         to be a qualified person, because you were  granted  leave  on  the
         basis of a relationship with an EU national, when  encountered  you
         were  unable  to  give  a  credible  account  of   any   subsisting
         relationship with the claimed partner.  You  also  failed  to  give
         satisfactory evidence of the claimed relationship or the absence of
         your partner."

That was followed by a Decision to Remove in accordance with section  10  of
the 1999 Act, which applied by virtue of regulations 26(6)(a) and  32(2)  of
the EEA Regulations, dated 17 August 2017, the first decision under  appeal.


Subsequent to  that  decision,  which  had  the  effect  of  curtailing  the
appellant's right of residence under  the  EEA  Regulations,  the  appellant
made a further application for a residence card under  the  EEA  Regulations
on the basis of the same relationship, on 11 September 2017, by  which  time
he had been released on bail. In that application  he  stated  that  he  was
separated from his sponsor and that divorce proceedings were being  pursued.
He produced a petition for divorce dated 4 September 2017.  The  application
was refused on 11 December 2017, on the basis that he had failed to  provide
a valid ID card or passport for his sponsor and that his  application  could
not be considered as one for a retained right of residence as there  was  no
decree absolute. The decision was not an appealable one.

The appellant then made an application on 23 January 2018  for  a  residence
card on the basis of retained rights upon divorce, following the issue of  a
decree absolute on 5 January 2018.  That  application  was  refused  by  the
respondent in a decision dated 12 April 2018, which is the  second  decision
under appeal in the case of EA/03221/2018. In that decision  the  respondent
noted that the evidence  demonstrated  that  the  appellant's  marriage  had
lasted over three years and that he and the EEA national  sponsor  had  both
lived in the UK for at least one year during their marriage. The  respondent
was also satisfied that the  appellant  had  continued  to  exercise  treaty
rights as an EEA national  since  the  date  of  the  divorce.  However  the
respondent considered that the appellant had not provided adequate  evidence
that his EEA national former spouse was a qualified person or  had  a  right
of permanent residence on the date of the termination of the  marriage.  The
respondent considered that he could only be  satisfied,  from  the  evidence
produced, that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights from  1  April  2014
to 19 August 2017 but not on the date of divorce  on  5  January  2018.  The
respondent made it clear that the genuineness  of  the  former  relationship
had not been considered, given that the  application  failed  on  the  first
basis, but noting that the appellant had an outstanding appeal in regard  to
the genuineness of the former relationship.

The appellant appealed against both decisions  and,  as  stated  above,  the
appeals were linked and heard together before Judge  Callow  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal on 9 November 2018.

Judge Callow considered the appeals on the basis that it was apparent,  from
the respondent's decision, based upon the immigration officers'  note,  that
the respondent believed the appellant's marriage to be one  of  convenience.
The judge noted from the appellant's statement that he was claiming to  have
separated from his wife on 15 July 2017 and that that  was  the  reason  why
she was not present at the immigration officers' visit in August  2017.  The
judge  rejected  that  claim  and  concluded,  from  the  evidence  in   the
immigration officers' note, that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  and
that the  appellant  had  ceased  to  have  a  right  to  reside  under  the
Regulations. The judge did not consider it necessary to address  the  second
decision, given his finding that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.  He
dismissed both appeals.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  in  regard
to both appeals on the basis that it was not open to the judge to find  that
the marriage was one of convenience. The grounds assert that the  respondent
had only stated that the marriage was not subsisting on 17 August  2017  and
there had been no consideration by the judge of the  appellant's  intentions
at the time of the marriage.

Permission was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was  subsequently
granted in the Upper Tribunal on 20 March 2019 by Judge Chalkley.

The matter then came before us. We made  some  initial  observations  before
hearing from the parties  in  relation  to  both  appeals.  As  each  raises
different issues, we address in this decision only the  matters  related  to
the appeal against the removal decision of 17 August 2017.

We put it to Mr Bramble that we could not see how he was able to defend  the
respondent's decision of 17 August 2017. The decision  had  been  made  with
reference to regulation 23(6)(a) on the basis that  "that  person  does  not
have or ceases to have a right  to  reside  under  these  Regulations".  The
reason given for the  decision  was  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
appellant's relationship was subsisting, but that was not a  requirement  of
the EEA Regulations. The relevant issue under the  Regulations  was  whether
the marriage, when entered into, had been one of convenience at  that  time,
and the Tribunal had previously found that it was not.  Mr  Iqbal  confirmed
that that was the appellant's case in the appeal before us.

We gave Mr Bramble some time to consider our observations. He accepted  that
Judge Callow had erred in law by  failing  to  bring  the  findings  of  the
previous Tribunal into play in regard to  the  marriage  not  being  one  of
convenience, but he submitted that the case should be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made. His response to  our  view  of
the respondent's removal decision itself was that the decision was based  on
a misuse of rights. Although he agreed that the reasons given differed  from
a conclusion of a marriage of convenience, he  submitted  that  the  reasons
stated as much indirectly and that the inference had to be that the  refusal
was made on the basis of the marriage being one of convenience. We  did  not
agree with Mr Bramble and we proceeded to  make  a  decision  setting  aside
Judge Callow's decision and re-making the decision by allowing  the  appeal.
Our reasons, as we explained to Mr Bramble, are as follows.

The relevant legal provisions

So far as is relevant, the EEA Regulations 2016 state as follows:

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


         23.-

         (6)      Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an EEA national who has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             (a) that person does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to
             reside under these Regulations;

             (b) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 27; or

             (c) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified on grounds  of  misuse  of  rights  under
             regulation 26(3)."

              "Misuse of a right to reside


              26.-

         (3)      The Secretary of State may take an  EEA  decision  on  the
         grounds of misuse of rights where there are reasonable  grounds  to
         suspect the misuse of a right to reside and it is proportionate  to
         do so. "

         "Person subject to removal


         32.-

         (2)      Where a  decision  is  taken  to  remove  a  person  under
         regulation 23(6)(a) or (c), the person is to be treated as  if  the
         person were a person to whom section 10(1) of the 1999 Act applies,
         and section 10 of that Act (removal of certain  persons  unlawfully
         in the United Kingdom) is to apply accordingly."

Findings and reasons

Whilst the notice of immigration decision dated 17 August 2017  giving  rise
to  the  appeal  refers  to  regulations   23(6)(a)/23(6)(c)   pursuant   to
regulation 26(3) and 32(2) of  the  EEA  Regulations  as  alternatives,  the
notice of liability to removal makes it absolutely clear that  the  decision
was made under 23(6)(a) of the Regulations  (ceasing  to  have  a  right  to
reside) and not 23(6)(c) (misuse of rights). Therefore we cannot  accept  Mr
Bramble's suggestion that this was a misuse of rights decision.

Neither can we accept his suggestion that the inference of the  decision  is
that the refusal  was  based  on  the  appellant's  marriage  being  one  of
convenience, when the wording of the decision is  clearly  focussed  on  the
question  of  a  subsisting  relationship.  We  do  not  dispute  that   the
respondent was entitled to have concerns about the appellant's  relationship
given the apparently inconsistent evidence about his wife's whereabouts  and
his living arrangements. However the decision was made on the basis  of  the
appellant's  current  circumstances,  with  no  reference  to  the  marriage
initially entered into having been one  of  convenience.  Had  the  decision
been one made under the immigration rules the  question  of  the  subsisting
nature of the relationship would of course have been  entirely  relevant  to
the appellant's eligibility  for  continued  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.
However that was not a relevant consideration  under  the  EEA  Regulations,
where the appellant was entitled to continue to reside in  the  UK  whatever
the state of his relationship, provided that he was  still  married  to  his
EEA national sponsor and that the  marriage  itself  had  not  been  one  of
convenience when entered into. It may be  that  the  respondent  has  proper
reasons for concluding that the marriage was one of  convenience,  and  that
the previous decision of Judge O'Garro based on the evidence before her  has
been displaced by further evidence relating to the marriage at the  time  it
was entered into, but that was not the case before the  judge,  it  was  not
provided as the basis for the removal  decision  and  it  cannot  simply  be
inferred from the reasons given in the removal decision.

Accordingly it seems to us that the respondent's decision was not one  which
was correctly and lawfully made under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  that  the
decision is simply unsustainable and indefensible.  Judge  Callow  erred  in
law by considering it to be one lawfully made under the EEA Regulations  and
by considering that a decision, that the marriage was  one  of  convenience,
was open to him to make, when it clearly was not.

For all these reasons we set aside Judge Callow's decision and  re-make  the
decision  by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that   the
respondent's decision was not in accordance with the EEA Regulations 2016.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. We set aside the decision and allow the  appellant's  appeal
under the EEA Regulations 2016.


Signed: [pic]                           Dated:      5 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
