
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07143/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 12th December 2018                |On 9th January 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                               Muhammad Nadeem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroup of Counsel, instructed by Whitefield
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who on 25th January, 2017
applied for a permanent residence card on the basis of retained right of
residence because he was the ex-spouse of an EEA national, Virginia Mendes
("the spouse") in accordance with the Immigration (European Economic Area)
Regulations 2016 ("the Regulations)".  The appellant married the spouse on
1st June, 2012 and their decree absolute was on 10th February, 2016.

2.   The Secretary of State refused the application on 1st August, 2017 for
several reasons.  The first was that the appellant had never declared to
the Rochdale Register Office that he had previously married and divorced
and therefore the marriage was "invalid".  Secondly, the marriage was one
of convenience because his answers at interview conducted on 21st June,
2017 were, it was claimed, inconsistent with answers given by the sponsor.
Thirdly, they claimed that the sponsor had been working for a firm called
ABC Plastic Recycling Limited and submitted payslips on 31st January, 2016
to 29th February, 2016.  However, interdepartmental checks indicated that
the sponsor had never actually been employed by that company.  Fourthly,
the appellant claimed that the sponsor worked for the appellant's own
company from April, 2013 until February, 2015 but interdepartmental checks
indicated that the sponsor had worked for the appellant's own company until
5th April, 2017, and lastly, the appellant failed to prove he had been
working in the United Kingdom since he was divorced on 10th February, 2016.

3.   The judge was satisfied that the appellant and sponsor were legally
married and that they were divorced on 10th February, 2016.  He was not
satisfied that the marriage was one of convenience but he did not accept
that the appellant had proved to the requisite standard that the sponsor
was an EEA national exercising treaty rights at the time of divorce and
"had done so for the preceding five years".  To the extent that he required
the sponsor to have been exercising treaty rights for a period of five
years he erred in law.  He found that the documents produced by the sponsor
did not establish that she was exercising treaty rights for five years and
he believed therefore that the application failed.  As I have indicated,
that was an error of law.

4.   The judge went on to find that the appellant had not worked since
January, 2017.  The appellant had adduced a letter written from the Home
Office to his solicitors dated 10th February, 2017 which said: "At this
stage we are unable to confirm your right to work in the UK.  This will
depend on the outcome of the application.  This is because you have not
provided original documentation ...".  Throughout the proceedings the
appellant claimed that this sentence had been understood to mean that he
was not entitled to work and therefore, he had stopped working immediately
following receipt of this letter.  The judge did not accept that the
appellant had misunderstood the terms of the letter because he had
throughout the proceedings been advised by solicitors.  The judge concluded
that the appellant had not worked since the date of his divorce as required
by the EEA Regulations and therefore the appeal failed under the
Regulations.

5.   The determination was challenged and in granting leave Judge Pitt said
that it was arguable that the case of Baigazieva v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 showed that the wrong date for
assessing the employment of the appellant's ex-wife had been used and that
the grounds concerning the ex-spouse having to exercise treaty rights for
five years and the appellant being precluded from working by the respondent
were also arguable.

6.   Mr Balroup told me that the time of the initiation of the divorce
    proceedings was relevant.  The decree absolute was granted on 16th
    February, 2016 but page 22 of the appellant's bundle showed that
    proceedings had been started earlier.  Unfortunately, there is no date
    on page 22 in the bundle and the date is actually on the original of
    the document at page 22, but has not been reproduced in the bundle.
    The date is 16th November, 2015, but this evidence was not before the
    judge.  Mr Balroup submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph 24
    of his determination by suggesting that the appellant was required to
    show that the sponsor had been exercising treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom at the time of the divorce and had done so for the preceding
    five years.  That was wrong.  I agree. It was only necessary to show
    that

         "... prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the termination
         of the marriage or the civil partnership, the marriage or civil
         partnership had lasted for at least three years and the parties to
         the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the United Kingdom
         for at least one year during its duration"

 7.  Mr Balroup suggested that the appellant had stopped working following
receipt by his solicitors of the letter from the Home Office of 10th
February, 2017, but that he had been working at the time of the start of
the divorce proceedings and indeed was still working at the time of the
decree absolute.

8.   Mr Bates accepted that there were errors made in the determination by
Judge Thorne.  He thought he was deciding a case involving a permanent
right.  It was in fact a residence certificate application.  The appellant
needed to establish that he had a retained right of residence.  That would
require the appellant to establish when the divorce proceedings were
initiated and whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights, but the
difficulty with this is that the evidence as to when the divorce
proceedings were initiated was not before the judge.  At the time of
divorce, the appellant needed to show that he had a retained right and that
he had been working but, given that it was an application for a residence
card, the judge needed to be satisfied that the appellant was still
exercising treaty rights in the place of the sponsor, so there was no
material error because the appellant was still exercising treaty rights at
the date of hearing.

9.   So, there was no materiality in the errors committed by the judge,
because the appellant was not still exercising treaty rights at the date of
the hearing.  He relied on the decision in Tommy Bustamante Delos Reyes v
The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC),
where the Tribunal decided that whether a person qualifies as a dependant
under the Regulations is to be determined at the date of decision on the
basis of evidence produced to the respondent or, on appeal, the date of the
hearing on the basis of evidence produced to the Tribunal.

10.  Responding briefly, Counsel accepted that there were clear errors.
The appellant made application under Regulation 10(5).  He retained his
right because he was working until 10th February, 2016.  Mr Bates told me
that he accepted that the appellant needs to show that he was working at
the time of the decision or in the case of an appeal at the date of the
hearing and because the appellant had failed to establish that he was still
working as at the date of the hearing before the judge (and in fact had
given evidence to the effect that he had ceased working in January 2017) he
was not entitled to retained rights.

11.  I granted Mr Balroup a brief adjournment in order that he could take
further instructions.  I proceeded to hear other cases on my list and,
having concluded one of them, invited Mr Balroup to address me further.  He
told me that in 2015 the appellant had been detained at Manchester Airport
when returning from holiday and at that time was served with Home Office
form IS.96 and was told that he was required to report once a week.  Form
IS.96 also advised him that he was not allowed to work.  However, the
appellant continued working.  Mr Balroup suggested that the decision of the
Tribunal in Reyes was not applicable in relation to retained rights.

12.  Responding briefly, Mr Bates suggested that the appellant needed to
continue to demonstrate that he qualified in place of the sponsor as at the
date of the hearing before the judge and clearly in this appeal did not.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  I have already pointed out that the determination contains errors of
law.  The question for me to decide is whether or not they were material
errors of law and I have been guided by the decision of the Upper Tribunal
in Reyes.  There, at paragraphs 32 to 35 the Tribunal said this:

"32. We are unable to accept that a person is entitled to succeed under
Regulation 7 if able to show dependency at the date of application but not
at the date of decision.


33.  As already noted, the test of dependency as found in Regulation 7 (and
also in Regulation 8) is expressed in the present tense: see [19] above.
As a result the appellant would only have been entitled to succeed in his
application to the respondent if he had been able to show on the basis of
the evidence produced to the respondent that he was dependent as at the
date of decision.


34.  How is the position affected once a person has been refused by the
respondent and lodges an appeal?  In our view, the relevant date for
deciding whether he met the requirements must then become the date of
hearing.  As a result of our finding that the First-tier Tribunal judge's
decision was set aside and our giving directions making clear that the
appellant was required to produce further evidence of his situation once he
had got a job in Kent, the relevant date for deciding whether the
requirements of Regulation 7 are met becomes the date of the hearing before
us.  The 2006 Regulations expressly apply to EEA appeals the provisions of
Section 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002: see
paragraph 1 of Schedule 1.


35.  Hence, even accepting that the appellant was a dependant at the date
of application, the evidence, as at the date of hearing before us, was
insufficient to satisfy us that the appellant had remained a dependant
after he got a job in Kent circa December, 2013."     [My emphasis]

15.  At paragraph 19 of Reyes the Tribunal decided, having reviewed
authorities on the point, that the test of dependency was a purely factual
test.

16.  Regulation 10 of the Regulations is as follows:

         "10. -   (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained
             the right of residence" means, subject to paragraphs  (8)  and
             (9), a person who satisfies a condition in paragraph (2), (3),
             (4) or (5).


             (2)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-


                  (a)  was a family member of a qualified person or of an
                  EEA national with a right of permanent residence when the
                  qualified person or the EEA national with the right of
                  permanent residence died;


                  (b)  resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these Regulations for at least the year immediately before
                  the death of the qualified person or the EEA national with
                  a right of permanent residence; and


                  (c)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).


             (3)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-


                  (a)  is the direct descendant of-


                      (i)  a qualified person or an EEA national with a
                      right of permanent residence who has died;


                      (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person on
                      ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom;


                      (iii)    the spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                      person or EEA national described in sub-paragraph (i)
                      immediately preceding that qualified person or EEA
                      national's death; or


                      (iv) the spouse or civil partner of the person
                      described in sub-paragraph (ii); and


                  (b)  was attending an educational course in the United
                  Kingdom immediately before the qualified person or the EEA
                  national with a right of permanent residence died, or
                  ceased to be a qualified person, and continues to attend
                  such a course.


             (4)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person is the
             parent with actual  custody  of  a  child  who  satisfies  the
             condition in paragraph (3).


             (5)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-




                  (a)  ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or
                  an EEA national with a right of permanent residence on the
                  termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;


                  (b)  was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these Regulations at the date of the termination;


                  (c)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


                  (d)  either-


                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the proceedings for
                      the termination of the marriage or the civil
                      partnership, the marriage or civil partnership had
                      lasted for at least three years and the parties to
                      the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the
                      United Kingdom for at least one year during its
                      duration;


                      (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the
                      qualified person or the EEA national with a right of
                      permanent residence has custody of a child of that
                      qualified person or EEA national;


                      (iii)    the former spouse or civil partner of the
                      qualified person or the EEA national with a right of
                      permanent residence has the right of access to a
                      child of that qualified person or EEA national, where
                      the child is under the age of 18 and where a court
                      has ordered that such access must take place in the
                      United Kingdom; or


                      (iv) the continued right of residence in the United
                      Kingdom of A is warranted by particularly difficult
                      circumstances, such as where A or another family
                      member has been a victim of domestic violence whilst
                      the marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.


             (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-


                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if the person were
                  an EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a
                  self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or


                  (b)  is the family member of a person who falls within
                  paragraph (a).


             (7)  In this regulation, "educational course" means  a  course
             within the scope of Article 10 of Council Regulation (EU)  No.
             492/2011.


             (8)  A person ("P") does not satisfy a condition in  paragraph
             (2), (3), (4) or (5) if, at the first time P  would  otherwise
             have satisfied the  relevant  condition,  P  had  a  right  of
             permanent residence under regulation 15.


             (9)  A family member who has retained the right  of  residence
             ceases to enjoy that status on acquiring a right of  permanent
             residence under regulation 15."

17.  Subparagraph 6 has to be satisfied and this is that the appellant is
not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA national, be a worker, a
self-employed person or a self-sufficient person under Regulation 6; or (b)
is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph (a).  So, just
as in paragraph 19 of Reyes, the requirement of the Regulation is one of
the present, not the past.  The Regulations are speaking about the present
tense and I believe therefore that the judge was correct to dismiss the
appellant's appeal on the basis that he had not worked since January, 2017
and was not therefore working as at the date of the commencement of his
matrimonial proceedings.

18.  It follows that I find that the judge did, for the reasons I have
given, err in law, but that his errors were not material and his finding
shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal.




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal.               Date: 19 December 2018

