
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/07528/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following       | On 08 March 2019                  |
|hearing                                  |                                   |
|On 21 January 2019                       |                                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Muhammad Jalal Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr C Taroni, Counsel, instructed by Richmond
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who was born on 10 April 1984 is a national of  Pakistan.
    He arrived in this country with a student visa and was last issued with
    leave to remain as a student on 14 February 2013, which leave was valid
    until 20 March 2015.  However, this leave was curtailed on 1 July  2014
    until 26 August 2014 because the college he was studying at  lost  its
    licence.

 2. It  is  the  appellant's  case  that  by  this  time  he  had  begun  a
    relationship with one Denise Duffy, an Irish  national  who  (which  is
    accepted on behalf of the respondent) was exercising treaty  rights  in
    the UK and they married on 6 August 2014, that is  after  the  date  on
    which notice had been given that leave was to be curtailed  but  before
    the leave was actually curtailed.

 3. As is normal in these circumstances in order to consider whether or not
    this was a genuine marriage, the appellant and his wife were invited to
    attend for interview, following which a decision was made to refuse the
    application. The basis of refusal was that  the  respondent  considered
    largely as a result of what were said to be inconsistent answers  given
    in interview that the marriage was a sham marriage, that  is  that  the
    parties did not have a genuine relationship with each other and did not
    in fact intend to live permanently with each other.  Reference will  be
    made to these discrepancies below.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  30
    March 2016 but in a decision and reasons promulgated on 12  April  2016
    Judge  Moxon  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.    The   appellant's
    applications both to the first and Upper-tier Tribunals for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper-tier Tribunal were refused  respectively  on  20
    September  2016  and  17  November  2016  and  shortly  thereafter  the
    appellant was appeal rights exhausted.

 5. Some four or five months only after being appeal rights exhausted on 28
    April 2017  the  appellant  applied  again  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.  The basis  of
    the application was that contrary to what had been found by Judge Moxon
    (to which reference will be made below) he  was  indeed  in  a  genuine
    relationship with Ms Duffy and that it was indeed  a  genuine  marriage
    and had been from its inception.  An alternative argument is made  that
    even if the marriage were  found  to  be  not  a  genuine  one  at  its
    inception, nonetheless the relationship became a genuine one  and  even
    if for technical reasons that would not entitle him to a residence card
    as a family member (because in these circumstances the  marriage  would
    still be treated as a sham marriage having  been  not  genuine  at  its
    inception), nonetheless he would be entitled to a residence  permit  as
    an extended family member because by this time  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Duffy.

 6. This application was refused by the respondent in a decision made on 23
    August 2017 and  the  appellant's  appeal  against  this  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McGrade  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 16 July 2018 following a hearing at Taylor House
    on 21 June 2018.  The  appellant  now  appeals  against  this  decision
    pursuant to leave granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  on
    22 November 2018, leave having previously been refused by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. It is instructive to refer to the reasons given in the  refusal  letter
    in which detailed reference is made to the  reasons  why  the  original
    application had been refused.  I cite below extracts from  the  refusal
    letter in which reference is made to the earlier decision in which  the
    respondent had considered that the relationship was not a  genuine  one
    but that the marriage was one of convenience:

         "On 8 December 2014 Immigration Officers visited  the  address  you
         claim to share with your sponsor,  because  nobody  was  home.   An
         officer called you on your mobile and you  informed  him  that  you
         were in Birmingham with your sponsor and would be back in two-three
         weeks.  The officer asked if he could talk with  Denise  Duffy  and
         was told that she was inside and unable to talk.

         A second visit was carried  out  on  5/1/14,  again  there  was  no
         answer.  The officer spoke to a neighbour who said they  had  never
         seen any females  coming  or  going  from  your  address.   It  was
         confirmed that you were the only  person  living  at  the  address.
         However, you had not  been  seen  there  since  24/12/14.   Several
         attempts were made to call your mobile but each time the  line  was
         unanswered.

         In accordance with Regulation  20B  this  office  is  empowered  to
         utilise methods from which to verify your right of residence in the
         United Kingdom under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (as
         amended, 2014).  Regulation 20B states ...

             '[Reference is made there to the right of  the  respondent  to
             invite an appellant to attend an interview and provide various
             other evidence] ...'.

         Upon assessing your application  and  the  evidence  provided  this
         office sought to invite both yourself and your EEA national sponsor
         to a marriage interview in order to verify the authenticity of  the
         claimed relationship.

         [Reference is then made to the attendance of both the appellant and
         his 'wife' to these interviews] ...

         Upon assessing the interview transcripts  it  is  highlighted  that
         there is a litany of discrepancies between the  answers  which  you
         and your sponsor  have  given  to  questions  ranging  between  the
         subject of the marriage proposal, the  wedding,  family  and  other
         areas.  It would appear appropriate to note that due to the  extent
         and number of the  discrepancies,  this  refusal  letter  will  not
         specifically  address  every  discrepancy,  rather  highlight   the
         significant number of key discrepancies which have been  deemed  to
         fatally contradict your claim to be in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with Denise Duffy.

         You claim to have met your sponsor  on  Brighton  Pier  in  October
         2013, to have moved in with her just a month later.    You  married
         on 6 August 2014.

         You both told the interviewer that when you met  your  sponsor  was
         letting a room from a family at [     Road].   You  joined  her  in
         November 2013.  You claimed to share the house  with  Umar,  Miriam
         and their son Mustafa  and  a  daughter  whose  name  you  couldn't
         recall.  Denise Duffy who claims to  have  lived  at  the  property
         longer than yourself, did not know the name of  any  of  the  other
         occupants.  She claims the property was shared with a mum, dad  and
         their two teenage sons.

         You said that you lived in the front bedroom  upstairs  and  shared
         that floor with the teenage girl and boy.  The parents lived in the
         room on the right at the front of the house.

         Your sponsor said your room was on the ground  floor  at  the  back
         looking over the back garden.  She stated that she didn't know  the
         arrangements  upstairs  as  she  had  never  been  upstairs.    The
         interviewing officer drew a picture  of  the  house  to  avoid  any
         confusion about the layout.

         This is a clear example of an attempt to use  deception.  You  both
         told the officer that you shared a property  with  a  family  at  [
         Road] however when asked for basic details  about  the  family  and
         your living arrangements the story fell apart.

         When asked basic questions about each other's families you answered
         incorrectly.  You told the interviewer that you grew  up  with  two
         brothers, one sister and your mother.  Your wife  stated  that  you
         only had one brother and didn't have any sisters.

         You told the interviewer that both your wife's parents  had  passed
         away.  That she had three brothers who lived  together.   You  were
         only able to recall the names  of  two  of  them,  Mike  and  Joye.
         Denise Duffy said her mother was alive and lived with  two  of  her
         brothers, the third lives separately.  She confirmed their names as
         Michael, Declan and Joey.  It is reasonable  to  expect  a  genuine
         couple to have been able to answer this question.

         When asked further questions about meeting  each  other's  families
         again your answers did not correspond.  You have a cousin in the UK
         named Amin you say that you introduced him to your  wife  when  you
         bumped into him at a shopping centre in November  2013.  Your  wife
         claimed that she met Amin when you visited his  house  together  in
         January/February 2014.  When asked you said  your  wife  had  never
         been to Amin's place.

         You say you introduced your sponsor to your brother,  Behram,  when
         he came to visit you in Brighton.  Behram's wife is  called  Raheer
         and their son is A.  You told the interviewer that you had  visited
         them at their home in London with your wife twice.

         Your sponsor said she had only met Behram once.  This was when  you
         visited him in London.  She couldn't name his wife or child.

         Consideration has been given to your individual responses.  This is
         not a case of two people  recording  an  event  differently.   Your
         answers do not correspond and in  parts  actually  contradict  each
         other.

         The interviewer next asked question about memorial celebrations you
         have shared.  You were each asked about your celebrations over  the
         Christmas period.  You told the interviewer that you had a 12  inch
         tree in your bedroom which you decorated with light.  You  had  put
         the tree up for the two Christmases you had  been  together.   Your
         sponsor said you did not own a tree.

         You told the interviewer that your sponsor had travelled to Ireland
         from Christmas 2014.  She left on the 24th and returned  on  either
         26/27 of December.  You added that this  was  the  only  time  your
         sponsor had left the UK since you had been a couple.

         Your sponsor said that she went to Ireland from 23 to  26  December
         2014.  She added that she had also been for a weekend in  September
         2014 when it was her nephew's birthday and that she went for a  few
         days the Christmas of 2013.

         When asked if you exchanged gift for Christmas 2014  you  told  the
         officer that you did so before your  wife  went  to  Ireland.   You
         claim to have brought your wife a green shirt and that she gave you
         a black jacket.

         Your sponsor said that the exchange happened on her return and  you
         gave her a watch and she gave you a black jacket.

         When asked about the proposal your answers differed  significantly.
         You say you proposed on 1 June 2014 you had been to the  beach  and
         on your way back you sat in the Royal Pavilion gardens on a  bench,
         you proposed on bended knee.  The ring was a plain gold  band  with
         no stones or detail the ring was not in any  box.   Afterwards  you
         say you went to Burger King then home.

         Your sponsor said you had been walking around, went for a drink and
         window shopping.  It was a hot day so you went to the  gardens  and
         were lying on the grass when you asked her.  She says you presented
         her with a gold ring which had a red stone  surrounded  with  white
         diamond like stones, like a flower.  It was in a white box with red
         velvet and a clear lid.  She said you did not go down on one  knee.
         She recalls that you went straight home, didn't stop  for  anything
         to eat and she drank lots of whisky at home.

         You both said that the witnesses at your wedding  were  Amin,  your
         cousin and Umar, the father of the family  you  shared  that  house
         with.

         You claim that your brother, his wife and son  also  attended  with
         the Miriam and Mustafa from [       Road].  Your wife  says  Miriam
         and Mustafa were the only other guests.

         You say your sponsor did not work on her last birthday.   You  gave
         her a watch and a card when she woke up about 10 a.m.  You had tea,
         coffee and pancakes.

         Your sponsor claims that she did work on her birthday when she came
         home you gave her a black and gold necklace.  She thought  you  had
         gone to the pub for drinks later.

         You both claim to have exchanged gifts on New Year's Eve.  She  got
         another gold and black necklace and you a pair of jeans.   You  say
         you stayed home and were both asleep for  midnight.   You  say  you
         went to Brighton Marina for a curry  and  drinks.   Afterwards  you
         went home and were in bed aware (sic) at midnight.

         It is reasonable to expect a genuine couple to be  able  to  recall
         the events of recently occurring major celebrations in their lives.



         You have told us that your sponsor is exercising her treaty  rights
         as a self-employed cleaner working in private houses.  Your sponsor
         says she takes taxis to work.  You claim that she either  walks  or
         gets  on  the  bus  with  her  equipment  which  includes  cleaning
         products, a small vacuum cleaner and a mop and bucket.

         You claim that your sponsor works Monday to Friday and last  worked
         on Thursday.  Your sponsor says she works Monday  to  Saturday  and
         last worked on Friday.

         You told the interviewer that your sponsor didn't keep receipt  for
         the business.  You say she visits her accountant ... once  a  month
         and that she last saw them two weeks ago.

         Your wife said that she keeps all her receipts for her  accountant,
         Accountax whom she sometimes speaks with on the phone.

         Denise Duffy is an educated woman who  has  studied  economics  and
         business at university.  She informed the interviewer that she also
         works for Universal Study and that last  Monday  she  was  tutoring
         students at her office in Brighton.

         You claimed that last Monday your sponsor was studying online for a
         job as a support worker that she is due to start in April.

         Lastly you were asked about driving.  You told the interviewer that
         you passed your driving test on 13 August 2013.  Denise Duffy  said
         she didn't think you could drive or had any licence.  You say  that
         your sponsor can't  drive  and  doesn't  even  have  a  provisional
         licence.  She claims that she is able to  drive  and  does  have  a
         provisional licence.

         In summary, it is abundantly clear from the details outlined  above
         that you have fatally and irreparably damaged  the  credibility  of
         your claim to be in a genuine relationship with Denise Duffy".

 8. The appellant had appealed against this decision  but  this  appeal  as
    already noted above had been dismissed by Judge Moxon and permission to
    appeal was refused both by the First and Upper-tier Tribunals.

 9. In addition to repeating the claim which had been refused earlier  (the
    appeal  against  which  decision  had  been  dismissed)  the  appellant
    provided some further evidence in particular a joint tenancy  agreement
    which predated the decision of Judge Moxon dated 9 June 2014  and  also
    some bank statements in his own name which showed that he  lived  at  [
                      ].  He also submitted separate bank statements in  Ms
    Duffy's name for the same address as the Virgin Media bill.

10. In the decision letter the respondent set out the basis upon which this
    subsequent application was refused, noting as follows:

         "It is this department's belief that if you were attempting to show
         that you were in a genuine relationship after being deemed to be in
         one of convenience then  you  would  ensure  you  provided  copious
         [evidence] of joint cohabitation covering 2014 to date".

11. The respondent did not consider that the subsequent evidence  submitted
    was sufficient to alter the view originally taken which  was  that  the
    appellant and Ms Duffy were not in a genuine relationship.  It has  not
    been disputed that they reside in the same address.

12. The appeal against this decision was dismissed by Judge McGrade and  as
    already noted it is this decision which is  now  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

13. The basis of the appeal can be summarised succinctly.  The first ground
    is that the judge misstated the burden of proof when at paragraph 2  he
    stated that "the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the  standard
    of proof required is the balance of probabilities".  It  is  of  course
    well understood that  although  the  burden  of  proof  in  a  case  is
    generally on the appellant, where parties have  as  a  matter  of  fact
    undergone a ceremony of marriage and the  respondent  seeks  to  assert
    that that is a marriage of convenience, the burden is on the respondent
    to establish on the balance of probabilities that that is so.  However,
    it was accepted by both parties (as referred to at paragraph 6 of Judge
    McGrade's decision) that in accordance with usual Devaseelan principles
    "the  starting  point  for  my  determination  should  be  the  earlier
    determination".  That decision is then set out  and  as  Judge  McGrade
    notes at paragraph  7 and is apparent from the large extracts from  the
    refusal letter set out above

         "The determination records a number of  unexplained  consistencies,
         which First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon found to be material  [which]
         include the fact that the appellant suggested he grew up  with  two
         brothers and one sister,  while  his  sponsor  stated  he  had  one
         brother and no sisters [and that] the  sponsor  stated  her  mother
         lives in Ireland and  the  appellant  has  met  her  [whereas]  the
         appellant indicated the sponsor's mother was dead".

14. The judge also notes that

         "The parties gave conflicting accounts of what happened after their
         first date, the location of the room they occupied at [      Road],
         which members of the appellant's family the sponsor  had  met,  the
         Christmas and birthday presents they had exchanged, details of  the
         sponsor's employment, where they had gone on  New  Year's  Eve  and
         whether the appellant had passed his driving test".

15. In light of what on any view were substantial discrepancies which  were
    contained within the separate interviews given by the appellant and his
    wife, when they were asked the same questions, as a matter of  evidence
    it is clear that certainly at the time of the earlier decision of Judge
    Moxon which was as recently as 2016 which was only a few months  before
    this fresh application, it was held that the respondent  had  satisfied
    the burden which was upon the respondent to establish that the marriage
    was not a genuine one but was indeed a sham marriage as the  respondent
    was required to establish.  As already  noted,  the  appellant  is  now
    appeal rights exhausted for challenging this decision.

16. Judge McGrade in his decision refers to various evidence which was  put
    before him, including the one witness statement from Mr  Umar,  who  as
    already noted above was said to be the neighbour  with  whom  they  had
    originally  lived.   The  judge  refers  to  Mr  Umar's  statement  and
    correctly states at paragraph 10 that it  is  "relatively  short".   He
    accepts that Mr Umar was present at the wedding but goes on to  say  as
    follows:

         "However, the statement of  Muhammad  Umar  provides  virtually  no
         detail on the parties' current relationship and states 'I  used  to
         meet with them quite  often',  suggesting  that  his  contact  with
         [them] now is more limited".

17. Appearing on behalf of the  appellant,  Dr  Taroni  submits  that  this
    suggests that the judge was considering whether or not the marriage was
    now a genuine one, whereas for the purpose of  considering  whether  it
    was a sham marriage, he ought to have had in his mind  whether  or  not
    the marriage was genuine at its inception.  This is a factor  to  which
    this Tribunal will need to have further  regard  when  considering  the
    alternative submission which is also made.

18. Dr Taroni also suggests that  the  judge  made  a  factual  error  when
    recording at paragraph 13 that the appellant had when asked why no  one
    had attended the appeal indicated "that they had not asked anyone".  No
    contrary indication was given in any of the witness statements, but  Dr
    Taroni (who represented the appellant before Judge McGrade as  well  as
    before this Tribunal), said that  it  was  her  instructions  that  the
    appellant had told the  Tribunal  that  his  brothers  could  not  give
    evidence for him because at the time they had been in Pakistan  because
    there was a religious  festival.   I note  first  of  all  that  Judge
    McGrade's misgivings about the lack of any evidence was not  restricted
    to the failure to call any witness, because at paragraph 13  he  stated
    his concern as follows:

         "Given both parties [that is the appellant and his wife] claim that
         their friends attended the wedding, I  find  very  surprising  that
         they should not ask those same friends to  attend  the  hearing  in
         order to speak to the genuineness of the relationship.  I also find
         it very surprising that the parties have been  unable  to  identify
         anyone that either of them has met in the  four  years  since  they
         were married, who could provide a letter of support or attend as  a
         witness to speak to the genuineness of their relationship".

19. In other words, it is not just the failure to call  any  witness  which
    concerned the judge but also the failure to provide even  a  letter  of
    support from anyone other than Mr Umar.

20. There is one added difficulty in this assertion which is that it is not
    supported by any statement from Dr  Taroni  herself,  which  one  would
    usually expect.  If indeed the appellant's evidence had been as is  now
    asserted, at the very least one would expect Dr Taroni to have provided
    a witness statement to this effect, which might  well  of  course  have
    resulted in the need for separate representation  to  be  obtained  for
    this appeal, but it would at the very least have afforded the judge  an
    opportunity to respond to this assertion, because he  would  have  been
    asked for his comments.

21. Because I did not wish the Tribunal to take any technical point without
    at least giving Dr Taroni an opportunity of informing the court  if  in
    fact she did have a note to this effect, I inquired during  the  course
    of the hearing whether she did have a  note  which  could  confirm  the
    assertion now made and having searched through her file,  she  informed
    this Tribunal that she had no record of such statement  being  made  by
    the appellant during his oral evidence as  is  now  asserted.   In  the
    circumstances there cannot be said to be any arguable error of  law  in
    the judge making the finding which he did, which is  founded  upon  his
    record of the evidence which was given.

22. The second ground of appeal was that the judge had failed to take  into
    account the new evidence which had been given and the passage  of  time
    which had elapsed.  In argument  the  first  and  second  grounds  were
    effectively combined because essentially the case  as  advanced  before
    this Tribunal was that the judge should have appreciated  that  it  was
    for the respondent to satisfy the Tribunal that the marriage was a sham
    marriage based on all the evidence.

23.  As noted above, the time that had elapsed between the rejection of the
    first application and the second application was only a few months  and
    it was only a year or two after the first  appeal  had  been  dismissed
    that Judge McGrade had to  consider  the  new  application.   There  is
    effectively no  new  evidence  going  beyond  that  when  the  original
    decision was made other than evidence that the parties share  the  same
    address.  Although a minor  point  is  taken  that  Judge  McGrade  has
    referred to there being only four photographs, whereas there were  also
    photographs of the wedding, it is clear from  the  decision  itself  at
    paragraph 11 that he has had in mind the wedding photographs that  were
    produced and these only show the appellant, his wife, Mr  Umar  and  Mr
    Umar's wife and sons.  These photographs are not the  four  photographs
    to which the judge is referring when referring  to  "four  photographs"
    because these are just of the appellant and  Ms  Duffy.   The  thirteen
    wedding photographs mainly show the appellant and Ms Duffy and the only
    other people are Mr Umar,  his  wife  and  child,  so  the  only  "new"
    evidence is Mr Umar's statement which is extremely sparse and which the
    judge considered in detail and that the appellant  and  Ms  Duffy  have
    continued to reside in the same house.

24. The third ground is that the judge ought to have considered  separately
    whether or not  even  if  the  finding  originally  made  that  at  its
    inception the marriage was a sham  marriage  was  not  set  aside,  the
    relationship had subsequently become  a  durable  relationship  in  the
    sense that there was now  a  genuine  relationship  amounting  to  true
    cohabitation, such that the appellant was entitled to a residence  card
    as the extended family member of Ms Duffy.  It is  right  to  say  that
    this argument is set out,  albeit  very  briefly,  in  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument which had been prepared for the hearing before  Judge
    McGrade, as follows:

         "III.    A's rights under Regulation 8 as a durable partner

             58.  In the alternative,  even  were  the  appellant  and  his
                  sponsor's marriage found to be one of convenience  at  the
                  time of entering the marriage, the Tribunal is invited  to
                  consider  that  they  are  and  have  been  in  a  durable
                  relationship as partners for many years.   Ample  evidence
                  has been provided of the durability of their relationship.



             59.  The first Adjudicator had before him documentary evidence
                  from before  the  appellant's  marriage  to  his  sponsor,
                  showing  their  address  and   photographs.    The   first
                  Adjudicator as a starting point, did  not  question  their
                  cohabitation.

             60.  Therefore, the appellant should be treated at  the  least
                  [as] the extended family member of  his  sponsor,  as  per
                  Regulation 8".

25. There are a number of aspects of this part  of  the  submissions  which
    should be noted.  In the first place although it  is  argued  that  the
    parties, that is the appellant and Ms Duffy  have  been  in  a  durable
    relationship as partners "for many years", this  was  not  accepted  by
    Judge Moxon some three years or so after that was said to be the  case.
    Also when it is said that "ample evidence  has  been  provided  of  the
    durability of their relationship", that is precisely  what  was  thrown
    into doubt by the enormous discrepancies within  the  interviews  which
    they gave.

26. Further, it is not correct when it is said that "the first  Adjudicator
    as  a  starting   point   did   not   question   their   cohabitation".
    "Cohabitation" for these purposes means significantly  more  than  that
    the appellant and Ms Duffy shared the same address.   Although  it  was
    accepted that they shared  the  same  address,  it  was  certainly  not
    accepted that they "cohabited" - that is that they were in  a  genuine
    relationship akin to marriage.

27. I refer now again to Dr Taroni's submission that the judge  erred  when
    considering Mr Umar's evidence by failing to concentrate on whether the
    marriage had been genuine at its inception.  It was said that he  erred
    in considering instead that evidence  in  the  context  of  whether  it
    supported an argument that the relationship  now  was  a  genuine  one.
    That is of course precisely would have to be established in  order  for
    the appellant to  persuade  the  Tribunal  that  he  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Duffy such that he is entitled to be  regarded  as
    her extended family member.

28.  Although  the  judge  does  not  in  terms  use  the  words   "durable
    relationship", in the course of argument I invited Dr  Taroni  to  make
    submissions as to whether or not there was any  respect  in  which  the
    evidence necessary  to  establish  that  a  marriage  was  genuine  was
    different from that which would be required to show  that  the  parties
    were in a durable relationship.  Dr Taroni was unable to suggest  there
    was any material difference between what would have to  be  established
    in either case, accepting that the  ingredients  were  the  same.   Her
    argument amounted to no more than semantics.  The  judge  did  consider
    whether the marriage was now a genuine one (which is not the  test  for
    considering whether the marriage is technically a sham marriage because
    that relates to the date of inception) and so even  if  it  might  have
    been better had the judge  specifically stated in terms that he did not
    find that the parties were in a durable  relationship,  such  error  as
    that might have been was not a material one, because the  matters  that
    he considered were  the  matters  relevant  to  consideration  of  that
    argument.  The judge dealt as fully as he needed with the evidence with
    regard to whether there was now a genuine relationship.  He referred to
    the evidence which had been given and explained why it  was  that  that
    was insufficient to persuade him that the appellant's  and  Ms  Duffy's
    relationship was a genuine (that is to say a durable) one.   There  was
    not even a letter of support from anyone other than Mr Umar and no live
    evidence.  The photographs are no more detailed than were or could have
    been before Judge Moxon.

29. There was one other feature as well which is that when  asked  why  the
    appellant had produced no records of text  messaging  or  social  media
    contact with his wife, he indicated  not  only  that  he  did  not  use
    Facebook or WhatsApp, but also that he never used texts.  This  as  the
    judge notes contradicted what he had stated in his own statement  where
    he had said that he had first met his wife on Brighton Pier and  having
    obtained her telephone number sent her a text which the judge notes was
    presumably asking her to meet with him.  Although Dr Taroni  says  that
    one can legitimately distinguish between somebody who does not now text
    and somebody who never texted, the judge was entitled to find that this
    was a material inconsistency which suggested that the appellant was not
    giving a truthful account.

30. The evidence that the marriage was a sham marriage at its inception was
    on the facts of this case very strong indeed, and it  would  have  been
    extremely surprising if Judge  Moxon  when  he  considered  the  appeal
    initially had reached any other conclusion but that this was  indeed  a
    sham marriage.  The evidence now produced on behalf  of  the  appellant
    does not go very much further.  Although the  appellant  and  Ms  Duffy
    continued to share a house, the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  it
    remained very much more likely than not  that  this  was  still  not  a
    genuine relationship of cohabitation and did not amount  to  more  than
    that the parties shared an address.

31. As he says at paragraph 17 of his decision

         "Other than the documentary evidence suggesting  the  parties  live
         together at the same address, I have  virtually  no  evidence  that
         shows the sort of  relationship  one  would  expect  of  a  married
         couple.   In  particular,  I  have  no  evidence  the  parties  are
         communicating with one another, in the way one would  expect  of  a
         married couple, that they undertake activities together, other than
         a reference to them going to the cinema, or most importantly,  that
         they have established relationships with others as a married couple
         or are viewed by others, whether they be  work  colleagues  of  the
         sponsor, neighbours, friends or acquaintances, as being  a  married
         couple".

32. The judge goes on to remark that "the only witness called was one of  a
    very small number of people who  attended  the  wedding  and  who  gave
    virtually no detail on the parties' life together now  [and  that]  the
    letter of support also provided very little detail".

33. In light of the judge's findings he was bound to  find  as  he  did  at
    paragraph 18 that "given the terms of the  previous  determination  and
    the deficiencies in the evidence before me on behalf of  the  appellant
    and the sponsor, I am not  satisfied  the  parties  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship, whether as spouses or otherwise".

34. So far as it is asserted that the judge should have regarded the burden
    of proof as remaining on the respondent, in light of the evidence which
    had already been provided that the marriage was a sham  marriage,  even
    if the earlier decision could now be reopened, the starting point would
    as the parties accepted have had to be that earlier decision.   Further
    as regards whether or not the parties are in a durable relationship, it
    is initially for the appellant to satisfy the Tribunal that this is so,
    which the appellant failed to come anywhere near doing.  Further and in
    any event, when considering who bears the burden of proof, as the Court
    of Appeal noted in the  decision  in  Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14,  the
    question of which party bears that burden will only be  relevant  where
    the decision is a marginal one.  In this case, as the Court  of  Appeal
    held was the case in Rosa, it is clear from  Judge  McGrade's  decision
    that he did not regard this as a marginal case at all,  but  considered
    that if it was very much more likely than not given the deficiencies in
    the evidence and the basis of the previous decision of Judge Moxon that
    the parties were not in a genuine  relationship,  as  the  judge  notes
    "whether as spouses or otherwise".

35. In these circumstances the judge's decision dismissing the  appeal  was
    inevitable and the appellant's challenge to that decision must fail.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against  Judge  McGrade's  decision,  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision refusing to grant him  a  residence
card, is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 25 February 2019
