
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/07303/2017
                                                               HU/06149/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SOOLE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     Im
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Litchfield, Counsel instructed by Kenton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. This is the appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Judge Hussain, promulgated on  9  January  2019,  which  dismissed  his
    appeal against two separate decisions of the respondent.  The first was
    dated 9 August 2017 and refused him a residence card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national.  The second  was  dated  19  February
    2018 and refused his human rights  claim.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge Saffer on 1 February 2019.

 2. We have granted  the  appellant  anonymity  in  order  to  protect  the
    identity of his children.

 3. The appellant is a national  of  Albania  born  6  February  1983.   He
    arrived clandestinely in this country on 28 October 1998, then aged 15,
    with his father.  His father having returned to Albania, the  appellant
    claimed asylum as an unaccompanied minor on 26 March 1999.   Eventually
    on 24 September  2004  he  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Between May 2004 and February2005 he  was  convicted  of  a  number  of
    driving offences receiving various forms of community  punishment.   On
    18 July 2005 he was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm
    and sentenced  to  four  months'  imprisonment  suspended  for  fifteen
    months.  On 10 March 2006 at Reading Crown Court he  was  convicted  of
    wounding/inflicting grievous  bodily  harm  and  sentenced  to  fifteen
    months' imprisonment, together with a consecutive term of three  months
    by way of activation of a suspended sentence.  This produced a total of
    eighteen months' imprisonment.  On 18 June 2007 a notice of deportation
    order was served on him.  Following exhaustion of his appeal rights  he
    was deported to Albania on 27 September  2007.   On  27  July  2010  he
    unlawfully entered the United Kingdom and was  deported  the  following
    day.  He again returned unlawfully on, according  to  his  account,  10
    September 2010.

 4. He began living in the UK with IK, a national  of  Latvia.   They  have
    three children, J, born on 24 September 2013, aged  5,  M  born  on  21
    October 2014, aged 4, and H born on 8  September  2015,  aged  3.   The
    appellant and his partner remain unmarried.

 5. On 16 September 2016 he submitted an application to the respondent  for
    the issue to him of  a  residence  card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  Regulation  18(4)  provides
    that the Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
    family member who is not an EEA national,  if  certain  conditions  are
    satisfied. These include that the relevant EEA national is a  qualified
    person and that in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
    State appropriate to issue the residence card.  For these  purposes  an
    extended family member includes a person who is the partner of and in a
    durable relationship with an EEA national and is able to prove this  to
    the decision maker (Regulation 8(5)) and a qualified person includes an
    EEA national who is a worker exercising treaty rights (see  Regulations
    4(1)(a) and 6).  By Regulation 17(1) the Secretary of State must  issue
    a registration certificate to an applicant subject to proof of  matters
    including that the applicant is a qualified person.

 6. The appellant's application for a  residence  card  was  refused  on  9
    August 2017 on the basis that the respondent was not satisfied that  IK
    was a qualified person.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the appeal was listed to be heard on 20 June 2018.  In the
    meantime, on 15 September 2017 a one stop  notice  was  served  on  the
    appellant.  This led to a human rights claim which was  refused  on  19
    February 2018.  The decision in particular took account of  Immigration
    Rule 399D to which we shall return.  He appealed against that decision.
     In due course the two appeals were listed to be heard together  on  29
    October 2018, the hearing on 20  June  having  been  vacated.   Shortly
    before that vacated hearing, on 1 June 2018, the respondent  issued  IK
    with a registration certificate pursuant to Regulation 17.

 7. At the hearing of the appeals on 29 October 2018 the central  issue  on
    the refusal of the residence  card  was  whether  IK  was  a  qualified
    person, namely exercising treaty rights in work.   The  judge  received
    written and oral evidence from the  appellant  and  IK.   The  judgment
    records her evidence of the issue of the registration  certificate  for
    which she had applied at the end of May 2018.  It continues:-

         "The document was given to her on the basis of her employment  with
         Caversham Ltd for whom she still works.  With her  application  she
         submitted statements up to June  2018.   She  started  working  for
         Caversham from July last  year.   Initially  she  worked  part-time
         until 1 November last year.  When  it  was  put  to  her  that  her
         statement does not say that, she was silent."

    The judge concluded that he was not satisfied that she  was  exercising
    treaty rights.  He stated:-

         "31. ... In making that decision, I do have regard to the fact that
             the sponsor has been issued with a Registration Certificate on
             1 June 2018.  In oral evidence, the appellant's  sponsor  said
             that this was on the basis of her employment  with  a  company
             called Caversham Construction Ltd.  I have no way  of  knowing
             why the Secretary of State granted the sponsor a  registration
             certificate.  Its mere issuance does not in my mind amount  to
             a formal concession behind which this Tribunal should not  go.
             In my view the Tribunal has  the  task  in  reaching  its  own
             decision as to whether the sponsor is employed.

         32.  In this regard, I have taken into account  the  four  separate
             statements deposed by the appellant and his sponsor.   I  have
             to confess that the statements were  thoroughly  unimpressive.
             There was very little there that  was  of  assistance  to  the
             Tribunal in making the finding I  am  required  to  make.   In
             fact,  it  positively  hindered  the  appellant  in  that  the
             appellant's statement attached to his bundle dated 19  October
             2018 said that his sponsor started working for Caversham  from
             17 August 2017, whereas, his statement attached to his 14 June
             2018 bundle asserted that she started  working  there  from  1
             July 2017.

         33.  Other than a P60 for the year ending 5 April 2018,  there  was
             very little supporting evidence of the sponsor's  exercise  of
             treaty rights.  It was claimed that she continues to work  for
             the business, yet the payslips, which are sporadic, appear  to
             go no further than 30 April 2018 and the bank statements  show
             only one deposit of what appears to be a salary on 23 February
             2018 and nothing beyond.   In  fact,  the  Tribunal  has  been
             presented only with bank statements that cover the whole month
             of February 2018 only.   If  the  sponsor  is  paid  into  her
             account and she has been working since 2017 then there  is  no
             reason why all of the payslips pertaining to her employment as
             well as bank statements could not have been produced.

         34.  In view of my findings above, the conclusion to which  I  have
             come  is  that  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was
             exercising treaty rights at the date of  application,  nor  is
             she exercising treaty rights as of the date of hearing."

 8. The  essential  ground  of  appeal  from  that  decision  is  that  the
    registration certificate of 1 June 2018 established  in  favour  of  IK
    that she was exercising treaty rights at that date and that  the  judge
    wrongly went behind that certificate.  In support of  that  proposition
    the appellant cites the case of The Queen v Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    ex parte Hubbard [1985] IAR 110 in which it was conceded by Counsel for
    the respondent that an appellate body should not go behind a finding of
    fact of the Secretary of State which is favourable to an appellant.  It
    is submitted that the decision was illogical and irrational because the
    evidence was prepared for a hearing listed for 20 June 2018 and that in
    consequence of the certificate of 1 June the question  of  whether  she
    was exercising treaty rights was no longer in issue at the date of  the
    appeal hearing.  Furthermore, the finding was at odds with the  judge's
    subsequent statement when considering the  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    human rights claim that "she is not herself a British  citizen  but  is
    only in the United Kingdom because she  is  exercising  treaty  rights"
    (paragraph 38).

 9. The appellant also seeks, pursuant to Rule  15(2)  to  put  in  further
    evidence which includes a witness statement of IK dated 18 April  2019.
    This evidence was not before the Judge and there was no reason advanced
    before us why it should be admitted in  order  to  decide  whether  the
    judge erred. Even if  we  were  to  admit  this  further  evidence,  it
    provides no support for the argument that  the  Judge  erred.   On  the
    contrary, it states that she began working with Caversham  Construction
    Ltd on 17 August 2017, left that job on 1 September 2018  "and  started
    another job with my current employer Tilehurst Valeting Garages Ltd  in
    February 2019". Thus it confirms  that  IK  was  not  at  work  at  the
    relevant date of the appeal hearing on 18 October 2018.

10. In any event, in our judgment the judge  made  no  error  of  law.   He
    stated that he did have regard to the fact that the  sponsor  had  been
    issued with a registration certificate.  He did  not  exclude  that  as
    evidence of the position as at 1 June 2018.  What he rejected  was  the
    argument that the grant of the certificate by the  Secretary  of  State
    was the end of the matter, hence his  observations  in  the  final  two
    sentences of paragraph 31.

11. As Counsel for the appellant, Ms Litchfield, rightly acknowledged,  the
    judge had to decide what the position was at the date of  the  hearing.
    In reaching his conclusion the judge in effect noted that  no  relevant
    evidence postdating the certificate had been produced.  In evidence  he
    was evidently unimpressed by IK's oral evidence.  The appellant and  IK
    had no good reason simply to rely on the certificate for the purpose of
    the hearing on 29 October; and it was the appellant's burden to produce
    evidence to establish the  case.   As  now  appears  from  the  further
    witness statement, this could not have been established.  The ground of
    appeal repeats the same error in that, as was argued below, it seeks to
    suggest that the issue of her status was determined by the  certificate
    dated 1 June 2018.  It was not, and the concession recorded in ex parte
    Hubbard is of no relevance.  Equally, we see nothing in the point about
    the sentence in paragraph 38 of the judgment.   However  that  sentence
    was expressed,  the  judge  had  clearly  concluded  that  IK  was  not
    exercising treaty rights in  respect  of  work,  nor  therefore  was  a
    qualified person, at the date of the hearing.

12. We should add that if  there  were  anything  in  this  point  and  the
    decision were set aside, the  question  of  whether  a  residence  card
    should be issued to the  appellant  would  in  any  event  require  the
    Secretary of State to  consider  whether  to  exercise  his  discretion
    within the meaning of Regulation 18(4)(c).

13. Turning to the appeal against the refusal of the appeal in  respect  of
    the  appellant's  human  rights  claim,  the  judgment   recorded   the
    acceptance by the Secretary of State that the appellant had  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with IK as well  as  their  three  children
    (paragraph 35). That concession evidently  reflected  the  language  of
    paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the Rules.  However, the judge  noted  that
    the application was refused pursuant to paragraph 399D. That provides :

         "Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the  United
         Kingdom in  breach  of  a  deportation  order  enforcement  of  the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances."
14. The judge noted that the appellant clearly could  only  succeed  if  he
    could establish "very exceptional circumstances" within the meaning  of
    paragraph 399D.  As its language makes clear, this Rule applies where a
    foreign criminal has been deported and then re-entered the UK in breach
    of the deportation order.  This the  appellant  had  done  twice.   The
    judge then considered the evidence and concluded that it did not amount
    to exceptional circumstances (paragraph 38).  That  paragraph  included
    reference to the three young children.  He concluded that the appellant
    was unable to meet the requirement of paragraph 399D (paragraph 39).

15.  However,  when  considering  whether  the  appellant  might  have   an
    exceptional and freestanding basis to defeat deportation under  Article
    8 ECHR, and concluding that he did not, the judge  observed  that  "The
    only factor I appear not  to  have  taken  into  account  is  the  best
    interest of her children".  He concluded (paragraph 41):-

         "The authorities are now well established which very clearly  state
         the children's best interests lie with their parents.  In this case
         the appellant's children who are British citizens  are  very  young
         having been [born] in 2013, 2014 and 2015.  They are  still  of  an
         age where the focus  of  their  life  would  revolve  around  their
         parents.  I see no reason why the children's interest which I  have
         to consider without any regard to the  parents'  conduct  would  be
         better served by them being allowed to stay in this country without
         their parents.  In the circumstances, the  conclusion  to  which  I
         have come is that the appellant's appeal does not  succeed  outside
         of the Immigration Rules either."

16. The central ground of appeal  against  this  decision  relies  on  that
    passage and submits  that  the  judge  took  no  account  of  the  best
    interests of the children, and in any event, by his reference to  their
    remaining in the UK without their parents made  a  decision  which  was
    perverse.  In her skeleton argument  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  Ms
    Claire Litchfield also submits that, having recorded  the  respondent's
    acceptance of the  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner and children, the judge should have  gone  on
    to consider within paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) and (b) whether it would  be
    "unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which the  person
    is to be deported" and "unduly harsh for the  child to remain in the UK
    without the person who is to be deported".   In  oral  submissions  she
    pointed to the absence of  an  assessment  of  best  interests  in  the
    circumstances where the children remained in the UK with  their  mother
    but separated from their father.  The skeleton  argument,  consistently
    with the witness statement before the FTT, pointed to the fact that the
    eldest child was attending school in the UK; that all the children were
    well-settled in the UK and have never lived  anywhere  else;  that  the
    appellant's partner is employed full-time  and  the  appellant  is  the
    primary carer and that if he were deported she would have  to  give  up
    her job and that the children would be without direct contact with  the
    father. The evidence in the further statements dated 18 April  2019  is
    to the same essential effect.

17. In argument Ms Litchfield acknowledged the more  stringent  requirement
    in paragraph 399D, as was confirmed by the  decision  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SU [2017] EWCA Civ 1069, in  particular
    at paragraph 45.  In that case  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
    interplay between paragraphs 398/399 and 399D.  It concluded  that  the
    difference in language imposed a more stringent requirement under 399D,
    reflecting a real difference in the circumstances which  each  covered.
    399D addressed the very  different  case  where  the  person  had  been
    deported and had then re-entered illegally.

18. On behalf of the respondent Mr Kotas emphasised the  elevated  standard
    that was imposed by paragraph 399D.  He submitted that the  grounds  of
    appeal did not reflect a fair reading of the judgment.  Having recorded
    that he had not yet considered the best interests of the children,  the
    judge went on to do so.  His unchallenged finding in paragraph  38  was
    that there was no reason why the appellant's partner and children could
    not live together within Albania or in  her  home  country  of  Latvia.
    There was no basis on the evidence for  a  finding  of  'unduly  harsh'
    within the meaning of paragraph 399, let alone for the very exceptional
    circumstances which were required by paragraph 399D. The evidence  that
    was provided in the witness statements to the Tribunal was exiguous and
    reflected the sort of consequences which typically apply in any case of
    deportation where a family, including a family with young children,  is
    separated.  Paragraph 399D imposes a particularly onerous burden on the
    applicant who has been deported and re-entered  unlawfully.   That  was
    this case.

19. In our judgment the judge did take account of the best interests of the
    children.  He accepted that their best interests were to be with  their
    unseparated parents. It could have been better expressed  in  paragraph
    41, but on a fair reading  of  the  judgment  and  in  the  context  of
    paragraph 38, it  was  taken  into  account  as  part  of  the  overall
    assessment of the human rights claim. However the crucial question,  on
    which  the  judge  correctly  focussed,  was   whether   the   evidence
    demonstrated the 'very exceptional circumstances' required by paragraph
    399D. The judge concluded that there was no good reason why the  family
    should not move together to Albania or Latvia.  True it is  that  there
    was no separate assessment of the effect on the children if they stayed
    in the UK with their mother.  However, there  is  in  our  judgment  no
    basis upon which the Judge could have concluded that the separation  of
    the children from the  father  within  the  meaning  of  paragraph  399
    (a)(ii)(b) would be unduly harsh, let alone satisfy the more  stringent
    requirement of very exceptional circumstances, as imposed by  paragraph
    399D.  If there is a structural error in the approach of the judge,  it
    is not material to the outcome. It is not the appellant's case that the
    Judge failed to take into account material evidence. In truth there was
    very little evidence before the judge relating to the children.

20. In her able submissions Ms  Litchfield  was  unable  to  point  to  any
    factors going beyond those which would typically  obtain  in  any  case
    where there is a separation of family, including  separation  involving
    young children.  The factors identified in the witness statement before
    the First-tier Tribunal, and then referred to again in  the  subsequent
    statements of 18 April  2019,  fall  within  the  category  of  typical
    consequences.  Beyond assertion they do not begin to establish  a  case
    of 'unduly harsh' let alone of  'very  exceptional  circumstances.   In
    reaching  these  conclusions  we  of  course  take  into  account   the
    observations on the meaning of 'unduly harsh' by the Supreme  Court  in
    KO (Nigeria) v. SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

21. In all these circumstances, and  set  against  the  demanding  test  of
    paragraph 399D, we see no error of law by the judge, nor perversity  of
    conclusion, nor, in any event, any basis upon which a properly directed
    Tribunal could have reached a different conclusion on the facts of this
    case.



Notice of Decision

22. Accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed on all grounds.

   Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008

   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is
   granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify him or any member of their  family.   This  direction
   applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
   with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed            Mr Justice Soole                    Date   10 May 2019


Mr Justice Soole

