
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/07324/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Columbus House Newport        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 November 2018                     |On 14 January 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           SALVADOR CASTILLO SOTO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


  Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of Judge  Holder  (the  judge)
    promulgated on   11 October 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Mexico  born  31  October  1975.  On  16
    December 2015 he applied for permanent  residence  in  the  UK  as  the
    former spouse of an EEA national who had been exercising Treaty Rights.
    His former spouse is a Spanish citizen.

 3. The application was refused on 6 June 2016. The  respondent  considered
    regulation 15 (1) (b)  of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 which provides that a person shall acquire  the  right
    to reside in the UK permanently if they are a family member of  an  EEA
    national who has resided in the UK with the EEA national in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

 4. The respondent accepted that the appellant's  former  spouse  had  been
    exercising treaty rights as an EEA citizen for a continuous  period  of
    at least five years between 1997 and 2008.

 5. The application was refused with reference to regulation 15  (2)  which
    provides that the right of  permanent  residence  shall  be  lost  only
    through absence from the UK for  a  period  exceeding  two  consecutive
    years. The respondent noted that the appellant and his former wife  had
    left the UK in 2009 to live in Spain. There was no  evidence  to  prove
    that the  appellant  had  returned  to  the  UK  until  May  2011.  The
    respondent decided that as the appellant had been absent  from  the  UK
    for a period in excess of two years, he had lost the right of permanent
    residence.

 6. The appeal against the respondent's decision was  heard  on  14  August
    2017. The judge heard evidence from the appellant noting  that  he  had
    previously been granted a residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national valid between 7 November 2002 and 7 November 2007.  The  judge
    found that the appellant had been absent from the UK for  a  period  in
    excess of two years from some time in 2009, until approximately 13  May
    2011. Therefore he had lost the right of permanent  residence.  He  had
    divorced in 2011. His wife and children had remained in Spain  and  not
    returned to the UK.

 7. The judge dismissed the appeal in relation to the EEA Regulations.  The
    judge did not consider article  8  of  the  1950  European  Convention,
    following the guidance in Amirteymour [2017] EWCA Civ  353  because  no
    notice had been served under section 120 of the Nationality Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and no removal decision had been made.

 8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary he submitted that the judge had been wrong in law to dismiss
    his appeal as there are exceptions to the two year rule that  were  not
    taken into consideration. The appellant did not deny that he  had  been
    absent from the UK for in excess of two years. He explained that he had
    always worked in the UK and is  of  good  character  and  that  he  has
    friends including a girlfriend in the UK and he did not want to  return
    to Mexico.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Nightingale of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who found that the grounds  disclosed  no  arguable
    error of law. The application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  who
    noted that the appellant's former spouse had  exercised  treaty  rights
    from the date of marriage in October 2002 until 7 November 2007 and  it
    was therefore arguable that the appeal should have been allowed.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the judge had not erred in  law  as  it  had  been
    found that the appellant had been absent from the UK for in  excess  of
    two years and even if he had acquired permanent residence in  2007  his
    subsequent absence for more than two years meant that he lost permanent
    resident status in accordance with regulation 15 (2).

11. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The appellant attended the hearing without legal representation. He had
    no difficulty in speaking  and  understanding  English.  The  appellant
    confirmed that he wished to proceed  without  legal  representation.  I
    explained to him the procedure that would be adopted  at  the  hearing,
    the purpose of the hearing,  and  the  independence  of  my  role.  The
    appellant confirmed that he was aware of the issues in the  appeal.  He
    was provided with a copy of the respondent's rule 24 response which was
    the only relevant document he had not previously seen.

13. The appellant submitted that the judge had been wrong in law to dismiss
    his appeal because he had acquired permanent residence between 2002 and
    2007 because at that time he was residing with his  former  spouse  who
    was exercising treaty rights. The appellant accepted that he was unable
    to remember exact dates but accepted that he, his former spouse and his
    daughter left the UK in 2009.  At  that  time  his  former  spouse  was
    pregnant and she gave birth to their second daughter  in  Spain  on  18
    September 2009. The appellant was unable to say exactly when he and his
    family had left the UK in 2009. He does not have his passport that  was
    valid at that time. His current passport  was  issued  on  26  November
    2015. He could not remember whether he returned to the UK  in  2010  or
    2011.

14. The appellant said that his former spouse divorced him. He  produced  a
    translated copy of the divorce certificate dated 20 December  2011.  At
    that time the appellant said his former spouse was in  Spain  with  his
    daughters and he was in the UK. He also produced at the  hearing  three
    wage slips issued in the UK dated 21 October 2011, 30 December 2011 and
    6 April 2012.

15. The appellant explained that he had travelled to Mexico in either  2012
    or 2013. He was unsure as to how long he had stayed  but  said  it  was
    possibly a year, and he then travelled to  Spain,  and  from  Spain  he
    travelled to the UK.

16. The appellant did not dispute that he had been absent from the  UK  for
    in excess of two years between 2009 and 2011,  but  explained  that  he
    could not remember exact dates and did not have documentary evidence to
    confirm exactly when he left and returned.

17. I then heard submissions from Mr Howells on behalf of  the  respondent.
    He relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that  the  judge  had
    not erred in law and had been entitled to find that the  appellant  had
    been absent from the UK for a period in excess  of  two  years  thereby
    losing any right of  permanent  residence  that  he  had  acquired.  Mr
    Howells pointed out that if the appellant was able to  produce  further
    evidence he could make a further application for  permanent  residence.
    It was submitted that the appellant's appeal should be dismissed.

18. I asked the appellant whether he wished to respond  to  what  had  been
    said on behalf  of  the  respondent.  He  said  that  there  were  some
    exceptions to regulation 15  (2)  and  he  fell  within  one  of  those
    exceptions because his wife wanted  to  have  her  baby  in  Spain.  He
    reiterated that he had spent half his life in the UK, that he is a hard-
    working person, not a criminal, and he enjoyed living  in  the  UK  and
    wished to remain here.

19. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. I find no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    The judge correctly set out the law in paragraphs 17 and 18, noting  in
    paragraph 16 that the respondent accepted that the  appellant's  former
    spouse had been exercising treaty rights in the  UK  between  1997  and
    2008 but not thereafter, and she had left the UK in 2009.

21. The judge assessed all the evidence before him and made findings  which
    were open to him to make on that evidence.  The  issue  in  the  appeal
    related to regulation 15 (2) and whether the appellant had been  absent
    from the UK for a period in excess of two years. The judge concluded at
    paragraph 20 that the evidence demonstrated that the appellant  had  in
    fact been absent from the UK for  a  period  in  excess  of  two  years
    between 2009 and 2011 and therefore lost any permanent residence status
    that had been acquired pursuant to regulation 15 (2). The appellant did
    not demonstrate before the judge or  before  me  that  there  were  any
    exceptions  to  the  two-year  rule  or  that  he  fell  within   those
    exceptions. The appellant accepted that he had been absent from the  UK
    for more than two years because his wife wanted to  have  her  baby  in
    Spain, and after the birth in September 2009  the  family  remained  in
    Spain.

22. The judge gave adequate reasons for his conclusion and it could not  be
    said that his decision was irrational or perverse. The  judge  did  not
    err in law in declining to consider article 8 of the 1950 Convention as
    he correctly followed guidance from the Court of Appeal in Amirteymour.

23. The appeal  of  the  appellant  must  therefore  be  dismissed.  If  he
    discovers further evidence then it is open  to  him  to  make  a  fresh
    application. It is also open to him to make an application for leave to
    remain if he wishes to rely upon article  8  of  the  1950  Convention,
    based upon any family and private life he has established  in  the  UK.
    Any such application would have to be made to the Home Office.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error  of  law.
I do not set aside the decision and I dismiss the appeal.

There has been no application for anonymity and no  anonymity  direction  is
made.


Signed  [pic]                       Date 12 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed  [pic]                       Date 12 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




