

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07272/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 7 December 2017                           |On 8 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            George Christian Baba
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Patrick Diavewa, legal representative with
Calices Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation
   23(6)(a)  and  32(2)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
   Regulations 2016.  The claimant is a citizen of Romania.



Factual matrix

2. The claimant's account is that he came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2015.
   He says that he studied during 2016 at  the  UK  College  of  Business  &
   Computing, but not in accordance with the Immigration (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2016 (as  amended),  as  Mr  Diavewa  conceded  at  the
   hearing, because he never met the requirements in Regulation  4(1)(d)(ii)
   and (iii) since he did not have comprehensive sickness insurance, nor did
   he make a declaration to the Secretary of State that  he  had  sufficient
   resources not to become a burden on the social assistance system  of  the
   United Kingdom during his intended period of residence here.

3. For some part of 2016, the claimant worked for Zaha Plastering.  In  July
   2016 he was cautioned by the police for theft.  In April 2017,  following
   a conviction on  19  March  2017,  the  claimant  received  a  16  weeks'
   suspended sentence, with an unpaid  work  requirement,  and  curfew  with
   electronic tagging.  He failed to comply with the community  requirements
   of his suspended sentence and on 13 July 2017, the claimant was sentenced
   to 8 weeks' imprisonment.  During his imprisonment, he was interviewed by
   an immigration officer to investigate his activity while  in  the  United
   Kingdom.   He did not mention a partner, children, or any family ties  in
   the United Kingdom.

4. The Secretary of State was satisfied that the claimant had  not  acquired
   a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom: she considered that
   he had not established that he had been exercising Treaty  rights  before
   his incarceration, and that in any event, a the  date  of  decision,  his
   sentence had interrupted any preceding exercise of Treaty rights.

5. The claimant was served with notice that she considered him  to  have  no
   right to reside in the United Kingdom and that the claimant was a foreign
   criminal whom she proposed to remove from the United Kingdom pursuant  to
   Regulations 23(6)(a) and 32(2) of the 2016 Regulations.

First-tier Tribunal decision

6. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds  of  appeal
   stated that the Secretary of State had  not  considered  that  he  had  a
   sister in the United Kingdom, and a nephew, or that his partner Ms  Elena
   Gabriela Moldovencei was living in  the  United  Kingdom  and  exercising
   Treaty rights of her own here.  The grounds raised  Article  8  ECHR  and
   section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.   The
   claimant said that he  was  not  a  serial  offender  and  regretted  his
   actions. He was seeking a second chance.

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge clarified with Mr Diavewa  at  the  hearing
   that Article 8 and section 55 were not relied upon.  For the  respondent,
   Ms Afzal said that this was not a decision  based  on  misuse  of  rights
   under Regulation 26(3)(c); rather, the Secretary of State considered that
   the claimant  had  not,  or  had  ceased  to  have,  a  right  under  the
   Regulations to reside in  the  United  Kingdom,  pursuant  to  Regulation
   23(6)(a).

8. The Judge was satisfied that at the date of  hearing,  the  claimant  had
   resumed study and was therefore a student.  The Judge recorded  that  the
   claimant's previous job as a plasterer remained open to him, but  allowed
   the appeal on the basis that the claimant was a student.

Permission to appeal

9. The Secretary of State appealed, relying on the  entirety  of  Regulation
   4(1)(d). First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted permission to
   appeal on the basis that:

         "2.  It is an arguable error  of  law  that  by  finding  that  the
         [claimant] qualified as a student under the  EEA  Regulations,  the
         Judge has failed to consider all the relevant  criteria,  including
         (a) whether the [claimant]  has  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
         cover in the United Kingdom and (b) has assured  the  Secretary  of
         State, by means of a declaration, or by such equivalent means as  a
         person may choose, that the person has sufficient resources not  to
         become a burden on the social  assistance  of  the  United  Kingdom
         during the person's intended period of residence."

Rule 24 Reply

10. There was no Rule 24 Reply for the claimant.

11. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

12. At the hearing today, Mr  Diavewa  for  the  claimant  agreed  that  the
   claimant had never had comprehensive sickness  insurance,  nor  made  the
   relevant declaration. He attempted to argue Article 8 ECHR,  although  it
   was pointed out to him that at [16]  in  the  decision,  the  Judge  said
   expressly that it was agreed that Article 8 ECHR was not relevant to this
   decision.

13. Mr Diavewa also said that there were 'other factors' but  when  pressed,
   these came down again to Article 8 ECHR  and  the  possibility  that  the
   claimant might be treated as the extended family member of  his  partner,
   Ms Moldovencei, who is said to be working in  a  factory  in  the  United
   Kingdom  and  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  her  own  right.  No   such
   application has been made, either under Article 8 ECHR  or  the  extended
   family member provisions of the 2016 Regulations.  Mr Diavewa  said  that
   the claimant would rely on the decisions of the European Court  of  Human
   Rights in Boultif v Switzerland - 54273/00 [2001] ECHR 497 and Maslov  v.
   Austria - 1638/03 [2007] ECHR 224.  As human rights  were  not  in  issue
   before the First-tier Tribunal, neither Boultif nor  Maslov  now  assists
   the claimant.

Relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations 2016

14. The definition of 'student'  is  found  in  Regulation  4(1)(d)  of  the
   Regulations:

         "4(1)...(d)   "student" means a person who-

               i) is enrolled, for the  principal  purpose  of  following  a
                  course of study  (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                  public or private establishment which is-
                      (aa) financed from public funds; or
                      (bb) otherwise recognised by the Secretary  of  State
                      as an establishment which has been accredited for the
                      purpose of providing such courses or training  within
                      the law or administrative practice of the part of the
                      United Kingdom in which the establishment is located;

               ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
                   Kingdom; and

             iii) has  assured  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                  declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person may
                  choose, that the person has sufficient  resources  not  to
                  become a burden on the social  assistance  system  of  the
                  United Kingdom during  the  person's  intended  period  of
                  residence."

15. Regulation 23(6), so far as relevant, is as follows:

         "23...(6)     ...an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom
         or the family member of such a national who has entered the  United
         Kingdom may be removed if-
             a) that person does not have or ceases  to  have  a  right  to
                reside under these Regulations; ..."

Discussion

16. The language of the EEA Regulations is plain.   To  be  a  considered  a
   'student' for the purpose of the 2016 Regulations,  a  person  must  show
   three things:   that he is studying at an educational establishment which
   is either financed from public funds or accredited by  the  Secretary  of
   State; that he has comprehensive sickness  insurance;  and  in  addition,
   that he has made a declaration or equivalent to the  Secretary  of  State
   that he has sufficient resources such that he would not be  a  burden  on
   the United Kingdom's social assistance system during his studies.

17. The claimant, at best, can meet the first  of  the  three  requirements.
   He is not a 'student' for the purposes of the Regulations.  Nor is he the
   family member of an EEA national who has entered the United  Kingdom  and
   remains here exercising  Treaty  rights.    The  Home  Office  Presenting
   Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing erred  in  [18]  in  conceding
   that the claimant was a qualifying person and agreeing to minute her file
   accordingly.

18. The claimant at the date of decision, when he was in  detention,  was  a
   person whose right to reside, if it existed, had ended by reason  of  his
   sentence.  After he was released, the claimant did not return to work but
   recommenced his study, but  continued  not  to  qualify  as  a  'student'
   because he still did not meet of the requirements of Regulation  4(1)(d).
    I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  fell  into  error  in
   failing to consider all of those requirements, and that  such  error  was
   material, since had he considered them, he would have reached a different
   conclusion.

19. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  err  in  failing  to  consider
   Article 8 ECHR at the  hearing  or  in  failing  to  decide  whether  the
   claimant is an extended family member of his partner or his sister, since
   neither argument was relied upon at the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  nor
   has it been advanced in this appeal by way of a  Rule  24  Reply  to  the
   grant of permission.

DECISION

20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing
   the claimant's appeal.



Date:         7 December 2017                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




