








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/07690/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th June 2017                      |   On 16th June 2017                 |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                         MR SEBASTIAN WOJCIECHOWSKI
                        (NO AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Sebastian Wojceichowski date of  birth  13  September
    1977, is a citizen of Poland.  Having considered all the circumstances,
    I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant was not in attendance at the hearing. It appears that the
    appellant has been  removed  to  Poland.  The  representative  for  the
    respondent  indicated  that  there  may  have  been   judicial   review
    proceedings to stay removal but  such  had  been  unsuccessful.  It  is
    unclear whether the appellant  has  sought  to  return  to  pursue  his
    appeal.  He  has  not  instructed  representatives.  He  did  not  have
    representatives in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Having considered all the circumstances I decided to proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence the appellant. I am satisfied taking account  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  that  the  appeal
    could be justly determined in the circumstances.

 4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler promulgated on  26th  October  2016,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him a residence card as a European Union  citizen,
    who is exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 5. By a decision of 4th April 2017 Upper Tribunal  Judge  William  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The permission is  granted
    in the following terms: -

    The judge records that the decision of the respondent  was  made  under
    21B (2) of the regs. It is arguable that if there was a decision  under
    21B(2) the judge did make of finding as to whether there  had  been  an
    abuse of rights.

 6. The appellant's immigration history is as follows: -

    a) The appellant having been in the United Kingdom on 13 March 2012  he
    was extradited to Poland. The reasons for his extradition are  not  set
    out within the letter of refusal.

    b) On or about 1 April 2013 the appellant appears to have  returned  to
    the United Kingdom.

    c) On 24 May 2016 the appellant was seen  by  Immigration  Officers  in
    Warrington city centre after attending at a police station. He  was  at
    that stage served with documentation indicating  that  as  he  was  not
    exercising treaty rights he would be removed from the United Kingdom.

    d) On 28 June 2016 the appellant  was  again  encountered  by  Cheshire
    police. He was at that stage detained.

    e) A decision was made to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.



    f) The appellant lodged an appeal against the decision taken to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom

 7.  The  decision  by  the  respondent  is  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and is in the following terms:-

    A decision has now been taken to remove you from the United Kingdom  in
    accordance with Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
    (which applies by virtue of Regulations 19(3)(a)/19(3)(c)  pursuant  to
    regulation 21 B(2) and 24(2) of the EEA Regulations.

 8. In accordance with the Regulations the power to remove an EU citizen is
    under Regulation 19. The criteria for making decisions based upon abuse
    of rights or fraud are set out  within  Regulation  21  B.  Accordingly
    whilst the judge has identified that the decision to remove  was  taken
    under Regulation 21B, a close examination makes clear that the decision
    was in fact taken under Regulation 19.

 9. The decision, as made, contains alternative basis for  removal  of  the
    appellant, in that the appellant is either to be removed in  accordance
    with Regulation 19(3)(a) or in accordance with Regulation 19(3)(c).

10. The relevant provisions  of Regulation 19 (3) provide:

    (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who has  entered
    the United Kingdom or the family member of  such  a  national  who  has
    entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

    a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right to reside  under
    these Regulations; or

    ...

    c) the Secretary of State has decided  that  the  person's  removal  is
    justified on grounds of abuse of rights in accordance  with  regulation
    21B (2).

11. Regulation 21B sets out the criteria which are relevant with regard  to
    abuse of rights or fraud. Regulation 21B provides:-

    Abuse of rights or fraud

    21B- 1) The abuse of the right to reside includes-

    a) engaging in conduct which appears to be intended to  circumvent  the
    requirements to be a qualified person.

    b) attempting to enter the United Kingdom within  12  months  of  being
    removed pursuant to regulation 19(3)(a) , where the  person  attempting
    to do so is unable to provide  evidence  that,  upon  re-entry  to  the
    United Kingdom, the conditions for any right to reside, other than  the
    initial right of residence under regulation 13, will be met;

    c) entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person  to  enter
    or attempt to enter, a marriage or civil partnership of convenience; or

    d) fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, or assisting another
    to obtain or attempt to obtain, a right to reside.

    (2) The Secretary of State may take an EEA decision on the  grounds  of
    abuse of rights where there are reasonable grounds to suspect the abuse
    of a right to reside and it is proportionate to do so.

12. In deciding the case the judge at the commencement of the decision  has
    only cited that the decision by the respondent was  taken  pursuant  to
    Regulation 21B(2). Clearly the basis of  the  removal  is  set  out  in
    Regulation 19.

13. On the facts before the judge the appellant was not working and had not
    worked during the time that he was in the United Kingdom. The appellant
    was otherwise sleeping rough in the street. He had  certainly  come  to
    the attention of the authorities on more than one occasion for criminal
    offences. There is also reference in the papers to the fact that he had
    been produced before the Magistrates Court.

14. The issue with regard to abuses of  rights  relates  to  the  appellant
    sleeping rough.  It is clear that the appellant  has  no  intention  of
    working. The appellant had not been exercising treaty rights.

15. The evidence disclosed that the appellant was in receipt of  Jobseekers
    allowance but that he was residing at a  YMCA  and  his  benefits  were
    limited to 91 days. Given that the appellant had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a number of years it is questionable whether or not he  had
    already  exceeded  the  period  of  not  working   permitted   by   the
    Regulations. He had not provided any evidence of working in the  United
    Kingdom. His only means of support was state benefits.

16. Further to that there was evidence that the appellant had been sleeping
    rough on occasions, had been arrested for various offences relating  to
    drink and had appeared  before  magistrates  with  regard  to  offences
    relating to drink.

17. The only grounds that the appellant had raised related to the fact that
    he feared friends in Poland who would  lead  him  into  bad  ways.  The
    appellant had not sought to seek protection in the United  Kingdom  and
    in any event Poland is a  member  of  the  European  Union.  The  judge
    properly found that that would not amount to a fear of  persecution  or
    give right to protection in the United Kingdom.

18. There was no evidence that the appellant had formed any family life. No
    evidence had been given otherwise that the appellant had  any  material
    aspect of private life. In any event given the cases  of  TY  EWCA  Civ
    2015 EWCA Civ 1233 and Amirteymour 2015 UKUT 466 the appellant had  not
    made an application in respect of human rights.

19.   The judge was  satisfied  on  the  facts  that  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant was such as to constitute an abuse  of  rights.  That  was  a
    finding fact the judge was  entitled  to  come  to  the  basis  of  the
    evidence. The evidence was clear the  appellant  had  no  intention  of
    working and had not worked in time that  he  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom. In the circumstances the judge was entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that the appellant was abusing the rights  given  under  the
    Regulations and Directives.

20. In any event proceedings on the alternative basis under  Regulation  19
    (3) (a) the appellant clearly has ceased to have the right  to  reside.
    He has been in the United Kingdom for a number of  years  and  has  not
    worked. He is therefore not a qualified person and  is  not  exercising
    treaty rights. Accordingly the judge would be entitled to dismiss  this
    matter on the alternative basis had it been necessary to do so.

21. For the reasons set out I do not find that there is any  error  for  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


22. I dismiss the appeal by the Appellant.

23. I do not make an anonymity direction.


Signed      Date 15.6.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

