
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07160/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2018                            |On 2 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel instructed by Expert Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against the decision of  the
    respondent on 2 August 2017 refusing him an EEA  residence  card.   The
    short point is that the appellant says the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    misdirected herself by applying the wrong burden of proof.  If that  is
    right then it is but a  short  step  from  establishing  the  error  to
    showing there was a material error of law with the likely  result  that
    the appeal has to be re-determined.

 2. The Judge directed herself in  a  way  that  probably  was  appropriate
    before the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Sadovska  and  another
    (Appellants) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Respondent)
    (Scotland) [2017] UKSC 54 but that decision was given on 26  July  2017
    and the First-tier Tribunal heard this appeal on 14 June  2018.  It  is
    therefore surprising that the Tribunal seemed unaware of it. It is  now
    clear law  that  the  burden  of  proving  that  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience rests on the Secretary of State.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

 4. The Judge not only misdirected herself at the start of the decision but
    she repeated the error at paragraph 44  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    where she said that the Appellant has  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof on him.

 5. As I indicated at the hearing, I  wanted  to  read  the  decision  very
    carefully to satisfy myself that the error was indeed material.  I  did
    not expect to take as long as I have taken and  I  apologise  for  that
    delay.

 6. I will look very carefully at the actual decision made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. The  judge  began  with  consideration  of  a  record  of  a  visit  by
    Immigration Officers on 4 December 2014.  She noted, correctly, that it
    was  the  respondent's  case  that  this  note  is  supportive  of  the
    contention that the appellant and Ms [G] had engaged in a  marriage  of
    convenience.  She noted too that there was criticism of  the  Secretary
    of State for not providing the notes  that  supported  the  Immigration
    Officer's conclusions but as there was no evidence that  the  Secretary
    of State had ever been asked to produce the documents she found that an
    unimpressive point.

 8. The record is not extensive and I set it out below:

         "The West London Arrest Team visited [Surbiton] today  04/12/14  in
         response to an EEA application made by Muhammad  [M]  20/12/92  PAK
         male.  On arrival at the address at 09:15 hours I  knocked  on  the
         door to the flat and  encountered  an  Italian  female  named  [NA]
         06/02/95.  I introduced myself to her as an Immigration Officer and
         asked if I could speak to Muhammad [M] or [EG], I also showed her a
         photograph of [M].  The female stated that she did not know  either
         person and stated that she lived there with her friend Sarah who is
         Polish, she added that Sarah had lived there for four years.  It is
         clear that neither applicant or sponsor is known  at  the  address,
         neither party lives there or is known by the occupants.  This  case
         should not be granted, there is clearly a problem, the address  may
         have been used as a postal drop by one of the occupants but clearly
         the present female occupant [NA] does not know either person on the
         application."

 9. It is then signed and the officer's identification number is shown.

10. The judge acknowledged evidence trying to explain away the  Immigration
    Officer's conclusion.  There was a statement from Ms  [NA]  saying,  in
    effect, that she was visiting the property when the Immigration Officer
    arrived.  Her English was poor and although she explained she  did  not
    know who lived at the flat she had tried to explain that  she  did  not
    live there and so could not know who lived there.  The judge noted that
    the witness statement was signed but the witness  did  not  attend  for
    cross-examination and that reduced the weight that could  be  given  to
    the statement.

11. The judge said at paragraph 26  that  "I  therefore  do  not  alter  my
    conclusion that the Immigration Officer's note is sufficient  basis  to
    discharge the legal burden on the respondent."

12. Even if that were the relevant test I am doubtful that it was satisfied
    by that evidence. It boils to a report from someone who was not  called
    to give evidence saying that the one  person  he  saw  at  the  address
    claimed to live there and not to know the appellant or his  wife.  Even
    if it is assumed that there the evidence is an accurate record I do not
    see how it illuminates the reasons for the appellant's marriage  rather
    than the integrity of [NA]. Maybe she did live there  with  her  friend
    Sarah and no-one else. Maybe she was misunderstood by  the  Immigration
    Officer. Maybe  she  does  not  trust  immigration  officials  and  was
    untruthful.  These  obvious  alternative  explanations  have  not  been
    considered in the judge's expressed reasoning.

13. The judge did hear evidence from Ms [S] also known as Sarah.   Most  of
    her evidence was addressed to the wedding ceremony.  She said that  she
    had attended the wedding and had helped Ms [G] by going with her to buy
    her wedding clothes.  That there was a  wedding  ceremony  was  not  in
    dispute but the judge could not help but note the inability of  Ms  [S]
    to give clear answers about who had attended the  ceremony  (only  very
    few people were present) and gave answers that were  inconsistent  with
    the appellants.  The judge found her evidence to  be  inconsistent  and
    vague and that reduced the weight that can go to it.

14. She also looked at photographs in the bundle but they all  appeared  to
    relate to the wedding day and showed that they were present  which  was
    not in dispute.

15. There was a letter from the landlord but that  simply  confirmed  there
    was a joint tenancy  involving  the  appellant,  Ms  [G]  and  Ms  [S].
    Unsurprisingly it did not illuminate the nature of the relationship.

16. The judge looked very carefully at bank statements that  were  produced
    and noted that there were several examples of people not known  to  the
    proceedings apparently paying rent on the Wellington Court address.  It
    was not explained satisfactorily or at all and the judge took the  view
    that the property was being used as a  home  by  people  who  were  not
    identified  and  this  tended  to  confirm  the  Immigration  Officer's
    suspicion that it was an accommodation address.

17. The judge was very aware of the potential value  to  the  appellant  of
    evidence  that  his  wife  had  miscarried.   Clearly  the  fact  of  a
    miscarriage is  not  conclusive  evidence  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine at its inception but it is something  that  would  need  rather
    careful  thought.   However  the  judge  noted  that  the  report   was
    incomplete being only pages 2 and 3 out of four and that the only  part
    of the report that actually identified the patient as Ms [G] could have
    been added to the top of the page.  The judge was not saying  that  the
    document was a forgery.  She merely used that  to  illustrate  how  the
    document was not reliable  or  helpful.   It  was  incomplete  and  not
    clearly relating to the appellant's wife.  She gave  little  weight  to
    that.

18. The  judge  found  is  that  there  was  no  satisfactory  evidence  of
    cohabitation at the stated address.  She found clear evidence  that  an
    incomplete story had been told.  She had no evidence  before  her  from
    the appellant's wife  or  former  wife  which  might  have  illuminated
    matters.  She found  little  relevant  supporting  evidence.   She  was
    perfectly aware of some documents tending to show cohabitation that  of
    its own does not illuminate the nature of the relationship.

19. The judge concluded:

         "For the reasons set out above, there are numerous issues  reducing
         the weight to be given to the appellant's  evidence.   I  therefore
         find that the appellant has not discharged the burden of  proof  on
         him and I conclude that the marriage between him and Ms [G] was one
         of convenience."

20. That, as I have explained above, is the wrong approach.

21. Of most concern to me is that the judge did not consider expressly  the
    appellant's evidence including his witness statement dated 14 June 2018
    where he writes about the reasons for the marriage, of  his  attraction
    to his wife and his unhappiness at the  time  of  the  miscarriage.  It
    would be particularly interesting to know if the appellant  was  cross-
    examined on the basis that he was lying when he spoke of his  distress.
    Alternatively, if he was not cross-examined on that basis it  would  be
    interesting to know why he judge was concerned about the reliability of
    the medical evidence when the point was never put to  the  witness  who
    might have been able to explain it.

22. The judge then looked at the documentary  evidence  and  found  further
    evidence that the property at Wellington Court was sublet  contrary  to
    anyone's case and this reinforced her finding that she  was  not  being
    told the truth.

23. However, although  the  Judge  might  have  given  proper  reasons  for
    disbelieving some of the evidence it  does  not  follow  that  she  was
    necessarily and consequentially satisfied that the marriage was one  of
    convenience and particularly not that the Respondent had proved that it
    was one of convenience.

24. This is a decision where the misapplication of the burden of proof  was
    a material error and one that I cannot remedy without a fresh  hearing.
    As the present findings are of no value the appeal needs  to  be  heard
    again in the First-tier Tribunal by a different judge.

    Notice of Decision

25. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I  set  aside  its  decision  and
    direct that the case be heard  again  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross by a different judge.




|Signed                   |                       |                        |
|Jonathan Perkins         |                       |                        |
|Judge of the Upper       |                       |Dated 1 May 2019        |
|Tribunal                 |                       |                        |



