
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: EA/07058/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 July 2021                    |On 2 August 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               Ahtesham Khalil

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     No legal representation.  Attendance by the  Sponsor,
                    Ms H Raja

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of  birth  given  as
   10.1.94, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 17.2.21 (Judge Williams),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 27.11.19, to refuse his application for an  EEA
   Family Permit to join his Spanish national niece in the UK as an Extended
   Family Member (EFM), pursuant to Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
   Regulations 2016, as amended (the Regulations).

2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  26.4.21,
   the judge granting permission considering it arguable that Judge Williams
   had applied an unduly restrictive interpretation of  dependency  stating,
   "The judge may well have had in mind that he  should  only  be  satisfied
   that the appellant was dependent on the sponsor  if  he  was  exclusively
   reliant on him."

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4. The relevant background is that the appellant claimed to  be  financially
   dependent on the EEA sponsor, who has lived in the UK  since  July  2014.
   The appellant claims that not only has  his  sponsoring  niece  regularly
   sent money to him over a considerable period but that he is dependent  on
   this money to meet his basis needs, thereby  establishing  the  necessary
   relationship of dependency as defined in Regulation 8.

5. The application was refused for insufficient evidence  of  claimed  money
   transfers from the sponsor in the UK to the appellant  in  Pakistan.  The
   decision was upheld in the Entry Clearance  Manager  review  of  11.5.20,
   which noted that no further documents had been submitted to  address  the
   concerns raised by the Entry Clearance Officer in the refusal decision.

6. At the appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted at  [38]  that  the
   documents relied on by the appellant demonstrated that  the  sponsor  had
   made continuous and regular payments on an approximately  monthly  basis,
   from January 2019 to the date of the hearing. The judge also accepted the
   oral evidence that such payments began before January 2019. At [40],  the
   judge concluded on the balance of probabilities  "that  the  sponsor  has
   been making regular payments to the appellant for a  considerable  period
   of time, with the payments having  become  formalised  when  the  sponsor
   opened her own Ria  account  in  approximately  2018.  Proof  of  regular
   payments from January 2019 has been provided in this appeal."

7. However, as the judge noted at [41] proof  of  financial  remittances  is
   not of itself proof that the appellant is dependent on  the  sponsor.  At
   [42] the judge noted that there was little evidence  of  the  appellant's
   own financial circumstances, noting that only three  paper  receipts  for
   purchases had been submitted. The judge  also  found  that  but  for  one
   problematic receipt, there was an absence of documentation to support the
   claim that the sponsor had paid the appellant's educational fees. At [45]
   the judge noted that  the  appellant  lived  in  a  house  owned  by  the
   sponsor's father (the appellant's brother-in-law) and he has no outgoings
   such as rent or bills. At [47] the judge found that there was a  lack  of
   evidence showing the appellant's true financial situation. At  [48],  the
   judge concluded that there was "a  lack  of  evidence  presented  of  the
   appellant's full income and outgoings. Without such evidence  it  is  not
   possible to conclude that the appellant is dependent upon the remittances
   paid by the sponsor." This conclusion was  restated  at  [49]  where  the
   judge found "a deficiency of evidence presented  upon  which  a  positive
   finding of dependency can be made. I am not persuaded on the  balance  of
   probabilities that the appellant is dependent upon the sponsor."

8. The Rule 24 reply, dated 13.5.21, maintains that the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge made the appropriate self-directions on the  issue  of  dependency.
   "It is clear that on the appellant's own evidence a substantial  part  of
   his essential needs, namely his accommodation, is  in  fact  met  by  his
   father and ultimately the judge was not satisfied that the appellant  had
   discharged the burden to show that he was dependent on the  sponsor.  The
   judge correctly applied the law and reached properly reasoned  findings."
   Actually, as explained above, the appellant lives in a house owned by the
   sponsor's father, not his own father.

9. In submissions, Ms Raja, who appeared for the  appellant  at  the  First-
   tier Tribunal and who had competently  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal,
   submitted that she had been a credible witness and that  the  appellant's
   personal circumstances in the village where he lived were  such  that  he
   could not obtain receipts  for  his  outgoings.  There  were  three  such
   receipts and the judge considered that more  could  have  been  obtained.
   However, I pointed out to Ms Raja that at [47] of the decision the  judge
   was aware of her submission that  receipts  could  not  be  produced  and
   suggested in response that at the very least there ought to have  been  a
   breakdown of the appellant's income and expenditure. As it is, there  was
   neither a witness statement nor a letter from the appellant  setting  out
   his financial circumstances in clear detail.

10. On a careful reading of the decision, it does not appear to me that  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that he/she could "only be satisfied
   that the appellant was dependent on the sponsor  if  he  was  exclusively
   reliant on him", as suggested by the judge granting permission. The judge
   accepted that payments were being made  by  the  sponsor  but  noted  the
   generous accommodation arrangements provided by the sponsor's father and,
   more significantly, the absence of documentation  or  other  satisfactory
   evidence of the appellant's true financial circumstances.  At  [45],  the
   judge was concerned that given the generous accommodation provided by the
   sponsor's father, the question was raised whether the  appellant  was  in
   fact reliant on the sponsor's father and not the sponsor. The judge noted
   that there was no differentiation between the sponsor  and  her  father's
   payments at various times  to  the  appellant.  The  judge  concluded  by
   stating, "there are grounds to believe that  the  appellant  is  in  fact
   reliant upon  the  sponsor's  father  rather  than  the  sponsor."  As  I
   explained to Ms Raja at the hearing, both she and her  father  cannot  be
   the sponsor's where the application was brought on the basis of she alone
   being the EEA sponsor.

11. I am satisfied that the  findings  and  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal were entirely open to the judge  on  the  limited  evidence  put
   before the Tribunal.  Whilst  the  judge  accepted  evidence  of  regular
   financial remittances despite the absence of  documentary  support,  such
   remittances  alone  were  insufficient  to  demonstrate  dependency.  The
   appellant had to demonstrate not only  that  he  received  the  sponsor's
   financial support but also that he needed that material support in  order
   to meet his essential or basic needs. It is evident that in preparing the
   application and the case for the appeal, the appellant  and  the  sponsor
   failed to understand the key requirement to demonstrate the necessity  of
   the financial remittances, which in  turn  begged  the  question  of  the
   appellant's true personal financial circumstances. The burden of  proving
   this was on the appellant but the finding that he failed to discharge  it
   was one open to the judge.

12. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 July 2021



