

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/08138/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                               Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 4 October 2018                                        On 11 October 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                   MS ESTHER OLUWAYEMISI OLABISI AKINTAYO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Robertson  on  9  August  2018  against  the  dismissal  of  the
           Appellant's EEA permanent residence card  appeal  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge James in a decision and reasons promulgated on  5
           July 2018.  The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born  on  14
           July 1975.  She relied on retained rights of  residence  as  the
           former spouse of an EEA national.


      2.    Permission to appeal was granted because the judge had  admitted
           further evidence and heard submissions on  such  evidence  after
           the hearing had concluded, in the  Appellant's  absence.   There
           were also questions arising as to the correct interpretation  of
           the evidence.


      3.    The Appellant attended the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  in  person.
           Her application for an adjournment to seek legal  representation
           had been refused by another Upper Tribunal judge, and was  again
           refused because the hearing could proceed  fairly  without  such
           representation.


      4.    The Appellant brought to the court  several  untidy  bundles  of
           disorganised papers.  Among them Mr Lindsay was able  to  locate
           an official copy of the  Appellant's  decree  absolute  dated  6
           November 2014.  (The First-tier Tribunal judge  had  found  that
           the decree absolute had not been produced.)


      5.    The Appellant relied on her brief  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
           grant of permission to appeal.


      6.    Mr Lindsay submitted in summary that any  procedural  unfairness
           had not  been  material,  as  the  Appellant  had  not  produced
           sufficient evidence on  any  view  to  show  that  she  met  the
           Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


      7.    The discovery of the decree absolute among the papers which  the
           Appellant had brought to the tribunal  was  in  itself  a  clear
           indication of how wrong  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  had
           gone.  The appeal file  showed  that  the  Appellant's  original
           solicitors  had  been  the  subject  of  intervention   by   the
           Solicitors Regulatory Authority, raising  the  risk  of  missing
           documents and general  confusion.   [10]  of  the  decision  and
           reasons shows that the Appellant's papers  as  produced  at  the
           first stage of the hearing  were  disorganised  and  potentially
           incomplete.  Judges must always take special care  when  dealing
           with litigants in person.


      8.     It  must  also  be  said  that  the   Appellant   must   accept
           responsibility for attending a  hearing  without  making  better
           efforts at preparation.   The decision and  reasons  shows  that
           the Appellant's papers at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  were
           in a sorry state.  (Nothing had improved by  the  stage  of  the
           Upper Tribunal hearing.)


      8.    Be that as it may, the tribunal has no option but to  find  that
           the judge fell into  serious  procedural  error  by  continuing,
           resuming or reconvening the appeal hearing  in  the  Appellant's
           absence. The judge had no way of  knowing  whether  or  not  the
           Appellant had been let down by  the  late  arrival  of  further,
           potentially  relevant  documents,  without  hearing   from   the
           Appellant herself.  The  fact  that  the  judge  had  with  some
           justification formed an adverse view of  the  materials  so  far
           produced by the Appellant did not  entitle  the  hearing  to  be
           reconvened in the Appellant's  absence,  at  least  without  the
           Appellant's consent. There was no reason for  the  Appellant  to
           have remained at the hearing centre after the judge had, so  far
           as she was aware, completed the  hearing.   There  was  manifest
           unfairness in considering the additional documents and receiving
           submissions  in  the  Appellant's  absence.   Those  submissions
           contributed to the dismissal of the appeal.


      9.    As already noted, an example of the resulting  problem  is  that
           the judge was mistaken to find that there had been  no  evidence
           of the decree absolute.  The judge is not perhaps to  be  blamed
           for that, but it illustrates why  this  was  plainly  an  appeal
           which should have been adjourned so that it could be  reconvened
           and conducted fairly.


      10.   It remains to be seen what the outcome  of  a  fairly  conducted
           hearing  will  be.   Certainly,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
           procedural fairness was immaterial since the inevitable  outcome
           would have been dismissal.  The tribunal finds  that  there  was
           procedural unfairness amounting to a material error of law.  The
           original decision is set aside, to be reheard in the  First-tier
           Tribunal before  any  judge  except  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           James.


      11.    The  tribunal  explained  to  the  Appellant  that  it  is  her
           responsibility to prepare her evidence properly and  to  put  it
           into good order before the rehearing.  Mr  Lindsay  accepted  on
           behalf of the Home Office  that  the  decree  absolute  dated  6
           November 2014 had been seen and accepted as genuine.




      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


      The original decision is set aside.  The appeal must be reheard in the
      First-tier Tribunal before any judge except First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      James.










      Signed                                              Dated  4   October
2018
      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell














































































































































































































































































































