
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/08045/2016
                                                               EA/08051/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              mrs jaspreet kaur
                             Mr Sarabjeet Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehmen (London Imperial Immigration Services)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellants  in  relation
    to a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  decided  and
    promulgated on 25th August 2017 on the papers.  The reason for that was
    because the Appellants had made applications  for  residence  cards  as
    extended family members of a cousin who was married to an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 2. At the time the Judge dealt with it the  relevant  case  law  was  Sala
    (extended family members - right of appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411.   That
    case was a case in the Upper  Tribunal  finding  that  extended  family
    members did not have a right of appeal and  on  that  basis  the  Judge
    dismissed the appeals for want of jurisdiction.  However, we  now  have
    the case of Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 by the Court of Appeal decided on
    22nd August 2017.  That case determined that Sala was  wrongly  decided
    and that extended family members do have a right to appeal.

 3. Accordingly, through no fault of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
    decided the case the jurisdiction point was  wrong  and  therefore  the
    First-tier Tribunal did have an appeal before it, it is only right that
    that appeal is determined in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  that
    reason the decision  is  set  aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.  It is not clear from the  file  whether
    an oral hearing was requested and paid for but no  doubt  that  can  be
    determined in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and the matter remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 13th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
