
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/08346/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 February 2019                      |On 08 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                               mr sumit sudan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Vencatachellum of Counsel, instructed by Adam
                  Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India appealing against the  decision  of
    the  respondent  who,  on  3rd  October  2017,  refused  to  grant  his
    application for a permanent residence card as confirmation of his right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.

2.   By way of background the appellant was married to Inga Sudan a  citizen
    of Lithuania. He entered into the United Kingdom in July 2005  and  was
    issued with an EEA  family  permit  on  18th  May  2012  following  his
    marriage to Inga Sudan an EEA national.

3.   Seemingly she has worked as a care assistant from September 2009  until
    August 2016 when she went on maternity leave.

4.   Proceedings to  end  the  marriage  were  legally  instituted  on  14th
    September 2016.  They lived together until 15th March 2016.  There  are
    court proceedings in relation to a non-molestation injunction  that  is
    lodged against him.  The decree  absolute  of  divorce  is  yet  to  be
    granted.

5.   The terms of the refusal decision are instructive in this appeal,  that
    being a decision of 3rd October 2017.  Reasons for  refusal  was  on  a
    limited basis namely:-

              "You have failed to  provide  a  valid  passport/ID  card,  as
         confirmation  of  your  sponsor's  identity,  in  support  of  your
         application.  You have only provided a photocopy  of  a  Lithuanian
         passport [           ].   You  have  therefore  not  satisfied  the
         Secretary of State that you are the former family member of an  EEA
         or Swiss national.


         The Regulations state that all applications submitted by a  non-EEA
         national after 1st February 2017 must be accompanied or joined by a
         valid national identity card or passport in the name  of  that  EEA
         national.


              although it is noted that you are divorced from your  sponsor,
         you have failed to provide any evidence that you have  in  any  way
         attempted to obtain the ID document required for this  application.
         As such this department  is  unable  to  establish  that  you  have
         exhausted all routes to demonstrate that  you  have  are  a  former
         family member of an EEA national who  has  retained  the  right  of
         residence in the United Kingdom".

6.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman on 22nd August  2018.   The
    respondent was not represented on that occasion.

7.   The Judge noted the particular reason for the refusal.

8.   It was submitted by Counsel that by reason  of  Regulation  42  of  the
    2016 EEA Regulations it  was  open  to  the  respondent  to  waive  the
    requirements, where alternative evidence had been presented, when there
    were circumstances beyond the appellant's control preventing  him  from
    obtaining the original documentation.

9.   The Judge noted the occupation order and non-molestation  order  issued
    by the Family Court at East London dated 27th  October  2016.   It  was
    also noted that the respondent  did  not  contest  the  making  of  the
    occupation order and non-molestation order made on 29th July 2016 which
    continued until 26th October 2017.

10.  The key reason why the application was refused is  that  the  appellant
    had not taken all steps to  obtain  the  relevant  documentation.   The
    Judge went on at paragraph 40 to say

         "It  is  clear  that  both  the  appellant  and  his  ex-wife  were
         represented by solicitors during the  ongoing  non-molestation  and
         during proceeding.  Whilst I accept that the appellant is unable to
         contact his ex-wife directly, his solicitors could have written  to
         his ex-wife's solicitors requesting her passport or  identity  card
         for the purposes of immigration proceedings.   However,  they  have
         failed to do so.


              The solicitors for Ms Sudan could have sent  directly  to  the
         Home Office her passport if she did not want the appellant to  have
         this document or alternatively the solicitors could have sent it to
         Mr Sudan's solicitors.  However, no attempts have  been  undertaken
         in this regard".

11.  Challenge is made to the comments made by the Judge at paragraph 38  of
    the determination.  There is a considerable merit in that challenge. It
    would seem to be quite irrelevant  to  the  issue  under  consideration
    whether or not the appellant had been aggressive and whether or not  he
    was at fault with the behaviour towards his ex-wife.   Essentially  the
    grounds contend that the appellant  had  indeed  taken  all  reasonable
    steps given the fact of the molestation order.

12.  Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  that  basis  that
    the Judge failed to take into consideration all the evidence, including
    the  difficulties  which  the  appellant  would  practically  face   in
    contacting his wife.

13.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine  the  issue.    Ms
    Vencatachellum submits that in this case a common-sense view should  be
    taken of the totality of the evidence that  has  been  presented.   The
    appellant has  produced  his  passport  in  which  the  residence  card
    permission is enclosed.  He would not have been granted  that  had  his
    wife not been a  EEA  national.   He  produced  the  photocopy  of  her
    passport and it was certainly within the ability of the  respondent  to
    verify her particulars and details.  There seems to be no challenge  to
    the fact that she was exercising treaty rights for the requisite period
    and therefore it would not be difficult for the  authorities  to  check
    her details.

14.  As the refusal decision makes it clear  there  is  really  a  two-stage
    process.  First is that the original documentation should be  presented
    unless it be shown that it was beyond the ability of the  appellant  to
    do so.

15.  If so, alternative ways of proving the identity would be considered.

16.  The decision notice was issued on 3rd  October  2017  and  the  hearing
    itself almost a year later on 22nd August 2018.   The  decision  letter
    set out in the  clearest  possible  terms  what  was  expected  of  the
    appellant and that was not done as was indicated by the Judge.  Contact
    between  solicitors  could  have  been  established  either  to  obtain
    physical possession of the passport or  at  the  very  least  that  the
    wife's solicitors could have duly certified the original passport as  a
    true copy.  No attempt was made to do that.  It may well  be  that  the
    attitude of the wife may have been such  that  it  would  have  been  a
    futile exercise but it is difficult to argue  when  the  obvious  steps
    were not taken.

17.  Ms Vencatachellum  indicated  that  an  email  had  been  sent  to  the
    solicitors on 11th February of this year to which no response had  been
    made.  Once again, the appeal was determined on 22nd  August  2018  and
    there had been a number of months in which those enquiries  could  have
    been made.

18.  I recognise in fairness to the appellant that it is a narrow point  and
    it is perhaps unfortunate that it  has  occupied  much  court  time  in
    hearing the matter.  As I have indicated, an obvious course of  conduct
    was suggested to the appellant by  the  respondent  which  was  not  in
    effect conducted.

19.  I found that nothing unlawful or unreasonable in what the Judge had  to
    say on the issue and accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

20.  I simply express the hope that common-sense  will  prevail  as  between
    the two parties and that the appellant carry  out  the  enquiries  that
    have been asked of him and that the respondent  thereafter  can  verify
    the identity if need be by other means.  This  seems  to  be  the  only
    point and the limited point  and  it  would  be  unfortunate  to  incur
    further court time in litigating a matter which seems on its face to be
    well able to be resolved with cooperation on both sides.

Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The First-tier decision
shall stand namely that the appeal in respect of the EEA decision is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5th March 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

