

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/08160/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 October 2018                      |  On 7 November 2018               |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              CHRISTIAN LEISTER
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    No appearance or representation.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
   decision to refuse the claimant admission to the United Kingdom  pursuant
   to Regulations 23 and 27 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations 2016.  Admission was refused, and removal  directions  given,
   on 15 September 2018.

The EEA Regulations 2016

2. Regulation 23 of the 2016 Regulations excepts from  the  automatic  right
   of admission certain categories of person.  In relation  to  the  present
   claimant, the exception is to be found in Regulation 23(1):

         "23.-(1) A person is not entitled to  be  admitted  to  the  United
         Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11  if  a  refusal  to  admit  that
         person is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
         public health in accordance with regulation 27."

3. Regulation 27, so far as relevant here, is as follows:

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
         public health

         27.-(1) In this regulation, a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve  economic  ends.
         ...

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;
             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;
             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;
             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;
             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person. ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.)."

4. Schedule 1, so far as relevant, is as follows:

         "Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or  public  security  values:  member  States  enjoy   considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by  the  EU  Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to  define  their  own
         standards of  public  policy  and  public  security,  for  purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time. ...

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.   For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the   fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-...

             (b)  maintaining public order;
             (c)  preventing social harm; ...
             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
             particularly from exploitation and trafficking;
             (j)  protecting the public; ...
             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
             values."

5. That is the statutory regime  against  which  this  decision  to  exclude
   falls to be considered.

Background

6. The claimant is a citizen of Germany.  He and a number of  other  persons
   arrived at Stansted  Airport  on  a  flight  from  Berlin  on  Friday  15
   September 2017, seeking to attend a music concert  in  Birmingham  called
   Blood and Honour, in honour of the late Ian Stuart Donaldson, due to take
   place on the third weekend of September, to mark the 25th anniversary  of
   Mr Donaldson's death on 23 September 1993.  Ian Donaldson  was  the  lead
   member of Skrewdriver, a far right extremist music group whose songs  and
   materials incite racial hatred.

7. The Secretary of State has provided documents from  the  Skrewdriver  and
   Combat 18 website, setting out the aims of these organisations, including
   excerpts from a  Field  Manual  on  the  Skrewdriver  website,  which  is
   headlined 'Combat 18, Blood & Honour'.  The Manual is  dedicated  to  the
   late George Lincoln Rockwell and Ian Stuart Donaldson.  Chapter 2, headed
   Organization, sets out the structure of Ian Stuart Donaldson's Blood  and
   Honour movements in the United Kingdom and abroad:

         "As a rule, the Blood & Honour movement is organised as a  network,
         which  activities  to  a  large  extent  is  based  on   leaderless
         resistance. (The exception being  Germany,  where  -  probably  for
         ethnic and cultural reasons - the  B&H  comrades  have  chosen  the
         classic and traditional organisational  structure,  with  officials
         and membership). ... The purpose of the  Blood  &  Honour  movement
         must be to attract and activate young Whites  through  White  Power
         music and other White Pride  cultural  activities,  along  National
         Socialist Political guidelines.  These followers should then be led
         into existing  political  parties/organisations  of  the  NS  kind.
         Where no such groups exist, the B&H should either create  its  own,
         or continue working solely through the B&H apparatus.  Despite  its
         flaws, the network model is still the best and proven  alternative.
         No self-styled 'leaders', no membership cards: guided forward by an
         elite of active idealists and united by a common  bond  of  purpose
         and goal. ..."

8. Another document sets out the aims of  the  linked  organisation,  Combat
   18.  It is a profoundly unpleasant list:

         "1.  To ship all non-whites back to Africa, Asia, Arabia, alive  or
         in body bags, the choice is theirs.
         2.   To smash the IRA and anyone else who kills  British  Squaddies
         and civilians.  There are NO legitimate targets!
         3.   To execute all Queers.
         4.   To execute all white race mixers.
         5.   To weed out all Jews in the government, the media,  the  arts,
         the professions.  To execute al Jews who have  actively  helped  to
         damage the white race and to put into camps the rest, until we find
         a final solution for the eternal Jew.
         6.   To form  a  white  commonwealth  containing  Europe,  America,
         Canada, South Africa, Australia etc.
         7.   the building up of our Armed Forces.
         8.   To stop killing white babies before they  are  even  born  and
         return to traditional family values.
         9.   To make Britain as self-sufficient as possible,  by  wrestling
         back control of our national assets,  and  in  vesting  in  British
         industry, banning foreign imports and only trading with like-minded
         white countries.  To go  and  plunder  whatever  raw  materials  we
         require from Africa, Asia, etc.
         10.  To hang all rapists and child molesters, after chopping  their
         bollocks off.
         11.  To re-educate and reintroduce decent white values and  promote
         a healthy white community free from Jewish poison and phoney  ideas
         of 'freedom' and 'democracy'."

9. Combat 18 and Blood & Honour organise the  concerts  which  the  claimant
   wished to attend in September 2018.

Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

10. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  consisted  of  the  Border
   Force officer's statement and a transcript of the notebook of an  officer
   from the Essex  Counter-Terrorism  Police,  who  did  not  interview  the
   claimant but another member of the group of 10 persons who  travelled  to
   Stansted from Berlin on the day in question. The Counter-Terrorism police
   officer says that part of his role within the  unit  is  to  monitor  the
   threat posed by individuals linked to domestic extremism, including those
   associated with extreme right-wing activity.

11.  The  Counter-Terrorism  police  had  been  provided  with  intelligence
   identifying  those  likely  to  attend  the  September  2018  Skrewdriver
   concert, and had a list of 10 names  of  persons  who  were  said  to  be
   suspected of extreme  right-wing  activities  and  sympathies.  The  list
   included this claimant. They were to be stopped, to obtain an account  of
   their intentions whilst in the United Kingdom.  All 10  were  apprehended
   at Stansted Airport, spoken  with  by  Border  Force,  and  detained  for
   further enquiries.

12. The Counter-Terrorism police officer's statement  records  an  interview
   with another member of the group, Thomas Hempel, who  confirmed  that  he
   had come to attend the concert as part of the same group of  10  arriving
   from Germany.  Mr Hempel admitted that  he  had  been  to  two  or  three
   previous Ian Stuart Donaldson memorial concerts.   The  location  of  the
   concerts is not given out in advance, making it more  difficult  for  the
   police to interrupt and close them  down.   Mr  Hempel  asked  where  the
   claimant was, and confirmed that the claimant was one of  those  who  was
   going to attend the concert on the next day.  Mr Hempel said that he  did
   not yet know where the concert was, but  that  'my  friend  will  let  me
   know'.

13. The statement of a United  Kingdom  Border  Force  Officer  at  Stansted
   airport says that officers from Essex Police Counter  Terrorism  Division
   apprehended the claimant on entry as they were satisfied that he had  the
   intention to attend the banned  extreme  right-wing  concert,  which  was
   known to have been planned for somewhere in the United Kingdom  over  the
   weekend of 15-17 September 2017.

14. The Border Force Officer interviewed the claimant, who was reluctant  to
   answer questions.  The Border Force Officer did  not  consider  that  the
   claimant was telling the truth.  Describing the risk from those attending
   the concert, the Border Force Officer said this:

         "6.  These types of events are known to  use  the  music  scene  to
         provide an international stage to exploit the  ideological  beliefs
         of the Far Right, enabling the open  preaching  of  different  hate
         messages,  often  without   any   law   enforcement   interference.
         Attendance at these events has been linked to public disorder, acts
         of violence, and in extreme cases, direct acts of  terrorism.   One
         such  group,  known  as  'Blood  and  Honour'  is  engaged  in  the
         distribution of extreme material and racist ideology via  websites,
         magazines and other literature, particularly through the lyrics  of
         the 'white power' music scene. ...

         12.   The  appeal  also  confirms  that  the  concert  went   ahead
         unhindered and equally has taken place every year since 1994.   The
         'Ian Donaldson Memorial Concert'  was  not  granted  a  licence  to
         operate and therefore any event taking place  or  otherwise,  under
         the auspices of being this type of  event,  is  therefore  illegal,
         regardless  of  whether  there  were  any  specific  instances   of
         breaching any of the fundamental interests of society. ..."

15. The claimant was refused leave to enter on the  basis  that  the  Border
   Force Officer believed that he planned to attend  the  concert  and  that
   therefore his planned activities while in the United Kingdom presented  a
   serious threat to the fundamental interests of society and were likely to
   incite tensions between local communities here.   Removal directions were
   set for 1900 hours on 15 September 2017 and the claimant was  removed  to
   Germany.

Appeal to First-tier Tribunal

16. The claimant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  through  his  German
   legal representative, Rechtsanwalt Alexander Heinig.  The  basis  of  the
   appeal is summarised in Herr Heinig's covering letter:

         "As stated in [the appeal form], my client did not seek immigration
         into the United Kingdom but only wanted to spend a weekend there.

         As cause for  his  refusal  of  admission,  it  is  stated  in  the
         immigration decision that he wanted to attend  a  memorial  concert
         for Ian Stuart Donaldson  and  that  this  activity  would  bear  a
         serious threat to the fundamental interest of society and is likely
         to incite tensions between local communities in the United Kingdom.

         Even assuming that it is true that my client wanted to attend  this
         concert, the decision is not consistent  with  the  action  of  the
         authorities concerning that concert in general.   The  concert  was
         not stopped by the police or other authorities and went ahead.   If
         such a concert would really be a threat to the fundamental interest
         of the British society, or were likely to incite  tensions  between
         local communities in the United Kingdom, this  would  certainly  be
         cause enough to stop such an event.  In  spite,  the  concert  went
         ahead unhindered. ...this sort of concert  has  taken  place  every
         year since 1994 and has never caused  any  tensions  between  local
         communities in the United Kingdom.

         In truth, the decision is simply based  on  the  assumed  political
         beliefs of my  client  and  is  therefore  unconstitutional  and  a
         violation of his personal freedom."

17. The claimant had visited the United Kingdom before, and intended  to  do
   so again.

First-tier Tribunal decision

18. The First-tier Tribunal considered the appeal  on  the  papers,  neither
   party having arranged representation.  The Judge noted the evidence  from
   the Border Force officer that the claimant  had  denied  any  involvement
   with far-right extremist groups.  The claimant had not admitted  that  he
   intended to attend the concert,  but  the  Immigration  Officer  did  not
   believe his denial and was satisfied that the claimant intended to attend
   an extreme right-wing concert while in the United Kingdom.  The  memorial
   concert had not been granted a licence to  proceed  and  was  an  illegal
   event.

19. The claimant relied on an unreported  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  the
   appeal of Niela  Kremtz  (the  Kremtz  decision)  in  March  2018.  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Blum concluded in that case that the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal was unsafe, and remade  the  decision  in  favour  of  that
   appellant, finding on the facts, that there was  no  evidence  that  that
   appellant's presence at  the  concert  was  likely  to  incite  community
   tensions in the United Kingdom or  that  the  appellant  in  that  matter
   intended to foster international links between extremist groups.

20.    In this appeal, the First-tier  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
   decision taken by the Immigration Officer was based  exclusively  on  the
   personal conduct of the claimant  or  that  the  claimant  represented  a
   genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of  the
   fundamental interests of society, recognising that  the  threat  did  not
   need to be imminent.  The First-tier Judge  found  as  a  fact  that  the
   claimant did indeed intend to attend an illegal  concert,  along  with  9
   other individuals arriving on that Berlin flight.  However,  he  did  not
   accept the evidence of the Border Force officer that the  claimant  would
   use the concert as an opportunity to express or support extremist groups,
   nor that there were any 'planned activities' beyond attendance.

21. The First-tier Judge allowed the claimant's appeal.

Permission to appeal

22. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, reminding the  Upper
   Tribunal that the  government's  Prevent  (2011)  and  Counter  Terrorism
   (2018) strategies state that 'intelligence indicates that [the risk of] a
   terrorist attack in our country is SEVERE and highly likely and that  the
   threat is large, multifaceted, diverse and evolving'.  The  Secretary  of
   State relied on the 5 terrorist attacks in the United Kingdom in 2017 and
   stated that four far right extremist plots had been  disrupted  in  2017.
   Refusal of entry to the claimant was necessary and lawful.

23. Evidence of 'planned activities' was  beyond  the  evidential  remit  in
   this  appeal:  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  permitted  to  take
   imperative preventative measures to  mitigate  against  any  threat  from
   extremism and any  intelligence,  however  limited,  must  be  given  due
   regard, to protect public safety. The Secretary of State  submitted  with
   her grounds of appeal further intelligence from Border  Force  which  has
   been set out above.

24. The Secretary of State's grounds argued that  evidence  from  the  Essex
   Counter-Terrorism police officer and the Border Force officer should have
   been given determinative weight, and that  the  fact  that  the  proposed
   event was unlawful should be taken  into  account  when  considering  its
   having been able to proceed unhindered:

         "10.  ...regarding   the   threat   of   extremist   activity   and
         radicalisation to and from those  attending  the  concert.   It  is
         submitted that from the Blood and Honour excerpt [paragraph 15]  it
         could be considered that there is a clear intention  to  radicalise
         'white youth'.  The ideology of Blood  and  Honour  and  Combat  18
         needs to be understood when considering appropriate action  at  the
         United Kingdom border and it is  respectfully  submitted  that  the
         First-tier Judge has failed  to  have  due  regard  to  the  public
         interest to do so.

         11.  In addition, the lyrics of songs performed at such  events  as
         the  Ian  Stuart  Donaldson  Memorial  Concert  certainly  reflects
         extremist and Nazi ideology. Whilst some individuals may be seeking
         to enter the United Kingdom to attend such events, perhaps for  the
         first time and unaware of the actual content, it is  reasonable  to
         conclude that most visiting   individuals  to  such  events  openly
         display their support for neo-Nazist  [sic]  ideologies,  may  with
         tattoos such as 88, representing the eighth letter of the  alphabet
         twice, HH i.e. Heil Hitler, or 18 as in Combat 18, AH=Adolf Hitler.
          Such ideologies  run  counter  to  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society and such individuals are clearly not those whose entry,  if
         facilitated to the United Kingdom, is conducive to the public good.
         "



Permission to appeal

25. Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth,  who
   considered that it was 'arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient
   weight to the factors bearing  upon  public  policy  and  has  introduced
   requirements going beyond that which has to be demonstrated'.

26. First-tier Judge Hollingworth also granted permission on the basis  that
   it was arguable that a differing interpretation could be attached to  the
   available evidence.  That is not a proper basis for a grant of permission
   to appeal: in order for the Upper Tribunal to interfere with a finding of
   fact or the weight given  to  evidence,  there  must  be  more  than  the
   possibility of a different interpretation (see  Lord  Justice  Brooke  at
   [90] in R (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department   [2005]
   EWCA Civ 982).

27. I consider this appeal therefore only on the basis of the weight  to  be
   given  to  public  policy  factors  and  whether  the  Judge   introduced
   requirements going beyond the provisions of the 2016 Regulations.

Rule 24 Reply

28. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the claimant,  and  he  did  not
   arrange for representation at the hearing today.

29. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

30. In the absence of any Rule 24 Reply or submissions  from  the  claimant,
   or any attendance by him, Mr McVeety relied on the Secretary  of  State's
   grounds of appeal.

Discussion

31. At the hearing, I indicated that in the absence  of  any  representation
   by the claimant, I was likely to allow the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
   and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.    I  reserved  my
   decision, and it is the written decision which is the decision of record.



32. In preparing my decision, I have  reluctantly  come  to  the  conclusion
   that despite the unsavoury nature of the  organisation  which  is  behind
   this annual concert, the Secretary of State has failed to show  that  the
   personal conduct of this claimant  constituted  a  genuine,  present  and
   sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
   society, by reference to his own past or intended actions.

33. In reaching that conclusion, I have considered the  evidence  which  was
   before the First-tier Tribunal.  The claimant was identified on a list of
   10 persons of interest to Essex Police Counter Terrorism  Division  based
   at Stansted airport because of their proposed attendance at  this  event.
   The evidence before the First-tier Judge consisted of a witness statement
   from a Counter-Terrorism police officer,  relating  to  an  interview  of
   someone else, not this appellant, and one from  a  Border  Force  officer
   which took the listing of this claimant by the  Counter-Terrorism  police
   as determinative of the right of exclusion.

34. In Arranz (EEA Regulations-deportation-test)  [2017]  UKUT  00294  (IAC)
   the Upper Tribunal held that the burden of proof that a person represents
   a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
   fundamental interests of society is on the Secretary  of  State,  to  the
   standard of balance of probabilities.

35. In Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Robinson  (Jamaica)
   [2018] EWCA Civ 85, Lord Justice Singh (with whom Lord Justice  Underhill
   and Lord Justice Lindblom agreed), the Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
   Bouchereau exception as it applies to deportation, rather than  exclusion
   from entry.  At [84]-[86], Singh LJ said this:

         "84. ...  Although the CJEU did not expressly refer  to  Bouchereau
         with approval in CS, nor it did in terms overrule it or depart from
         it. Further, there is no reason, in my  view,  to  regard  the  two
         decisions as being necessarily inconsistent with each  other.  This
         is because, as I have said in my earlier  analysis  of  Bouchereau,
         that case itself recognised that what  one  is  looking  for  is  a
         present threat to the requirements of public policy;  but  it  also
         recognised that, in an extreme case, that threat might be evidenced
         by past conduct which has caused deep public revulsion.

         85.      However, with all of that said, I am also of the view that
         the sort of case that the ECJ had in mind in  Bouchereau,  when  it
         referred to past conduct alone as potentially being sufficient, was
         not the present sort of case but one whose facts are very  extreme.
         It is neither  necessary  nor  helpful  to  attempt  an  exhaustive
         definition but the sort of case that the court was thinking of  was
         where, for example, a person has committed grave offences of sexual
         abuse or violence against young children.

         86.  I would not wish to belittle the seriousness of the offence in
         the present case but it is not the sort of offence in which  public
         revulsion at a past offence alone will be sufficient. I note  that,
         in Straszewski, Moore-Bick LJ referred  to  "the  most  heinous  of
         crimes" at para. 17. That  gives  an  indication  of  the  sort  of
         offence the ECJ had in mind when it said that a past offence  alone
         might suffice. I also note that, in ex p.  Marchon,  the  defendant
         was convicted of an offence of conspiracy to  import  4�  kg  of  a
         Class A drug (heroin); he was a doctor; and he was sentenced to  11
         years' imprisonment. As Moore-Bick LJ  observed  in  commenting  on
         that case in  Straszewski,  at  para.  18,  the  offence  had  been
         described by this Court in  ex  p.  Marchon  as  being  "especially
         horrifying" and "repugnant to  the  public"  because  it  had  been
         committed by a doctor. In contrast, as the UT noted at para. 28  of
         its judgment in the  present  case,  the  sentence  of  30  months'
         imprisonment that was imposed on this Respondent was at  the  lower
         end of the scale for offences of supplying Class A drugs."

   There is no suggestion that the present claimant or any other  member  of
   the 10-person group detained and questioned at Stansted airport have  any
   previous conviction which  could  engage  the  provisions  of  Regulation
   27(5).

36. The question  of  the  requirement  in  Regulation  27(5)  for  personal
   conduct also arose in the Kremtz decision in March 2018.   That  decision
   is not a reported decision.  There has been no application for permission
   to rely upon an unreported decision but as the claimant is represented by
   a German lawyer, I do not  take  that  point  against  him.   Judge  Blum
   considered that Mr Kremtz was intending to do no more than attend a  neo-
   Nazi  music  concert,  with  no  evidence  that  he  intended  to  foster
   international links between extremist groups.  The Upper Tribunal allowed
   the Kremtz appeal, finding that the Secretary of State had not discharged
   the duty on him of showing personal conduct which  presented  a  genuine,
   present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental
   interests of society.

37. I have considered whether the First-tier Judge in this appeal  correctly
   applied Regulation 27(5) to the facts of this  application.   The  First-
   tier Judge found that the claimant came to the United Kingdom  to  attend
   an illegal concert and accepted the  evidence  of  the  Counter-Terrorism
   police that all 10 of the group on their list were intending  to  do  so.
   The matters advanced in the grounds of  appeal  are  matters  of  general
   prevention.  Nothing in the materials before me refers to the  claimant's
   personal conduct, past or future, save for his intention  to  attend  the
   illegal concert.  The Secretary of  State  has  not  asserted  that  mere
   attendance at an illegal event is a criminal offence.  He has provided no
   evidence of past occurrences at  these  concerts,  which  might  indicate
   future problems, or of this claimant's other personal conduct.

38. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did not identify why,  other
   than their attendance at the concert, the Counter-Terrorism  police  were
   interested in these individuals.   It  may  well  be  that  the  Counter-
   Terrorism police, or indeed the security services, have more  information
   specific to this claimant than appears in the materials  before  me.   If
   that is the case, then in order to discharge the burden of proof upon the
   Secretary of State, the gist thereof should have been made  available  to
   the Judge.

39. The Secretary of State's evidence in this appeal  comes  to  this:  that
   the Counter-Terrorism police are satisfied that this claimant and  his  9
   colleagues present a risk, and that the Tribunal must take  the  police's
   word for that.  That is not enough. Reluctantly, in view of the nature of
   the organisation and its aims, I conclude that the Secretary of State had
   not discharged the burden upon him of showing why he considered that this
   claimant's  conduct  in  attending  the  Ian  Stuart  Donaldson  memorial
   concert, or any other conduct which the Secretary of State considered  he
   would commit while in the United Kingdom, would incite local tensions  or
   cause criminal offences to be committed.

40. The decision of the First-tier Judge was open to  her  on  the  evidence
   and the respondent's grounds of appeal disclose no material error of  law
   therein.

41. This appeal is therefore dismissed.

DECISION

42. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         29 October 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




