
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/08230/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 14th March 2018                  |On: 23rd March 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                         Syed Zaigham Arafat Bukhari
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Patel of Counsel instructed by Amjad Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 1st April 1972.
          He appeals with  permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Ennals), who on the 14th July  2017  dismissed  his
         appeal against a decision to revoke his residence card,  made  with
         reference to regulation 2 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006.

         Background and Matters in Issue Before the First-tier Tribunal

      2. The relevant chronology in this case was not made altogether  clear
         but in summary the facts are these. The Appellant came to the UK in
         2004 with leave to enter as a student.  On the 1st December 2008 he
         married a Portuguese national who was exercising treaty  rights  in
         the UK. Her name was Ms Mendes. The Appellant duly applied for, and
         on the 4th November 2009 was granted, confirmation of his right  to
         reside in the UK as the spouse of Ms Mendes. On  the  17th  January
         2014 he was granted a permanent residence card.

      3. At some point thereafter the Appellant applied to naturalise  as  a
         British national. When the Respondent considered  that  application
         the following matters came to light. The Appellant  and  Ms  Mendes
         were divorced on the 1st September 2014. On the 29th November  2014
         he had married in the UK a  Pakistani  national,  Ms  Tabassum.  Ms
         Tabassum and the Appellant had a child together, born  in  Pakistan
         in 2005. These assertions  led  the  Respondent  to  interview  the
         Appellant and Ms Tabassum and having done  so  she  concluded  that
         discrepancies  in  the  accounts  given  "did  not  add  up".   The
         Respondent found that the Appellant had been married to Ms Tabassum
         prior to his marriage to Ms Mendes and  that  his  marriage  to  Ms
         Mendes had in fact been a marriage of convenience conducted for the
         purposes of obtaining  a  residence  card  under  the  regulations.
         The Secretary of State revoked the Appellant's  residence  card  on
         the 10th June 2016. I assume, although I am not told, that she also
         rejected his application for naturalisation as a British national.

      4. The Appellant exercised his right of appeal before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
         on the 13th June  2017.  On  that  day  the  Respondent  sought  to
         introduce further evidence,  and  to  supplement  her  grounds  for
         revocation. She produced a copy of Ms Tabassum's passport, held  on
         Home Office files,  upon  which  the  Appellant  is  named  as  her
         husband. That passport was issued on the  2nd  November  2007.  The
         Respondent submitted  that  this  was  further  evidence  that  the
         marriage to Ms Mendes was a sham, and further that in  the  absence
         of any evidence of a divorce from Ms Tabassum, it also demonstrated
         that the marriage to Ms Mendes was invalid, since the Appellant had
         not been free to marry her.  Judge Ransley  very  fairly  adjourned
         the matter, to enable the Appellant to  give  instructions  to  his
         legal representatives on this new evidence.

      5. On the 14th July 2017 the matter came before Judge Ennals.   Having
         had regard to the documentary evidence before  him,  and  the  live
         evidence given by the Appellant, Judge Ennals determined  that  the
         Appellant had in fact been married to Ms Tabassum all along, and in
         particular at the point that he purported to marry Ms  Mendes.  The
         conclusion is simply stated:

             "The EEA residence card, issued on the basis of marriage to an
             EEA  national,  was  issued  on   the   basis   of   a   false
             representation, and is validly revoked. On that basis I do not
             need to consider whether the marriage to  Ms  Mendes  was  for
             convenience, since it was not a valid marriage at all".

      6.  The  appeal  was  accordingly  dismissed  and  the  Appellant  now
         challenges that decision on several grounds.

         Discussion and Findings

         Ground (i): Failure to Consider Material Evidence

      7. Ground (i)  is  concerned  with  Judge  Ennal's  finding  that  the
         Appellant and Ms Tabassum had been married prior to the marriage to
         Ms Mendes. Ms Patel submits that the Tribunal  based  that  finding
         solely on the fact that he had been named as Ms Tabassum's  husband
         in her 2007 passport, and that in taking that approach he erred  in
         failing to weigh in the balance competing evidence  to  the  effect
         that they not in fact been married. In particular Ms  Patel  relies
         on the record of interviews conducted by the Respondent on the  4th
         May 2016 when the Appellant and Ms Tabassum both denied having been
         married in Pakistan.

      8. I am satisfied that Judge Ennals was entitled to place considerable
         weight on the fact that Ms Tabassum  named  the  Appellant  as  her
         husband in her 2007 passport. The Appellant had denied knowing that
         she had done so but this is of little consequence, since  it  would
         appear likely that  Ms  Tabassum  would  necessarily  have  had  to
         satisfy the Pakistani passport authority that he was  in  fact  her
         husband.    I am further satisfied  that  this  was  not  the  sole
         evidence upon which Judge Ennals based his decision.  At  paragraph
         12 he finds that the Appellant  is  also  named  as  Ms  Tabassum's
         husband in a second passport issued to her,  on  the  18th  October
         2012, at a time when he was supposedly still living with Ms Mendes.
         At  paragraphs  12-15  Judge  Ennals  highlights  the   fundamental
         discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence on the  point.  He  and  Ms
         Tabassum had denied at interview that they had ever been married in
         Pakistan,  yet  at  hearing,  having  been  confronted   with   the
         passports, the Appellant changed his evidence and agreed that  they
         had in fact undergone an Islamic marriage sometime in 2004 or 2005.
           There were therefore several reasons why Judge Ennals reached the
         conclusions that he did, and it is in my view  unarguable  that  he
         omitted to weigh in the balance the Appellant's  interview  record:
         he expressly refers  to  that  evidence  at  paragraph  14  of  his
         reasoning.  He rejects that evidence on  the  grounds  that  it  is
         inconsistent with the Appellant's testimony before him.

         Ground (ii): Validity of the 'Islamic' Marriage

      9. The second ground advanced before me  was  that  Judge  Ennals  had
         erred in his conclusion that the Islamic marriage  to  Ms  Tabassum
         was valid, and thus precluded the Appellant from lawfully  marrying
         Ms Mendes.  Ms Patel submits that there was no evidence before  the
         Tribunal to the  effect  that  such  a  ceremony  was  valid  under
         Pakistani law;  she  submits  that  under  the  Muslim  Law  Family
         Ordinance 1961 it is  not.   It  had  been  the  Appellant's  clear
         evidence that the marriage was not legally recognised in Pakistan.

     10. It was the oral evidence of the Appellant before Judge Ennals  that
         he had undergone an "Islamic marriage" in  Pakistan.  As  is  noted
         above, this marriage was prima facie recognised  as  valid  by  the
         Pakistani passport authorities on the two occasions that  they  had
         issued a passport to Ms Tabassum. The real difficulty for Ms  Patel
         in pursuing this ground, however, is that the statutory  provisions
         upon which she relies do not in  fact  demonstrate  that  a  simple
         Islamic marriage, a nikah, would not be recognised by the Pakistani
         state. The relevant provision of the MFLO 1961 is Regulation 5:

             '5. Registration of marriage.

             (1) Every  marriage  solemnized  under  Muslim  Law  shall  be
             registered  in  accordance  with  the   provisions   of   this
             Ordinance.

             (2) For the purpose of registration  of  marriage  under  this
             Ordinance, the Union Council shall grant licenses  to  one  or
             more persons, to be called Nikah Registrars, but  in  no  case
             shall more than on Nikah Registrar be  licensed  for  any  one
             Ward.

             (3) Every marriage  not  solemnized  by  the  Nikah  Registrar
             shall, for the purpose of registration under this Ordinance be
             reported  to  him  by  the  person  who  has  solemnized  such
             marriage.

             (4) Whoever contravenes the  provisions  of  such-section  (3)
             shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term  which
             may extent to three months, or with fine which may  extend  to
             one thousand rupees, or with both.

             (5). The form of nikahnama, the registers to be maintained  by
             Nikah  Registrars,  the  records  to  be  preserved  by  Union
             Councils, the manner in which marriage shall be registered and
             copies of nikhanama shall be supplied to parties, and the fees
             to be charged thereof, shall be such as may be prescribed.

             (6) Any person may, on payment of the prescribed fee, if  any,
             inspect  at  the  office  of  the  Union  Council  the  record
             preserved under sub-section (5), or obtain a copy of any entry
             therein.'

     11. Ms Patel submitted that since regulation 5 indicates that  a  nikah
         is to be registered, and that failure to do so  will  result  in  a
         fine, ergo a nikah that is not  registered  is  unlawful.     I  am
         unable to accept that submission.  The  conclusion  that  Ms  Patel
         draws is strikingly absent from Regulation 5.  There  is  no  doubt
         good reason for that. It is difficult to imagine that  the  statute
         intended to declare that a marriage conducted  in  accordance  with
         principles of Hanafi jurisprudence could be rendered unlawful for a
         failure to comply with some civil procedure.   The  most  that  the
         legislature could have intended  by  the  MFLO  was  to  create  an
         incentive for citizens to comply with registration requirements; it
         cannot have intended to declare procedures ordained by  the  Qur'an
         and hadith to be invalid.  That this is so is confirmed by Pearl, D
         & Menski, W Muslim Family Law  London, 1998 (3rd ed) who  say  this
         of Regulation 5:

             "On a close reading of this statutory provision, one does  not
             find a definite legal requirement  of  registration  to  bring
             about legal validity of a Muslim marriage. In other  words,  a
             Muslim marriage  in  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh  still  becomes
             legally valid when the contract of marriage has been  properly
             completed in accordance with the personal law,  not  when  the
             marriage is  registered.  All  that  the  state  law  can  do,
             therefore,  is  to  encourage  Muslims   to   register   their
             marriages.  Non-compliance  with  the  legal  requirement   to
             register may be penalised. Indeed, section 5 (4) of  the  1961
             ordinance, cited above, stipulates punishments. However, these
             are quite lenient fines and there is no evidence  that  either
             Pakistani or Bangladeshi law are treating non-registration  as
             a serious offence warranting heavy penalties".

     12. If the Appellant was telling the truth when he  told  Judge  Ennals
         that he had undergone an Islamic marriage  ceremony,  Judge  Ennals
         was quite right to conclude from that that he was  validly  married
         to Ms Tabassum in accordance with Pakistani law; in the absence  of
         any evidence that the Appellant ever divorced Ms  Tabassum  he  was
         not therefore free to marry Ms Mendes when he did.

         Ground (iii): Burden of Proof

     13. The final point raised  in  the  grounds  is  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal failed to appreciate that there was an initial, evidential
         burden on the Respondent to prove that the marriage  to  Ms  Mendes
         was a sham, or indeed invalid.   It was this ground that led  Judge
         Easterman to grant permission, noting as he did that  Judge  Ennals
         refers only to a burden on the Appellant at his paragraph 8.

     14. It is correct to say that paragraph 8 of the determination contains
         only a standard direction on burden  and  standard,  and  makes  no
         specific reference to the Respondent. I am however quite  satisfied
         that this is immaterial, since the Respondent  had  discharged  the
         burden upon her by production of the passports.




         Decisions

     15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material errors
         of law and it is upheld.

     16. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            15th March 2018.

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 22nd December 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Easterman


