
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/08231/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                              |On 16 October 2018            |
|                                               |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                          Obasanjo remilekun kudoro
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, of Counsel, instructed by D J Webb &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 27 November 1981.  He
          challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Veloso,
          promulgated on 24 April 2018, dismissing his  appeal  against  the
          respondent's refusal to grant him a residence card as  the  former
          family member of an EEA national.




       2. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidge  on  23
          May 2018 but granted on renewal by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
          Hutchinson on 30 July 2018. The matter then came before me  on  11
          October 2018.


       3. The Hearing


       4. I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  A  full  note  of  the
          submissions is set out in my Record of  Proceedings.  Essentially,
          the crux  of  Mr  Jesurum's  submission  was  that  there  was  no
          requirement in law for the  production  of  the  passport  of  the
          former EEA spouse to be adduced when an application  for  retained
          rights of residence was made. This was absent from  the  Directive
          and indeed the preamble made it clear there was no rational reason
          why it should have to be produced given that  the  respondent  had
          already seen it previously when a residence card had been  issued.
          He submitted that in the appellant's case, the respondent had seen
          the passport on three previous occasions. The judge had relied  on
          Ullah [2017] EWHC 1999 (Admin) but that was unfair as the  parties
          had not been given an opportunity to respond to that authority. It
          was also submitted that that there had been a failure to  consider
          the  proportionality  of  the  refusal  for  the  absence  of  the
          document.


       5. In response, Ms Everett acknowledged  that  the  Regulations  were
          more restrictive than the Directive. She submitted, however,  that
          there was scope for an  exception  where  the  required  documents
          could not be obtained but the appellant would have to show why  he
          could not do so.


       6. Mr Jesurum replied. He submitted that the safety valve Ms  Everett
          referred to would only come into play once  a  rationale  for  the
          production of the passport had been shown,  otherwise  it  was  an
          undue obstacle and it  was  clear  from  the  Directive  that  the
          objective was to remove obstacles and facilitate free movement.


       7. That completed the hearing. I reserved my  determination  which  I
          now give.


       8. Discussion and Conclusions


       9. The first  two  grounds  for  permission  relate  to  the  judge's
          reliance on Ullah; the first to the unfairness  in  relying  on  a
          case that was not part of the  evidence  and  the  second  to  her
          misapplication of it.


      10. The judge placed heavy reliance on  the  judgment  in  making  her
          decision. It is correct that this was an authority which  had  not
          been placed before the parties and there  is  no  indication  that
          they were alerted to it during the course of the hearing or  given
          the opportunity  to  make  submissions  on  it.  That  placed  the
          appellant, at least, at a disadvantage and has led to  unfairness.
          It is of course open to a judge to rely on a judgment that neither
          party has adduced but prior warning must be given.  This  was  not
          done in this case. On that basis alone, the determination  is  not
          sustainable.


      11. In the circumstances, it is not necessary to  consider  the  other
          criticisms made.  However, it would be helpful if the respondent's
          guidance on obtaining documentary evidence in  cases  of  retained
          rights is made available for the  next  hearing  as  this  may  be
          pertinent to the applicant's claim that he was  unable  to  obtain
          his former spouse's passport.


      12. Decision


      13. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The  decision  is  set
          aside. It shall be remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal at a date to be arranged.


      14. Anonymity


      15. I have not been asked to make an anonymity order and see no reason
          to do so.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 11 October 2018






