
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/08460/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 March 2018                           | On 29 March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                              mr joseph konadu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Counsel instructed by Tamsons Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana,  born  on  17  January  1970,  who
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  refusal  by  the
    respondent, dated 21 June 2016, to refuse the  appellant's  application
    for a residence card under Regulation 7(1)(a) and Regulation  21(b)  of
    the Immigration (EEA Regulations) 2006, with reference to Regulation  2
    which states that a spouse does not include a party to  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 1 August 2017,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Jessica Pacey dismissed the appellant's  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.  Given the findings of the Court of Appeal in Khan v SSHD
    & Anor [2017] EWCA Civ 1755  which  overturned  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 that decision was  incorrect as  the  appellant
    arguably would have had a right of appeal as an extended family member.



 3. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the appellant was habitually resident in the  UK.
    The divorce had been executed under Ghanaian customary law and  Divorce
    (Registration law).  Reliance was placed on Awuku [2017] EWCA  Civ  178
    which concluded that Kareem and TA had been wrongly decided.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. The First-tier Tribunal considered the EEA Regulations and  noted  that
    the application had been refused on the basis that  the  appellant  had
    produced a divorce certificate dated 12 June  2014,  issued  in  Ghana,
    pertaining to the cessation of his previous marriage  to  a  Ms  Awuah.
    The respondent had relied on Section 46(2) of the Family Law  Act  1986
    and the respondent's Immigration Directorate Instructions which  stated
    that an overseas divorce obtained other than by  means  of  proceedings
    shall be recognised under Section 46(2) of the Family Law Act 1986 if:

         "(a) the divorce, annulment or legal separation is effective  under
             the law of the country in which it was obtained;

         (b)  at the relevant date -

             (i)  each party to the marriage was domiciled in that country;
                  or

             (ii) each party to the marriage was domiciled in that  country
                  and the other party was domiciled in a country under whose
                  law  the  divorce,  annulment  or  legal   separation   is
                  recognised as valid; and

         (c)  neither party to the marriage was habitually resident  in  the
             United Kingdom throughout the period of one  year  immediately
             preceding that date."

 5. Although reliance was placed on Awuku this is  not  a  case  where  the
    First-tier Tribunal wrongly required that the validity of  the  divorce
    be shown to be recognised as valid by the law of another country.  This
    was a case where the respondent relied on the provisions of UK law  and
    there was nothing before me to suggest that those provisions,  set  out
    in the preceding paragraph, do not apply.  Although the respondent took
    no issue with the domicile provision, the respondent was not  satisfied
    that it  had  been  shown  that  neither  party  to  the  marriage  was
    habitually resident in the  United  Kingdom  in  the  year  immediately
    preceding the divorce.

 6. Ms Everett accepted before me that the judge erred in finding that  the
    appellant was habitually resident in the UK, as  it  was  not  disputed
    before me that the appellant did not have leave to remain in the UK and
    Ms  Everett  further  accepted  that  to  be  habitually  resident   an
    individual would require such leave; however I am  not  satisfied  that
    any error was material.  As  noted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant's former wife was also in the UK and had remained there since
    her arrival on 24 May 2011.   There  was  no  information  or  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that she was  not  habitually
    resident in the UK and therefore it had not been demonstrated that  his
    divorce was one that should be recognised under Section  46(2)  of  the
    Family Law Act 1986.

 7. In addition to her findings that the divorce  was  not  recognised  and
    therefore the appellant's later purported marriage to the  sponsor,  an
    EEA national, was not valid, the judge made  additional  findings  that
    she did not "find the appellant's account of his relationship  with  Ms
    Wansema to be credible".

 8. The Tribunal found that there were inconsistencies in the evidence  and
    also reached the conclusion that the appellant was coaching the sponsor
    or attempted to coach the sponsor during the  course  of  the  hearing.
    The judge considered that the sponsor stated that the appellant did not
    work but that his name was on the utility bills  because  friends  gave
    him money and she wanted him to be responsible for  paying  the  bills;
    the judge did not find to be a  credible  explanation  given  that  the
    sponsor was working and therefore able to pay the bills.   It  was  not
    credible that the appellant was apparently reliant on some random  sums
    of money from friends which could not guarantee there would  be  enough
    money to pay bills and that there was no information or evidence  which
    might support that claim.

 9. The judge also did not find the sponsor's evidence in relation  to  her
    council tax and her receipt of a single person discount evidence to  be
    credible.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  further  noted  that  the
    respondent in her refusal letter had contacted EDF Energy  and  British
    Gas who confirmed that they had not provided gas or electricity to  the
    appellant's address and that the bill  provided  with  the  appellant's
    application was fictitious.  EDF  Energy  also  confirmed  the  account
    number provided did not match their records.  The respondent considered
    this to be an attempt to deceive the respondent and an attempt to  gain
    residence card using fraudulent documents.

10. The Tribunal considered  all  the  evidence  and  directed  herself  in
    relation to RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 0086 and that an
    allegation of forgery needs to be proved and a bare allegation  carries
    no weight.  However in  the  Tribunal's  findings  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden  of  proof  with  respect  to  the  documents  in
    question.

11. I have considered the relevant jurisprudence in relation  to  marriages
    of  convenience  including  Papajorgi  (EEA  spouse   -   Marriage   of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC) and the Court of  Appeal  in
    Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 where it was confirmed that the burden of proof
    on the  issue  of  marriage  of  convenience  lies  throughout  on  the
    Secretary of State.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    cite the relevant case law, in the findings  that  she  reached,  which
    were in the further alternative to her findings on the validity of  the
    marriage, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered all the evidence and
    it was  apparent  that  she  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged  the  burden  in  showing  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, including because of the fraudulent documents and that she
    did not find the appellant's  account  of  his  relationship  with  the
    sponsor to be credible ([16] of the decision).

Conclusion

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  only
    insofar as the decision has been superseded by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Khan and the appellant did have a  right  of  appeal.   I  re-make  the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 29 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date: 29 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

