
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: EA/08551/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
|On: 13th December 2018                     |On: 30th January 2019           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Wahida Saddiqui
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Davison, Counsel instructed by the Sangat Advice
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan date of birth 24th September
    1976.   She appeals with permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Miles) to dismiss  her  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


 2. This matter has been settled  by  consent  so  the  background  can  be
    shortly stated.

 3. The matter in issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  Ms
    Saddiqui had a right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Surinder Singh route at Regulation 9 of the Regs.   She  asserted  that
    she and her British family members had spent a period of time living in
    the Republic of Ireland where her husband and  children  had  exercised
    treaty rights; the family had latterly relocated to the United  Kingdom
    and she now wished to be granted residence under the Regulations.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's claim that she and her
    family had genuinely resided in EIRE. At paragraph 22 the determination
    says this:

         "both  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  asserted  that  they  had
         integrated and that the children had attended school. However there
         is no documentary evidence in support of those assertions either in
         the form of letters from  friends  and  acquaintances  resident  in
         Ireland  or  from   educational   establishments   confirming   the
         attendance of the children in the Irish education system"

 5. As Mr Bramble agreed,  this  was  a  significant  error  of  fact.  The
    Appellant's bundle  did  contain  the  documentary  evidence  that  the
    Tribunal found to be lacking, notably  letters  from  the  Presentation
    Primary School, Limerick, in respect of each of the  Appellant's  three
    children confirming that they had been enrolled at the school from 31st
    August 2015 to the date of writing on  the  11th  November  2016.   The
    Respondent accepted that this error went to the heart of  the  question
    of whether the family had genuinely resided in Ireland and as such  the
    decision should be set aside.


 6.  The  parties  agreed  that  in  the  circumstances  (there   remaining
    challenges to the Appellant's claim overall) the most appropriate forum
    for remaking would be the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decisions


 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contain an error  of  law  such
    that the decision is set aside.


 8. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

 9. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          13th December 2018


