
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09765/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2018                          |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                            Mr Ifta Khairul Islam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Salim, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  made  application  for  a
    Residence Card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the extended family member of a  person  exercising  "Treaty
    rights" in the United Kingdom pursuant to Regulation 8 and 17(4) of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. That application
    was refused and he appealed and in a decision promulgated  on  27  July
    2017 Resident Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker  dismissed  the
    appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. On 9 November 2017 in Khan v SSHD and Anor [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755  the
    Court of Appeal held that Sala was wrongly decided and that a  decision
    to refuse admission or a Residence Card to an extended family member is
    an "EEA decision" within  the  meaning  of  the  above  mentioned  2016
    Regulations and therefore attracts a right of appeal.

 5. On this basis both representatives agreed that Resident  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Zucker had materially erred  and  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

 6. That is an analysis that I share.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
an error on a point of law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Court and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Resident  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Zucker.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date  16 March 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










