
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/09348/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 June 2017                            | On 20 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             Devora Nechama Lang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Devora Nechama Lang was born on 31 July 1990  and  is  a
    female citizen of Australia.  The appellant had applied for a permanent
    residence card as confirmation of her right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her application  had  been  refused  by  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 14 July 2016.  The appellant appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge S T Fox) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  28
    November 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Fox had heard this appeal on the papers.  The  appellant  asserts
    that the judge failed to have regard to documentary evidence which  had
    been submitted both to the Tribunal and to the respondent prior to  the
    date upon which the appeal was determined.  The appellant has  produced
    proof of postage and I am satisfied, on a  standard  of  proof  of  the
    balance of probabilities, that the documents had been sent and had been
    received by both the Tribunal and the respondent prior to  24  November
    2016 (the  date  upon  which  Judge  Fox,  sitting  at  North  Shields,
    determined the appeal).  For whatever reason, the  judge  has  not  had
    regard to the documents; it is likely that they were not put before him
    by the administration of the Tribunal.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set
    aside Judge Fox's decision and remade the decision.

 3. Mr McVeety, for the respondent, and I considered  the  documents  which
    had been produced  by  the  appellant,  who  attended  court  with  her
    husband, the sponsor.  Those documents, in particular the forms P60 and
    documents relating to jobseeker's allowance, clearly indicate that  for
    the five year period prior  to  the  date  of  the  application  for  a
    residence card,  the  sponsor  had  been  either  in  employment  or  a
    jobseeker.   Mr  McVeety  agreed  with  that  interpretation   of   the
    documentary evidence.  In the circumstances, I allow the appeal against
    the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant a residence card.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28 November 2016
    is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 14 July 2016 is allowed.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 19 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





