
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09006/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2018                             |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               kenneth Akuoku
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel instructed by Bwf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  G
    Walters which was promulgated on 9 January of 2018.  The appellant is a
    Ghanaian national, born on 9 December 1966 who brought an  appeal  from
    the refusal by the Secretary of State to issue  her  with  a  residence
    card pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  regulations  2  and  6  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal on the basis (i) that  the
    marriage was one of convenience, and (ii) that at the material time the
    appellant's wife (and sponsor) was not exercising treaty rights.

3.   The grounds of appeal settled by the appellant's solicitor focus on  an
    error of law alleged to have been made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    in relation to the burden and standard of proof.  Express reference  is
    made to  paragraph  6  of  the  decision  under  the  sub-heading  "The
    Applicable Law" which reads as follows:

         "In EEA appeals the burden of proof lies on the Appellant  and  the
         standard of proof is the balance of probabilities."

4.   In truth, as is conceded on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    evidential  burden  in  demonstrating  that  there  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience lies on the Secretary of State.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler
    in the following terms:-

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge misdirected himself in  relation
             to the burden of proof where, as here, the respondent asserted
             that the marriage was one of convenience.


         4.   Although the grounds do not challenge the judge's finding that
             the appellant's EEA national wife was  not  exercising  treaty
             rights and in those circumstances any error  of  law  may  not
             affect the outcome of the appeal, the appellant would arguably
             be prejudiced if he  were  to  make  another  EEA  application
             without being able  to  challenge  the  finding  that  he  had
             entered into a marriage of convenience; and  it  is  therefore
             appropriate to grant permission."

6.   Mr Malik who acts for the appellant today seeks to enlarge the  grounds
    of appeal by purporting to challenge the judge's findings  in  relation
    to whether or not the appellant's  EEA  national  wife  was  exercising
    treaty rights.  He relies on the fact that contained within the grounds
    of appeal there appears the following at paragraph 11:

         "The IJ's overall assessment of the marriage and the EEA national's
         work history, lacks clarity and does not meet the evidential burden
         test in the above cases."

7.   Mr Malik points me to the decision in Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;
    Alvi) [2012]  UKUT  00304  (IAC).   He  cites  the  head  note  and  in
    particular paragraph (2) which reads as follows:-

         "Where the First-tier Tribunal judge nevertheless intends to  grant
         permission only in respect of certain of the  applicant's  grounds,
         the judge should make this abundantly plain, both  in  his  or  her
         decision under Rule 25(5) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
         (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  by  ensuring  that  the   Tribunal's
         administrative staff send out  the  proper  notice,  informing  the
         applicant  of  the  right  to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal on  grounds on which the  applicant  has  been
         unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal."

8.   Mr Malik says that those procedural requirements were not followed.  In
    my judgment there was no obligation to follow any of  those  procedural
    requirements because the grounds do not, on their face,  challenge  the
    judge's finding in relation to the EEA  national  wife  not  exercising
    treaty rights. Paragraph 4 of the grant of permission expressly recites
    the absence of any challenge in that regard.  I agree with Miss Holmes'
    submission that paragraph 11 of the grounds is insufficient  to  amount
    to a discrete and separate ground of appeal.  In any event,  it  should
    have been plain on  the  face  of  the  grant  of  permission  that  no
    permission is granted in relation to the second matter.

9.   The situation is slightly complicated by a Rule  24  response  sent  by
    the Secretary of State and dated 12  March  of  2018.   That  reads  as
    follows:-

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
         appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider  whether
         the appellant's marriage is one of  convenience  in  light  of  the
         unchallenged findings with regards to the EEA sponsor having failed
         to exercise treaty rights."

8.   Miss Holmes at one point sought to look behind that Rule  24  statement
    and to say that looking at the  decision  in  the  round,  even  though
    paragraph 6 amounted to a misstatement, the judge in fact  applied  the
    correct burden and standard of proof. In my opinion it is not  open  to
    Miss Holmes to look behind that Rule 24 statement and to seek to uphold
    the decision.

9.   The proper course in the light of the concession made by the  Secretary
    of State is to set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision (on the basis
    of the inaccurate statement as to the burden  of  proof)  but  then  to
    remake the decision relying on  the  judge's  unchallenged  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's wife not exercising treaty  rights  and  to
    dismiss the substantive appeal on that basis.

10.  Although Mr Malik has argued against that resolution, it  seems  to  me
    that it is inevitable on the basis of the clear findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside;
   2) The decision is remade dismissing the appellant's appeal.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     19 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

