
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09637/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2019                          |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                DENNIS AGYIRI

                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms A. Radford of counsel, instructed by
Turpin Miller LLP
For the Respondent:                  Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Ghana. He entered the United Kingdom  as
    a visitor on 20 July 2010. On 8 May 2013 the Appellant was  part  of  a
    customary marriage by proxy to a  Dutch  national.  The  marriage  took
    place under the  provisions  of  the  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985. He applied for a residence card as the  spouse
    of a Dutch national, but his application was refused in  January  2014.
    In March 2016 he made a further application as the unmarried partner of
    an EEA national, but this was refused on 6 September 2016.

2.   On 10 August 2017 the  Appellant  made  a  further  application  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of as EEA national. The Respondent refused
    his application on 27 November 2017. He stated that the  Appellant  had
    not provided adequate evidence to show that he qualified for a right to
    reside. This was because he did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided the necessary documentation to  show  that  his  marriage  was
    conducted by a competent authority.  The Respondent also asserted  that
    the person concerned must  be  someone  who  is  authorised  to  handle
    marriages in Ghana.

3.    The  Appellant  is  no  longer  living  with  his  EEA  wife  but   it
    accommodated  by  her  mother  and  they  are  not  yet  divorced.  The
    Appellant's mother in law supports him and his wife and child.

4.   In a decision, promulgated on  7  December  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes dismissed the Appellant's appeal and  on  4  January  2019
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted the Appellant  permission
    to appeal.  This was on the basis that it was arguable that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes had failed to consider material matters and  also
    failed to canvas an issue which had not been  expressly  raised  within
    the Respondent's decision letter, thereby  denying  the  Appellant  the
    opportunity to address an issue of concern.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   The Appellant had made a Rule  15(2A)  application  to  submit  further
    evidence and this was granted and  therefore  the  Appellant  has  been
    granted permission to rely on a Supplementary Bundle, if  an  error  of
    law is found. The start of the hearing was delayed until  2.30  as  not
    all of the pages of the Appellant's Bundle had  been  provided  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. When the  hearing  reconvened,  both  counsel  for  the
    Appellant and the Home Office Presenting Officer made oral  submissions
    and I  have  referred  to  the  content  of  these  submissions,  where
    relevant, in my decision below.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.    Regulation  14(2)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") states that:

     "A person who is a family member of a qualified person residing in  the
    United Kingdom under paragraph  (1)...is  entitled  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom for so long as P  remains  the  family  member  of  that
    person or EEA national".

7.   In his decision letter, dated 27 November 2017, the Respondent did  not
    challenge  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been  in   a   genuine
    relationship with his wife. He also stated that:

     "as your marriage was conducted in Accra, Ghana where  proxy  marriages
    are recognised by  law,  the  Home  Office  may  recognise  your  proxy
    marriage to your sponsor  if  documentation  to  demonstrate  that  the
    marriage was conducted by a competent authority within  Ghana  is  also
    provided".

8.   This approach accorded with the decision in Awuku v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178 where the Court  of  Appeal
    found that the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) was not correct. Instead,  the
    Court of Appeal held that "the law  of  England  and  Wales  recognises
    proxy marriage if valid by the lex loci  celebrations.  Accordingly,  a
    spouse of an EU national who has concluded such a marriage will qualify
    as a family member within Article 2 of the Directive".

9.   In the refusal letter the Respondent also stated that "the person  must
    have authority to certify that the marriage is valid. That person  must
    be someone who is authorised to handle marriages in  Ghana.  It  cannot
    for example, be someone  from  the  High  Commission,  who  may  handle
    immigration matters but does not have any jurisdiction over marriages.

     The competent authority must be someone akin to a UK registrar, who  is
    authorised to handle marriages".

10.  At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  the  Appellant
    relied on a Form of Register of Customary Marriages that stated that  a
    marriage had taken place under Ghana's Customary Marriage  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985 on 8 May  2013.  The  document  had  also  been
    signed by the Registrar of the  Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly  Marriage
    District on 14 June 2013.  He did not raise any issues with the content
    or format of this document but relied on the  fact  that  there  as  an
    inaccuracy in  another  document  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant.  In
    particular, he noted  that  the  letter  from  the  Accra  Metropolitan
    Assembly Legal  Department,  dated  17  April  2018,  stated  that  the
    marriage had been registered on 14 May 2013 not 14 June 2013,  as  said
    on the "marriage document".  This mistake was rectified  in  a  further
    letter from the Accra Metropolitan Assembly Legal Department, dated  16
    October 2018, which was also before the First-tier  Tribunal.  However,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes would not accept this second letter as
    it did not state how it was that the error  was  made  or  how  it  was
    corrected and he noted that neither letter stated how the  contents  of
    the certificates being certified were verified.

11.  In particular, First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  found  that  the  only
    way that the marriage certificate could have been  certified  as  being
    accurate would be it being compared to the Register itself. If that was
    the case it would not have been possible to put the wrong month in  the
    first letter. (However, he did not take into account the possibility of
    a simple human error having been made.)

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes then referred to the case  of  Tanveer
    Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT  00439*
    and found that he could place no weight  on  the  "marriage  document".
    However, in paragraph 38 of this decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that "the decision maker should consider whether a document is  one  on
    which reliance should properly be  placed  after  looking  at  all  the
    evidence in the round". I find  that  this  case  is  relevant  to  EEA
    appeals as such appeals are conducted under the same Procedure Rules as
    asylum and immigration appeals.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer to the  other  evidence  relied
    upon by the Appellant in relation to his marriage. For  example,  there
    was a Statutory Declaration made by  the  Appellant's  and  his  wife's
    uncles, Francis Nyariloh and O. K.  Sekyere.  dated  24  October  2016,
    which confirmed that they attended the customary marriage on 8 May 2013
    and that a dowry was paid and that they had given  their  full  consent
    and approval to the marriage. There  was  also  a  document,  dated  14
    October 2016 and signed  by  Richard  Apietu,  Second  Deputy  Judicial
    Secretary of the Judicial  Services  of  Ghana,  which  confirmed  that
    George B. Kom who signed, stamped and sealed  the  uncles'  declaration
    was a notary public.  In addition, there was a further document,  dated
    25 October 2016 and signed  by  Solomon  Korbieh,  Assistant  Director,
    Legal and Consular Bureau, Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Regional
    Integration, which confirmed that it was Richard Apietu's signature  on
    the earlier confirmatory document.

14.  In addition, there was also a  document,  dated  19  October  2016,  in
    which Richard Apietu, Second Deputy Judicial Secretary of the  Judicial
    Services of Ghana, attested that Frank Adeeku, whose  stamp,  signature
    and seal appeared on the reverse side  of  "marriage  document"  was  a
    notary public of Ghana.  There was also a further  document  signed  by
    Hilda Hinidza-Elluh, the Assistant Director of the Ministry of  Foreign
    Affairs and Regional Integration  and  dated  20  October  2016,  which
    confirmed that Richard Apietu had signed the  previous  document.   The
    reverse side of the "marriage document" also discloses that she  signed
    and legalised this document on 21 September 2018.

15.  The failure by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes to  take  into  account
    any of this additional evidence or the photographs said to  be  of  the
    customary marriage and evaluate it amounted to an error of law  in  the
    context of the starred decision in Tanveer Ahmed. It was also  a  wider
    breach of procedural fairness, in so far at the Judge did not take into
    account the totality of the case being made by  the  Appellant  at  the
    appeal.

16.  In paragraph 13 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  also  stated  that
    there was "no reliable evidence to show that  the  actual  requirements
    for a valid proxy marriage would be in Ghana and no evidence to show in
    what way they were validly  complied  with".  He  added  that  a  "bald
    statement that all requirements were met would be insufficient...".

17.  This was not a basis on which the Respondent had refused to  grant  the
    Appellant a residence card and it was confirmed in paragraph 5 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Parkes decision that there was only  one  basis  on
    which the application had been refused. The Appellant was not asked  by
    the Judge at the hearing to address  any  further  allegation  that  he
    could not meet the actual requirements for a valid  proxy  marriage  in
    Ghana. Therefore, the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  to
    proceed to dismiss his appeal on this alternative basis  also  amounted
    to an error of law. Procedural fairness requires that the totality of a
    case made against an Appellant is put to him at a hearing  so  that  he
    has a proper opportunity to respond to it.

18.  As a consequence, the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  did
    contain errors of law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  is  re-made,  as
    detailed below.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 26 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


RE-MAKING

1.   As noted above, the only  basis  upon  which  the  Appellant  had  been
    refused a  residence  card  was  that  his  customary  proxy  "marriage
    document" had not been certified  by  someone  who  was  authorised  to
    handle marriages in Ghana.

2.   I have taken into account the fact that the "marriage document"  itself
    was certified by a  Registrar  from  the  Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly
    Marriage District and Richard Apietu, Second Deputy Judicial  Secretary
    of the Judicial Services of Ghana,  had  attested  that  Frank  Adeeku,
    whose stamp, signature  and  seal  appeared  on  the  reverse  side  of
    "marriage document" was a notary public of Ghana.   There  was  also  a
    further document signed by Hilda Hinidza-Elluh, the Assistant  Director
    of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration  and  dated
    20 October 2016, which confirmed that Richard  Apietu  had  signed  the
    previous document.  The reverse side of the  "marriage  document"  also
    discloses that she signed and legalised this document on  21  September
    2018.

3.   Richard Apietu,  Second  Deputy  Judicial  Secretary  of  the  Judicial
    Services of Ghana, had also confirmed that George B.  Kom  who  signed,
    stamped and sealed the Statutory Declaration made on 24 October 2016 by
    the Appellant's and his wife's  uncles,  Francis  Nyariloh  and  O.  K.
    Sekyere. was a  notary  public.   In  addition,  there  was  a  further
    document,  dated  25  October  2016  and  signed  by  Solomon  Korbieh,
    Assistant Director, Legal and  Consular  Bureau,  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs and Regional Integration, which confirmed that it  was  Richard
    Apietu's signature on the earlier confirmatory document.

4.   The evidence indicated that legal officers from the Accra  Metropolitan
    Assembly Marriage District, the Judicial  Services  of  Ghana  and  the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration  Legal  Department
    were all content that the Appellant had undertaken  a  legal  customary
    marriage in Ghana.

5.   I accept that there had been one letter  from  the  Accra  Metropolitan
    Assembly Legal Department, date 17 April 2018,  that  stated  that  the
    marriage had been registered on 14 May 2013 not 14 June 2013.  However,
    this error was corrected in a subsequent letter, dated 16 October  2016
    from the Accra Metropolitan Assembly Legal Department. In the light  of
    the other evidence relating to the validity of  the  marriage  document
    and applying the principles outlined in Tanveer Ahmed and  the  balance
    of probabilities, I find that the discrepancy contained in  the  letter
    dated 17 April 2018, was as a result of a human error.

6.   I have also taken into account the evidence previous admitted  for  the
    purposes of any re-hearing and, in particular, the  letter  from  Accra
    Metropolitan Assembly Legal Department, dated 21  January  2019,  which
    admitted that an error had been made in the letter dated 17 April  2013
    by one of its employees. In a further letter, dated  8  February  2019,
    the Accra Metropolitan Assembly Legal  Department  confirmed  that  the
    "marriage document" was signed by a competent Registrar duly authorised
    to sign all said  certificated  and  the  marriage  Registry  vets  all
    documents before signing them.

7.   For all of these reasons, I allow the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision, dated 24 November  2017,  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card.

DECISION

1.   The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 26 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



