
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/09263/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2017                |On 13th December 2017                |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                        JAYDEN PETER STEWART-BRADFORD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None - no attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand born on 4th September 1995.
       He came to the UK in August 2010, and was granted a residence card as
       a family member of an EEA  national  in  December  2012  valid  until
       December 2017.  He applied for a residence card and confirmation of a
       right to permanent residence as the step son of Mr Graeme  Hills,  an
       Irish citizen. The respondent refused the application  on  16th  July
       2016 on the basis that the appellant had not provided enough evidence
       that Mr Hills had resided in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
       Regulations 2006.  His appeal on the papers against the decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge RE Cooper in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 12th December 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 3rd
       August 2017 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law in failing to consider material evidence which
       had been placed before the Tribunal, and on the consideration of  the
       question of the age of the appellant at the date of application.

    3. The matter came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  to  determine
       whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law, and for the reasons
       set out at Annex A she found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
       and set aside the decision. The matter was listed to come  before  us
       to remake the appeal.

    4. The appellant's sponsor wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 22nd  November
       2017 say that: "Due to personal circumstances I am unable to  provide
       the documentation requested for the full five year  period.  In  this
       instance we shall initiate alternative residency avenues open to us."
       The appellant was asked in writing by the Upper Tribunal  to  confirm
       in a signed letter if he wished to withdraw his case before the Upper
       Tribunal. In a letter dated 5th December 2017 received by  the  Upper
       Tribunal on 11th December 2017 the appellant confirmed he  wished  to
       withdraw his case before the Upper Tribunal.

    5. We consent to the withdrawal of the appellant's case before the Upper
       Tribunal in accordance with Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008.

  DECISION:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 17th  October
       2017.

    3. The appellant withdrew his case on 11th  December  2017  and  so  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper is  reinstated,  and
       the appeal dismissed.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 13th December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand born on 4th September 1995.
       He came to the UK in August 2010, and was granted a residence card as
       a family member of an EEA  national  in  December  2012  valid  until
       December 2017.  He applied for a residence card and confirmation of a
       right to permanent residence as the step son of Mr Graeme  Hills,  an
       Irish citizen. The respondent refused the application  on  16th  July
       2016 on the basis that the appellant had not provided enough evidence
       that Mr Hills had resided in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
       Regulations 2006.  His appeal on the papers against the decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge RE Cooper in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 12th December 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 3rd
       August 2017 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law in failing to consider material evidence which
       had been placed before the Tribunal, and on the consideration of  the
       question of the age of the appellant at the date of application.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The appellant argues in his grounds of appeal that he  was  20  years
       old when the application was made so under the age of  21  years  and
       that at that time he only had a small wage as  a  trainee  scaffolder
       and was reliant on his step-father for his accommodation and food. It
       is argued that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider  evidence  of
       Mr Hills work which included information  regarding  his  contracting
       through AGM Contracts Ltd  since  2010  along  with  bank  statements
       showing self-sufficiency.

    5. The respondent sets out in the  Rule  24  notice  that  there  is  no
       questioning turning on the appellant's age. He has to  show  that  he
       had acquired a permanent right of residence before he  was  21  years
       old, so the five year period is that between the appellant's  arrival
       in the UK and 4th September 2016. The respondent  had  not  seen  the
       documents provided to Judge Bruce so was unable to comment on whether
       they were with the First-tier Tribunal but observes that it is a risk
       inherent in a paper appeal  that  an  appellant  does  not  have  the
       opportunity to clarify matters or explain documents.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. It is clear from paragraph 8(iv) of the decision that the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not receive all of  the  documents  that  the  appellant
       provided.  The  only  documents  considered  were  the  small  bundle
       received at Manchester Piccadilly on 24th August 2016,  and  not  the
       further documents submitted on 1st September 2016. It is  clear  that
       further documents were provided with a letter of  29th  August  2016,
       the file copy of which is stamped with a Manchester Piccadilly  stamp
       dated 1st September 2016 but no longer has any documentation attached
       to it. It is also clear that these documents related to Mr Hills  and
       his work, and so were material to the key issue in this appeal namely
       whether Mr Hills had been residing in the UK in accordance  with  the
       EEA Regulations for five years.

    7. I find that the documents that were attached to the  letter  of  29th
       August 2016 must have become detached and were lost by the First-tier
       Tribunal and so were not before Judge Cooper when he  determined  the
       case.  I  find  therefore  that  inadvertently   not   all   relevant
       documentation going to the key  issue  of  whether  Mr  Hills  was  a
       qualified person under the EEA Regulations for a period of five years
       was considered by the First-tier Tribunal, and that this  amounts  to
       an error of law as it was procedurally unfair to the appellant.

    8. The appellant is a family member of Mr Hill's under  Regulation  7(1)
       of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  as  he  is  the  direct
       descendent of Mr Hill's spouse, until he is 21 years old, thus  until
       4th September 2016. (After this time he may remain a family member if
       he is dependent on Mr Hill's or his mother.) To qualify for  a  right
       of permanent residence he must show that Mr Hill has exercised Treaty
       rights for a period of five years whilst he, the appellant, has  been
       present in the UK as a  family  member,  see  Regulation  15  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

    9. I adjourned the re-making hearing so that Mr Hills could attending  a
       future hearing and provide a comprehensive statement on his work from
       2010 to September 2016,  and  also  provide  a  paginated  bundle  of
       documents supporting his implicit contention to have been a  frontier
       or posted worker in Germany and a UK work seeker during  this  period
       of time. The bundle should also  contain,  in  a  separate  paginated
       section, a chronology of what the appellant has been doing in the  UK
       since his arrival and  any  documents  showing  the  appellant's  own
       residence in the UK during this period.  The documents provided  with
       the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  were  confusingly  laid  out,  the
       bundle was unpaginated  and  they  had  not  reached  the  Presenting
       Officer's file.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I adjourn the re-making of the appeal.



DIRECTIONS:

    1. The appeal is  relisted  for  a  remaking  hearing  on  Tuesday  12th
       December 2017 at 10am. The appellant and Mr Hills should both  attend
       this hearing.

    2. The appellant must file a bundle of all documents on which he  wishes
       to rely regarding his own residence in the UK and Mr Hills work  from
       2010 onwards with the  Upper  Tribunal  at  Field  House,  15  Breams
       Buildings, London EC4A 1DZ and serve a copy of  that  bundle  on  the
       Secretary of  State  at  the  Presenting  Officers  Unit,  5th  Floor
       Fleetbank House, 2-6 Salisbury Square, London EC4Y 8JX by Monday 27th
       November 2017.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 17th October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

