
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09341/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SHAHID [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, instructed by Malik Legal Solicitors Ltd

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Shahid [H], was born on 5 December 1976 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed against a  decision  of  13  November
    2017 to refuse an application for a residence card on the basis of  his
    marriage to Ms [RD] (hereafter Ms [D]).  The First-tier Tribunal, in  a
    decision promulgated  on  10  May  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2002.  He applied
    in July 2010 for a residence card on the basis of his relationship with
    Ms [D] but was  refused.   He  did  not  appeal.   Following  a  failed
    application on human rights grounds in 2012, the appellant  applied  in
    June 2013 for a residence card on the basis of his relationship with Ms
    [D].  That application was refused, as were five  subsequent  residence
    card  applications  and  one  further  human  rights  application.    I
    understand that a number of those applications, if  not  all,  did  not
    attract a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In 2014, the appellant brought an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal
    following his refusal of  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  that  his
    relationship (not at that time the marriage)  to  Ms  [D]  was  one  of
    convenience only.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith dismissed  the
    appeal.  Judge Lloyd-Smith's decision refers to a "sham  marriage";  in
    2013, Ms [D] and the appellant had entered an  Islamic  marriage  which
    was not recognised in  accordance  with  the  Marriage  Act  1949.   In
    consequence, the application had been treated as  one  brought  on  the
    basis of a durable relationship.  The appellant appealed  Judge  Lloyd-
    Smith's decision to the Upper Tribunal but Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
    dismissed that appeal in October 2014.  Subsequent to that  litigation,
    the appellant and Ms [D] married on 31 May 2017.  Thereafter, they made
    a further application on the basis of marriage.  It is that application
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. Judge Hudson considered that she was required to consider the  decision
    in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  At [14],  Judge  Hudson  found  that
    "the documentation that was supplied with his present  application  was
    substantially the same as that supplied in the  previous  applications,
    save for the marriage certificate and photographs".  Judge Hudson  went
    on  to  quote  Judge  Lloyd-Smith's  trenchant  finding  that  it   was
    "abundantly apparent from the evidence that the sole purpose  of  [the]
    applicant contacting the sponsor was to get married ... in an  economic
    arrangement to assist the  appellant  regularising  his  stay".   Judge
    Hudson concluded that she was "bound in relation to matters  determined
    in that case by the findings of IJ Lloyd-Smith ..."

 5. Judge Hudson found that "the only  change  in  Mr  [H]'s  circumstances
    since that determination [of IJ Lloyd-Smith] is that he has  entered  a
    legal marriage in England on 31 May 2017".   Thereafter,  Judge  Hudson
    conducted a detailed examination  of  the  evidence  including  tenancy
    agreements [20]  and  evidence  from  the  school  of  the  appellant's
    stepchildren and also in relation to fertility treatment received by Ms
    [D].  She found that the fertility treatment was  "minimally  invasive"
    and that the school evidence added  little  to  the  appellant's  case.
    Significantly,  however,  the  judge  heard  from  four  witnesses  who
    attended before the First-tier Tribunal.  There had been  no  witnesses
    before the Tribunal of Judge Lloyd-Smith.  Judge Hudson concluded  that
    "this partnership is one of convenience to circumvent  the  Immigration
    Rules" [30].  However, in the same paragraph she acknowledged that  "on
    the basis  of  this  evidence  [from  the  schools]  Mr  [H]  spends  a
    significant amount of time with Ms [D]'s children and is very  fond  of
    them this does not outweigh the concerns that I have over  the  purpose
    of the partnership".

 6. After hearing the oral submissions of Ms Mair for the appellant and  Mr
    McVeety for the Secretary of State, I reserved my decision.

 7. I am satisfied that the judge has erred in law such that  her  decision
    falls to be set aside.  I have reached that decision for the  following
    reasons.  First, I agree with Ms Mair's submission that an  application
    made on the basis of  a  durable  relationship  is  different  from  an
    application brought on the grounds of marriage.  At  the  beginning  of
    the hearing, Mr  McVeety  had  submitted  that  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had entered a "sham" relationship was inevitably fatal to any
    subsequent application, even one brought following a  genuine  marriage
    ceremony.  I  do  not  agree.   Judge  Hudson  was  concerned  with  an
    application on the basis of marriage whilst Judge Lloyd-Smith was  not.
    That does not mean, of course, that the findings as to the  credibility
    of the appellant and Ms [D]'s evidence should be wholly  ignored.   The
    fact that an individual claims  to  be  genuinely  married  to  another
    person must be considered in the light of  previous  judicial  findings
    which  had  not  been  overturned  and  the  effect  of   the   earlier
    relationship prior to marriage had not been genuine.  Equally, however,
    I do not believe that it can be said that a finding that a relationship
    between two individuals is not genuine cannot, in any circumstances, be
    displaced by subsequent evidence.  It is possible for  two  individuals
    to enter a sham marriage and subsequently to be parties  to  a  genuine
    relationship.

 8. Secondly, I do not find that Judge Hudson was right  to  conclude  that
    the evidence before her was "substantially the same as that supplied in
    previous applications".  First, it is not clear what "applications" she
    is here referring to.  In considering the tenancy documents at [20], it
    is clear that the judge reduced the weight which she felt should attach
    to that evidence because "all of this information has  been  considered
    in previous applications".  Some of the evidence postdates the previous
    litigation before Judge Lloyd-Smith and Judge Plimmer so I assume  that
    she  is  referring  here  to  applications  made  subsequent  to   that
    litigation to the Secretary of State.  Those  were  applications  which
    did not attract a right of appeal.  I am not  persuaded  that  all  the
    documentary evidence which the Secretary of State saw  in  relation  to
    those applications was necessarily before Judge Hudson.  In any  event,
    dismissing evidence on the basis that  had  previously  been  filed  in
    support  of  applications  which  had  attracted  no  right  of  appeal
    following refusal is simply not enough.  Moreover, I agree with Ms Mair
    that the evidence was not substantially the same;  for  example,  there
    was live witness evidence before Judge Hudson which had not been before
    Judge Lloyd-Smith.  The firm impression left by [14] is that the  judge
    found that she did not have anything new before her and  that  she  had
    little alternative but to follow the  findings  of  Judge  Lloyd-Smith.
    The correct approach should have been to consider the  evidence  before
    the previous Tribunal and the new evidence as a totality, weighing  the
    various items of evidence in accordance with Devaseelan.  In the  light
    of the fact that it postdated the previous decision, much of the  "new"
    evidence could not by definition have been before the previous Tribunal
    and, whilst much of the new  evidence  was  similar  in  kind  to  that
    previously adduced, that was not  the  case  in  respect  of  the  live
    witness evidence.

 9. Thirdly, I  accept  Ms  Mair's  submission  that  the  judge  has  paid
    insufficient attention to the fact that there was now more evidence  of
    cohabitation and of a relationship simply by reason  of  the  lapse  of
    time.  Mr McVeety submitted that evidence such  as  utility  bills  and
    letters  from  the  children's  school  did  not   "get   better   with
    repetition".  I  disagree.   Judge  Hudson  should  have  taken  proper
    account of the period of time over which this couple has been  able  to
    produce evidence of a relationship; such evidence does not, of  course,
    show conclusively that the relationship is genuine  but  the  lapse  of
    time should not simply have been ignored as it has been here.

10. I stress that  Ms  Mair  has  not  submitted  that  "new"  evidence  is
    determinative of the genuineness of the marriage.  She did  not  go  so
    far as to say that Judge Hudson's decision was  perverse.   It  is,  of
    course,  possible  that  a  couple  might  keep  up  a  pretence  of  a
    relationship for a number of years.  I am, however, satisfied that  the
    judge's analysis and application of  Devaseelan  is,  for  the  reasons
    which I have given, defective.  I therefore set aside her decision.

11. There will need to be a fresh hearing de novo.  I  was  told  that  the
    last hearing had taken a day of court's time (there were  a  number  of
    witnesses  who  gave  oral  evidence).   Although  it  may  have   been
    preferable to have kept this appeal in the Upper Tribunal,  the  extent
    of the new fact-finding which will have to be  undertaken  renders  the
    appeal more suitable for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 10 May
    2018 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  A  R  Hudson)
    for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

13. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 26 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
