
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09034/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2019                         |On 24 May 2019                    |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                  Roshdy Mahmoud Mohamed Abdelsalam Gassar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shrimpton, for Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of  Mr  Roshdy  Mahmoud  Mohamed  Abdelsalam  Gassar
    against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing  his  application
    for a permanent residence card to confirm he is the family member of  a
    European Economic Area national exercising treaty rights in the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The matter comes before me because it is said that  the  appellant  did
    not have notice of the hearing that took place before the judge  on  10
    December 2018, so it is  necessary  to  say  a  little  bit  about  the
    background.  There had been an earlier listing in September  2018  when
    the appellant and representative attended, but due to lack of  time  it
    was adjourned.  Subsequently a new notice of hearing was sent  out  and
    this was sent out on 22 November 2018 to the appellant at an address at
    [NW2], and to Lawland Solicitors at what I think is the correct address
    for them.

3.   Nobody on the appellant's side attended  the  hearing  on  10  December
    2018 and it is now said that they did not receive a notice of  hearing.
    It seems clear from the file that in fact  earlier  on  in  August  the
    representatives had sent in a different address, a new address, for the
    appellant and the notice  of  hearing  for  the  December  hearing  was
    therefore sent to the wrong address as far as he was concerned.  It was
    purportedly sent to the right address as regards  his  representatives,
    but they say they simply did not receive it and there is  some  support
    for the credibility of that from the fact  that  they  did  attend  the
    September hearing which indicates that there had been any  falling  off
    in enthusiasm for pursuing the matter, so the matter  is  not  entirely
    clear, as it never can be in relation to a matter where it is contended
    that post has gone  astray.   As  Judge  McCarthy  said  when  granting
    permission  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  there  has   been   an
    administrative failing somewhere along the line and as a consequence it
    seems to me that the appellant has not had a hearing in any real  sense
    and therefore the matter will have to be remitted for a  fresh  hearing
    in its entirety at Hatton Cross or  Harmondsworth  before  a  different
    First-tier Judge.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 23 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



