
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: EA/09213/2016         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Decision promulgated         |
|On       |19 JANUARY 2017           |On      |20 january 2017              |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                  |             |
|           |Midia Mohamad                                     |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|           |                                                  |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                  |             |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |             |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr. E Mehmood, of Nationwide Law Associates
For the respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.



                           Decision and Directions



 1. The appellant, a national of Syria born  on  1  January  1991,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Housego who,  in
    a decision promulgated on  28  September  2016,  dismissed  her  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent of 19  July  2016  to  refuse  her
    application of 25 January 2016 for a residence card as confirmation  of
    her right of residence as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom, a Mr. Kawa Youseff (the "sponsor".



 2. The sponsor was a British citizen. He and the appellant and the sponsor
    had travelled to  Germany  where  they  lived  for  11  months  with  a
    relative, Kibar Yousef.  Soon  after  their  arrival  in  Germany,  the
    appellant gave birth to a son. The sponsor was said to have worked as a
    childminder for the relative. It was also  said  that  he  had  studied
    German in Germany.

 3. The respondent refused  the  application  under  regulation  9  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  "2006  Regulations").  The
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  had  established  that
    the  sponsor  was  genuinely  employed  in  Germany  and  that  he  had
    transferred the centre of his life to Germany. In giving  her  reasons,
    the respondent said, inter alia:

         "The payslips that you have provided show  that  your  sponsor  was
         paid 420,27 Euros each month and the bank statement printouts  show
         the following amounts paid into sponsor's bank account  from  Kibar
         Yousef and Muhamed Zeyno - 374,39 Euros on 3 August,  695.55  Euros
         on 01 September stating that difference of  275,28  Euros  was  for
         February to July 2015 and 420,27 Euros paid on 01  October  and  02
         November...."

 4. The judge decided the appeal on the papers, as the  appellant  had  not
    opted for an oral hearing. There  were  several  documents  before  the
    judge,  including  bank  statements  and  payslips.  These   were   not
    translated. It is evident that the fact that  the  documents  were  not
    translated caused the judge some difficulty.

 5. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  established  that  she
    satisfied the two requirements that were in issue. He gave his  reasons
    at paras 12-14 of his decision, which read:

         "12.  I am unable to make a finding of fact as to the  payment,  if
             any, for childminding because the  evidence  supplied  by  the
             appellant in the  form  of  a  letter  from  KY  (Home  Office
             documentation G1) does not mention  payment.  There  are  bank
             statements in German which are not explained, but which appear
             to show relatively modest amounts of money being paid into the
             account, for example 30 October 2015  E254.93  and  a  further
             E300 on the same date, E28 on 08  October  2015,  E188  on  07
             October 2015, E420.27 on 01 October 2015, E300 on 30 September
             2015, E254.93 on 30 September 2015, E509.86  on  14  September
             2015, E188 on 07 September 2015, E695.55 on 01  September  15,
             and so on. No contract of employment was provided.

         13.  I make no finding of  fact  as  to  the  study  of  German  in
             Germany  by  the  sponsor  as  no  satisfactory  evidence  was
             produced of it.

         14.  On the basis of these facts, the sponsor moved to Germany  for
             a period of 11 months and  lived  with  a  relative  for  that
             period. He assisted that relative  with  childminding  and  in
             return lived rent free.  Very  soon  after  they  arrived  the
             appellant gave birth to her son. The centre of  the  sponsor's
             life had  not  transferred  to  Germany.  On  the  balance  of
             probabilities he was not employed  there  either,  but  simply
             staying with a relative to help out, and perhaps  being  given
             money as well. There is no evidence to establish a contract of
             employment between the sponsor and the relative in whose  home
             the sponsor and the appellant lived."

         (my emphasis)

 6. At the hearing, Mr Mehmood submitted, inter alia, that, notwithstanding
    the fact that the judge did not have translations of the  payslips  and
    the bank statements, he  had  erred  in  law  because  the  figures  he
    mentioned at para 12 showed that he had mixed up  payments  by  way  of
    salary and child benefit payments. He submitted, inter alia,  that  the
    judge should have examined the payslips, identified the payments on the
    payslips and cross-referenced them on the bank statements.

 7. I have no hesitation  in  rejecting  these  submissions.  Mr  Mehmood's
    submissions fail to take proper account of  the  significance  of  rule
    12(5)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. Judges  are  not  obliged  to  consider
    documentary evidence that is not in the English language and for  which
    no certified translations have been provided. If a judge  has  no  such
    certified translations and there is nothing in the decision letter that
    materially assists  him  in  this  respect,  the  appellant  can  hardy
    complain if the judge goes  beyond  his  duty  and  does  his  best  to
    consider the contents.

 8. Nevertheless, in this particular case, Mr. Walker accepted that,  given
    the contents of the decision letter, in particular the paragraph quoted
    above, it appears that the respondent had translated documents. In  any
    event, he accepted that the judge should have taken  into  account,  at
    the minimum, what  the  respondent  said  about  the  contents  of  the
    payslips and the bank statements in the decision letter. In failing  to
    do so, the judge failed to take into  account  relevant  evidence.  Mr.
    Walker therefore accepted that the judge erred in law in  reaching  his
    finding that the sponsor was not genuinely employed in Germany  because
    the evidence as to the  alleged  wages  received  by  the  sponsor  was
    relevant to that finding.

 9. Mr. Walker accepted that the error of law was material  because  it  is
    evident from what the judge said at para 14,  in  particular  the  text
    emboldened at my para 5 above, that he took into  account  his  finding
    that the sponsor was not genuinely employed in making his finding  that
    the centre of the sponsor's life had not transferred to Germany.

10. I am therefore satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I
    therefore set  aside  his  decision  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  His
    decision that there is no jurisdiction in an EEA appeal to deal with an
    Article 8 claim stands.

11. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

12. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2(b). In addition,  having
    regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 327, I am of the  view  that  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

13. Mr Mehmood informed me that the appellant opted for a paper decision in
    her Notice of appeal and paid the relevant fee for a paper decision. He
    informed me that the appellant now wishes to have an oral hearing.

DIRECTIONS

1.   Any translations of documents to  be  relied  upon  must  be  certified
    translations and shall be served within 14 calendar days of the date on
    which these directions are posted to the  parties  (regardless  of  the
    date of receipt, given that the directions were given  orally  in  open
    court), together with any  other  documents  to  be  relied  upon.  The
    appellant is on notice that the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  will
    not consider any documents that are not translated.

2.   The appeal is not to be listed for oral hearing until  and  unless  the
    First-tier Tribunal confirms receipt of the appropriate fee.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Housego  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
appeal under the EEA Regulations is set aside. His decision  that  there  is
no jurisdiction in an EEA appeal to deal with an Article 8 claim stands.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Housego.








[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                        Date: 20 January 2017
