
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09238/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 November 2017                  |On 13 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                        Priyakant Mahendrasinh Parmar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India, appeals against a decision of  Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  A  J  Parker,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 17 February 2017 dismissed his appeal against a decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi to grant him a family  permit
    as the spouse of an EEA national.  The appellant  having  appealed  and
    permission to appeal having been granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Gillespie, the Secretary of State in a Rule 24 notice dated 17
    October 2017 stated that the respondent did not oppose the  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a consideration of whether or
    not the appellant  is  entitled  to  a  family  permit  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

2.   When granting permission to appeal Judge Gillespie stated:-

         "2.  ...  It appears to me fairly arguable that the  learned  judge
             has erred in law in failing  to  apply  his  mind  to  and  to
             determine whether or not the appellant and  the  EEA  national
             sponsor are lawfully married; and in failing to apply his mind
             to and to determine whether or not the EEA sponsor intends  to
             travel to the United Kingdom and will here be an EEA  national
             residing  in  accordance  with  Regulations.   These  are  the
             fundamental requirements for the issue of a family permit  and
             are not addressed, disclosing arguable error of law.

         3.   The decision appears to be based upon a  perception  that  the
             appellant has in the past misled the respondent.  The decision
             appears to be influenced by a perception, although not  raised
             by the respondent of potential fraud  by  the  appellant.   To
             allow such  unresolved  suspicion  to  influence  the  result,
             without clearly addressing and making findings on  the  issue,
             is to err by relying upon improper considerations.

         4.   It might be, although there is no finding to that effect, that
             the learned  judge  considered  there  to  be  a  marriage  of
             convenience.  If that be the case, then it  is  arguable  that
             the learned judge failed to apply the proper principle to  the
             question of determination of  an  allegation  of  marriage  of
             convenience and failed to make a proper  reasoned  finding  on
             the issue."

3.   I consider that Judge Gillespie clearly identifies the  errors  of  law
    in the determination and, having noted the  fact  that  the  respondent
    does not oppose the application and invited the Tribunal to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal, I now set aside the decision, having
    found the errors of law to which Judge Gillespie referred,  and  direct
    that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing
    afresh.  It may well be of use if the appellant's  wife  were  able  to
    attend the remitted hearing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]             Date: 11 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

