
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/10846/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2018                     |On 11 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                            Mohd Ashfaque Saiyed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, Counsel instructed by Apex Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Keith of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  28
    March 2018 dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 16 August 2016 to refuse to grant a  permanent  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national.  The appellant  claimed  he  was
    entitled to such a card because he had a retained right  of  residence.
    The appellant had entered into an arrangement with his EEA  partner  on
    26 November 2010 and it was dissolved in a Decree Absolute of 6 October
    2013.

2.   The appellant's grounds levelled three main criticisms of  the  judge's
    decision:

       i) that he  wrongly  considered  the  date  of  termination  of  the
          marriage rather than  the  date  that  divorce  proceedings  were
          commenced;


      ii) that the just neglected that the respondent could have  contacted
          the  HMRC  to  establish  the  actual  position  as  regards  the
          appellant's ex-wife's exercise of Treaty rights; and


     iii)  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that   the   appellant's
          relationship had lasted more  than  three  years  as  the  couple
          applied for permission from the Home  Office  to  register  their
          marriage and they had had an "Islamic marriage" which should have
          been seen as a relationship akin to marriage.

3.   In relation to ground (iii,) Mr Mustafa sought to rely on the  case  of
    Akhter v Khan (Rev 4) [2018] EWFC 54, 31  July  2018  finding  that  an
    Islamic marriage was a void marriage.

4.   It is convenient to deal first with ground (ii).   The  respondent  was
    not under any legal obligation to contact the HMRC to ascertain details
    of the appellant's ex-wife's working history, although there  is  power
    to make such contact  conferred  on  the  respondent  by  S.36  of  the
    ANA2006.  Mr Mustafa sought in his skeleton argument  to  rely  on  the
    case of Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 55.  In  that  case  the  Court  of
    Appeal noted that it was within the power of the Tribunal to direct the
    respondent to contact  HMRC  to  obtain  particulars  relating  to  the
    employment  history  of  an  ex-spouse.   However,  in  this  case  the
    appellant's representatives made no application for an Amos  direction.
    Furthermore,  although  the  appellant  did  state  he  had  met   with
    difficulties in obtaining  his  ex-wife's  employment  particulars,  he
    nowhere demonstrated that he had taken reasonable steps to obtain them.
     The judge records at paragraph 12 that the appellant was  asked  about
    his efforts to get documents  from  his  estranged  wife  and  then  at
    paragraph 9 makes  a  specific  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated he had made a reasonable effort to  obtain  such  details.
    Such findings were within the range of reasonable responses.   In  such
    circumstances there was no error in the judge failing to consider or to
    make an Amos direction.

5.   I do not consider that I need address  grounds  (i)  and  (iii)  since,
    even if I considered them made out, they do not  suffice  to  establish
    that the judge erred in dismissing the appellant's appeal.  To  succeed
    in his appeal the appellant would have had to establish  that  his  ex-
    wife was working for at least three years prior to the date of  divorce
    (on 6 October 2013).

6.   The judge accepted that the appellant had been working since  the  date
    of their divorce (paragraph 20).  However, in order to be able to count
    his own period of  employment  towards  his  entitlement  to  permanent
    residence the appellant was required  to  show  that  his  ex-wife  was
    working  for  a  sufficient  period  pre-divorce  to   constitute   (by
    aggregation) five  years.   Even  leaving  aside  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 10(5)(d)(i), the minimum period during which  the  appellant
    was required to show his wife was working was in the order of just over
    two years (assuming the appellant was entitled  to  count  towards  the
    five years the entirety of  his  period  of  working  between  date  of
    divorce and the date of decision i.e. between 3 October  2013,  and  16
    August 2016) that still left some two years  of employment on the  part
    of his ex-wife which would have had to take place immediately prior  to
    the date of divorce.  Yet the only evidence produced by  the  appellant
    regarding his ex-wife's employment was his  own  assertions  which  the
    judge at paragraph 9 expressly  found  unreliable.  Whether  the  above
    timelines are adjusted to date from before the date of commencement  of
    divorce proceedings rather than the date of divorce (see  Baigazieva  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1088), the same evidential obstacles apply.

7.   Hence, even if the appellant could sometimes surmount  the  requirement
    of Regulation 10(5)(d)(i) of showing his marriage lasted  three  years,
    that would not assist him establishing that he had  acquired  permanent
    residence under Regulation 10(5)(a).

8.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law in concluding that the appellant  could  not  meet  all  the
    requirements of Regulation 10.  Accordingly the decision of  the  judge
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date: 4 October 2018
            [pic]

