
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10975/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 5 June 2019                                |On 2 August 2019             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                      Mr emmanuel kwame okai-kwai aruah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dornan, instructed by Fisher Law
For the Respondent:    Miss Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Gillespie promulgated on 10 September 2018, dismissing
    his appeal against a decision made on 31 May 2016 to  refuse  to  issue
    him a residence card as confirmation of his right of residence  as  the
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The application and  the  subsequent  appeal  were  determined
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the
    2006 Regulations"). As the date of decision was prior to the entry into
    force of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 continue to  have
    effect by operation of Section 3 of Schedule 3 to the 2016 Regulations.

 2. The decision in this case is expressed as  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant pursuant to section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999, which applies  by  virtue  of  regulation  19(3)(a)  pursuant  to
    Regulation 21B(2) and 24(2) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 3. The appellant's wife has  dual  British  and  Irish  nationality.   The
    couple were married in Ghana on 30 June  2009  and  the  appellant  was
    issued with a residence card  on  20  December  2010,  valid  until  20
    December 2015.  Although the appellant's wife is a dual national and so
    is not an EEA national as now defined in the EEA Regulations,   as  the
    appellant had the right to reside in the United Kingdom under the  2006
    Regulations as at 16 July 2012 and on 16  October  2012  held  a  valid
    residence card issued under the 2016 Regulations, his wife  falls to be
    regarded as an EEA national for the purposes of  the  2006  Regulations
    (see Schedule 3 to the Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)
    Regulations 2012).

 4. The appellant's case, as set out in the submissions made to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, are that his wife had been employed from October 2012 to
    October 2015 as a repackaging employee at a creamery (which appears  to
    be an error for the reasons we set out below)and that she was  required
    to stop working in 2013 following a diagnosis of osteoporosis.   It  is
    also said that the appellant is the primary carer for  his  spouse  who
    suffers from coeliac disease.

 5. It was also submitted that the appellant  had  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence on the basis that the  appellant's  spouse,  as  an
    Irish citizen entitled to dual nationality, is settled with  the  right
    of abode under section 1  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  2002  and
    pursuant to regulation 15(b) of the 2006 Regulations and the fact  that
    the appellant's wife is now  self-employed  and  had  commenced  a  new
    business venture indicated that  her  incapacity  had  been  temporary.
    Alternatively, it was submitted that as the spouse of a worker who  had
    permanently ceased activity at  the  time,  he  was  also  entitled  to
    permanent residence.  Finally, it was submitted that the appellant  was
    not subject to removal as his wife cannot be removed.

 6. The judge noted [6] the respondent's case that the  appellant  had  not
    submitted evidence to show that his spouse had been employed for a year
    or more  before  becoming  temporarily  incapacitated  as  he  had  not
    provided evidence with his application that she had  started  receiving
    employment support allowance from May 2013,  there  being  no  evidence
    from employment prior to that date, no other  details  of  her  current
    illness and the time during which she had been unable to work.

 7. The judged noted also that the appellant's spouse was  not  present  at
    the hearing, as she had gone to Spain to visit  a  friend  on  holiday.
    The judge found that:-

      i) the appellant had not shown that his spouse had been working for  a
         year prior to stopping given lack of evidence thereof [22] and thus
         she could not meet regulation 6(2)(b);

     ii) there was no evidence as to the likely duration of the illness,  GP
         notes not providing an indication as to  what  impact  her  various
         illnesses would have on her fitness to work or when  she  could  be
         expected to return;

    iii) there was no evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant's  spouse  is
         registered as self-employed [24];

     iv) there was no medical evidence to show that the  appellant's  spouse
         was permanently incapacitated,  which  was  inconsistent  with  the
         assertion that she had recently registered as self-employed and had
         travelled to Spain to live with a friend for a month [25];

      v) there was doubt over the appellant's evidence generally as  medical
         documents indicating the marriage broke  down  in  2012,  when  the
         spouse discovered that the appellant had secretly married in Ghana;
         that a letter in the medical records describes her as a right  hand
         dominant  62  year  old   hairdresser   and   a   letter   from   a
         gastroenterologist in May 2015 describes her as living alone;  and,
         that this evidence put in question the appellant's reliability as a
         witness as to  his  wife's  condition,  employment  capability  and
         employment record; and

     vi) limited weight could be  attached  to  the  wife's  unsigned  draft
         statement, in light of her absence at the hearing.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred:

         Ground 1:

         In his  approach  to  what  the  appellant  required  to  prove  to
         demonstrate an entitlement to permanent residence:

          i) By not noting that, as  the  appellant's  spouse  had  already
             acquired  permanent   residence,   the   appellant   must   be
             automatically  entitled  to  derivative  permanent   residence
             status as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  under  Directive
             2004/38 read in light of Article 7 of the European Charter  of
             Fundamental Rights as, properly understood, the Directive only
             required that the appellant's spouse had  resided  legally  in
             the United Kingdom for any continuous period of five years;

         ii) In failing to note that article 16(1) of the Directive did not
             require the appellant's wife to show that she  was  exercising
             Treaty rights under  regulation  6  of  the  2006  Regulations
             (although it was accepted that to have "resided legally" meant
             a period in  residence  which  complied  with  the  conditions
             stated in the Directive and that a period of  residence  under
             section 1 of the British Nationality Act 1981 did not  satisfy
             these conditions); and,

        iii) In not noting that the appellant's grant of residence was made
             under the 2006 Regulations, and that the  appellant's  spouse,
             as a long-term worker or jobseeker who has lived in the United
             Kingdom for her entire life had long since acquired  permanent
             residence and thus, he had no need to show that he  had  lived
             in the United Kingdom with his spouse for a continuous  period
             of five years;

         Ground 2:

         In failing to consider  that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  an
         entitlement to permanent residence as a family member of  a  worker
         or a self-employed person who had  ceased  activity,  it  following
         from  the  fact  that  he  had  not  shown  she   was   temporarily
         incapacitated that she must  be  deemed  to  have  ceased  activity
         permanently, given the appellant's testimony;

         Ground 3:

         In  failing to consider the legality of the decision to remove  the
         appellant from the United Kingdom as, given the appellant's  spouse
         had been a dual Irish/British national, she could  not  be  removed
         from the  UK  and  accordingly  he  cannot  be  removed  under  the
         Regulations  otherwise  as,  following  article  14(4)(a)  of   the
         Directive, EU  nationals  and  their  family  members  may  not  be
         expelled so long as the  Union  citizen  can  provide  evidence  of
         continuing to seek employment and they have  a  genuine  chance  of
         being engaged, the judge erring in failing to address  the  failure
         of the Home Office to remove or detain the appellant in consequence
         of its refusal to grant him status;

         Ground 4:

         In the alternative, it is claimed  that  there  is  a  need  for  a
         preliminary reference to the European Court of Justice.

 9. We heard submissions from Mr Dornan who submitted  that  there  was  no
    dispute that  the  appellant  and  his  spouse  were  resident  in  the
    territory of the United Kingdom for the qualifying period.

10. Miss Cunha accepted that ground 1 did involve the making of an error in
    that the judge had not approached the  law  correctly  as  he  had  not
    considered  whether  the  appellant's  wife  had   acquired   permanent
    residence and that the appeal should be re-made on that basis.

11. Mr Dornan accepted there was no evidence of activity on the part of the
    appellant or his wife prior to 2010 and that this ought to be  inferred
    or in the alternative, that the  appellant's  spouse  had  ceased  work
    owing to ill health and that she was either  temporarily  incapacitated
    or, if not, permanently incapacitated.  He accepted that there  was  no
    evidence of her being duly recorded as in receipt of employment.

12. Mr Dornan submitted also that the Tribunal had  erred  in  not  finding
    that the evidence of the illness resulted in permanent incapacity  and,
    relying on regulation 5(3)(a) and 5(6) in the interests of equivalency,
    this should apply to the appellant's wife as  she  is  also  a  British
    citizen.

13. Miss Cunha submitted that the appellant  had  not  provided  sufficient
    evidence and, in this case, in addition to  the  lack  of  evidence  of
    capacity to work, there was insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant's wife was in genuine and effective work, this falling  below
    �4,000 in 2011, demonstrating that the work was marginal and ancillary.
     She accepted that regulation 6(5) applied but there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show temporary or permanent incapacity as the wife appeared
    still to be able to work as a hairdresser.  Miss Cunha  submitted  that
    the applicant could not meet the requirements of regulation  15  as  he
    could not show that he was a spouse or a person who had been exercising
    treaty rights for five years or  is  a  self-employed  person  who  had
    ceased activity.

14. In reply, Mr  Dornan  said  that  he  was  not  relying  on  regulation
    15(1)(f).  He submitted that it could be inferred the spouse  had  been
    employed prior to 2009 as shown by the  P60s  and  thus  she  had  been
    economically active before that period.

15. We turn to the grounds of appeal in turn.

Ground 1

16. Given Miss Cunha's concession, it is unnecessary for us to consider  in
    detail ground 1 of the grounds of appeal at this stage.  The concession
    is, however, limited to  whether  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether at any point the appellant's spouse had acquired the  permanent
    right of residence.  That is an issue on which we need to  re-make  the
    decision in the light of the evidence.  We do  not,  however,  consider
    that this is an acceptance that, as the grounds aver  at  [1(xii)]  the
    appellant's wife is to be deemed to be permanently resident; that would
    be a concession as to the law which is not permissible.

Ground 2

17. We do not accept that the judge erred in respect to the findings as  to
    permanent incapacity.  The judge was entitled to find  that  there  was
    insufficient  evidence  to  show  incapacity  to  work,  temporary   or
    otherwise, from the medical notes.  Further,  what  evidence  that  the
    appellant was able to give was not accepted by the judge.  His  reasons
    for doing so - that the appellant and  his  wife  appeared  not  to  be
    living together, this being recorded in the medical evidence  which  is
    not challenged in the grounds -  are  adequate  and  sustainable.   The
    judge was manifestly entitled to attach little weight  to  an  unsigned
    witness statement from a witness who  was  not  present  to  be  cross-
    examined.

18.  Whilst  it  may  the  case  that  somebody  who  is  not   temporarily
    incapacitated may be permanently incapacitated if there is no  evidence
    that they cannot get any work, that is not the case here.  What  is  in
    issue here is whether the wife  ceased  her  activity  and,  while  she
    appears to have set up as a  self-employed  hairdresser,  more  to  the
    point  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to   show   that   she   was
    incapacitated or has ceased work due to  illness  as  opposed  to  some
    other reason.

Ground 3

19. It is not arguable that the Secretary  of  State  acted  unlawfully  in
    seeking to remove the appellant.  He was  not  seeking  to  remove  the
    appellant's wife. Regulation 19(3) permits the Secretary  of  State  to
    remove the appellant if has ceased to have a right to reside under  the
    Regulations.  That is clearly so if it is shown that his spouse is  not
    exercising Treaty rights or does not otherwise have a right  to  remain
    under the Regulations.  As the appellant concedes in the  grounds,  the
    spouse's right to remain under British domestic law is not in issue and
    does not mean that she is living under the Regulations.  The  reference
    to Article 14(4)(a) of the  Directive  is  not  of  assistance  as  the
    appellant has failed to provide evidence that his wife is a worker or a
    self-employed  person  whose  economic  activities  are   genuine   and
    effective.  He has not shown that there is any evidence that she has  a
    genuine chance of being engaged.

Re-making the Decision

    The law

20. For the reasons set out at [1] above, the relevant law is  set  out  in
    the 2006 Regulations which, so far  as  is  relevant  to  this  appeal,
    provide:

         5. - "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

             (1)  In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person who
             has ceased activity" means an EEA national who  satisfies  the
             conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-



                  (a)  terminates his activity as a worker or  self-employed
                  person and-

                      (i)  has reached the age at which he is entitled to a
                      state pension on the date on which he terminates  his
                      activity; or

                      (ii) in the case of a worker, ceases working to  take
                      early retirement;

                  (b)  pursued his activity as  a  worker  or  self-employed
                  person in the United Kingdom for at  least  twelve  months
                  prior to the termination; and

                  (c)  resided in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more
                  than three years prior to the termination.

             (3)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a
                  worker or self-employed person as a result of a  permanent
                  incapacity to work; and

                  (b)  either-

                      (i)  he resided in the  United  Kingdom  continuously
                      for more than two years prior to the termination; or

                      (ii) the incapacity is the result of an  accident  at
                      work or an occupational disease that entitles him  to
                      a  pension  payable  in  full  or  in  part   by   an
                      institution in the United Kingdom.

         6. - "Qualified person"

             (1)  In these Regulations, "qualified person" means  a  person
             who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                  (a)  a jobseeker;

                  (b)  a worker;

                  (c)  a self-employed person;

                  (d)  a self-sufficient person; or

                  (e)  a student.

             (2)  Subject to regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4), a person  who  is
             no longer working shall not cease to be treated  as  a  worker
             for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

                  (a)  he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                  illness or accident;

                  (b)  he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  having been employed in the United Kingdom  for  at  least
                  one year, provided that he-

                      (i)  has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                      employment office; and

                      (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;

                  (ba) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  having been employed in the United Kingdom for  less  than
                  one year, provided that he-

                      (i)  has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                      employment office; and

                      (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;

                  (c)  he is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on
                  vocational training; or

                  (d)  he has voluntarily ceased  working  and  embarked  on
                  vocational  training  that  is  related  to  his  previous
                  employment.

             (2A) A person to  whom  paragraph  (2)(ba)  applies  may  only
             retain worker status for a maximum of six months.

             (3)  A person who is no longer in  self-employment  shall  not
             cease to be treated as a self-employed person for the  purpose
             of paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to pursue  his
             activity as a self-employed person as the result of an illness
             or accident.

         15. -    Permanent right of residence

             (1)  The following persons shall acquire the right  to  reside
             in the United Kingdom permanently-

                  (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                  in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
                  period of five years;

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                  an EEA national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years;

                  (c)  a worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                  activity;

                  (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person
                  who has ceased activity;

                  (e)  a person who was the family member  of  a  worker  or
                  self-employed person where-

                      ...

                  (f)  a person who-

                      (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                      with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                      five years; and

                      (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family  member
                      who has retained the right of residence.

21. The first issue which we must address is whether the  appellant's  wife
    had acquired the right of permanent residence.    In  this  case,  that
    issue is complicated by two factors: first, she is a dual  British  and
    Irish national; and second, the  transitional  provisions  set  out  in
    Schedule 3 to the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)
    Regulations 2012.

22. It is important to note that in  McCarthy  [2011]  EUECJ  C-434/09  the
    Court of Justice ruled that:

         "1.  Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC ... must be interpreted
         as meaning that that directive is not applicable to a Union citizen
         who has never exercised his right of free movement, who has always
         resided in a Member State of which he is a national and who is also
         a national of another Member State.


         2.   Article 21 TFEU is not applicable to a Union citizen who has
         never exercised his right of free movement, who has always resided
         in a Member State of which he is a national and who is also a
         national of another Member State, provided that the situation of
         that citizen does not include the application of measures by a
         Member State that would have the effect of depriving him of the
         genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by
         virtue of his status as a Union citizen or of impeding the exercise
         of his right of free movement and residence within the territory of
         the Member States."


23. It is not submitted that  the  appellant's  wife  has  exercised  free-
    movement rights, and so it follows that, as a matter of  European  Law,
    she has no rights under the Directive or pursuant to Article 21,  TFEU.
     As the decision of the CJEU  declares  what  the  legal  position  has
    always been, she has never had those rights.

24. As the appellant's wife has no rights under EU law, then the  appellant
    has no rights under EU law; his rights under the TFEU or the  Directive
    can only be derived from his wife's rights as an EU national.

25. The position under the 2006 Regulations is different. That  is  because
    prior to McCarthy,  the  respondent's  position  as  reflected  in  the
    Regulations was to grant residence documents to family members of  dual
    British/EEA nationals.  That  is  permissible  as  Article  37  of  the
    Directive permits a member state to  give  greater  rights  than  those
    conferred by the Directive, but that does not give them rights under EU
    law - see Ziolkowski v Land Berlin [2011] EUECJ  C-424/10  at  [47]  to
    [50]

26. As EU law is not engaged, there is no basis on which  it  can  be  said
    that Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  and  Freedoms  is
    engaged and so there is no legal basis for arguing that the appellant's
    wife's settled status as an Irish national under domestic  law  can  be
    read over into to her automatically having acquired a  permanent  right
    of residence, something that can be acquired only by operation  of  the
    Directive.

27. It therefore follows that the only basis on  which  the  appellant  can
    show he is entitled to a permanent right of residence is under the 2006
    Regulations.

28. We therefore turn to the Regulations and the different possible  routes
    by which the  appellant  could  have  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence. This requires us to consider first the position of his  wife
    on whose status his rights inevitably depend.

29. We recall that it is only necessary for the appellant to show  that  he
    has resided within the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  five
    years during which his wife  was  either  a  qualified  person  or  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence.

30. As Mr Dornan accepted, he was asking the Tribunal  to  infer  that  the
    appellant's wife had acquired permanent residence  through  working  on
    the basis of the fact she was born and had lived in the United  Kingdom
    ever since.  That is not something which we can do.  We accept that she
    was born in the United Kingdom but there is no reliable evidence as  to
    her work activity prior to 2009.  Whilst we have P60s for the tax years
    2009/10 and 2010/11 these are insufficient to show that she had been  a
    worker prior to that.  Her own witness statement is silent on the point
    which, it might  be  thought  surprising,  in  light  of  the  detailed
    submissions to the effect that she  had  acquired  permanent  residence
    through working.  Indeed, the witness statement refers to  the  husband
    as working for a creamery not her.  All she says is at paragraph 8 is:

         "I was compelled to stop working in 2013 following a  diagnosis  of
         osteoporosis.  I also suffer  from  coeliac  disease  for  which  I
         require medication, a heart condition which depletes my energy, and
         ongoing anxiety issues for which I have been receiving treatment."

31. There are then further  details  of  her  medical  conditions  and  she
    accepts disclosing that her marriage had broken down in 2012.

32. Whilst there is significant material relating  to  the  wife's  health,
    there is little mention about employment other than an observation from
    the Primary Mental Healthcare Service  (page  76)  that  she  hopes  to
    return to paid employment soon.

33. There is also, we accept, reference in the fracture clinic letter of 10
    October 2016 to her being a hairdresser but viewing the evidence  as  a
    whole we are not satisfied she is permanently incapable of work, either
    through her coeliac disease or otherwise.  There  is  limited  evidence
    from the wife herself beyond a letter of 16 August 2016  in  which  she
    says that she is dependent on the appellant due to  her ill health  but
    there is no letter  or other document  issued  by  a  doctor  or  other
    health professional stating the appellant's wife  is  unable  to  work,
    beyond a letter of 14 December 2015 which says only this:

         "To Whom It May Concern

         This letter is to confirm that this lady is not  fit  for  work  at
         present.  I hope this information is useful to you."

34. This letter is inadequate in that it fails to say when the wife  ceased
    to be fit for work or whether this is temporary.  Similarly,  a  letter
    dated 15 December 2015 confirming that she is in receipt of  Employment
    and Support Allowance again is inadequate as it  simply  fails  to  say
    from when this was paid.

35. In summary, there is simply  insufficient  evidence  also  to  show  on
    balance that that the appellant's wife is permanently incapacitated  or
    has exercised Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

36. In the light of this evidence, we make the following findings.

      i) The appellant  has  not  shown  that  his  wife  had  acquired  the
         permanent right of residence through  the  continuous  exercise  of
         Treaty Rights prior to 2009 due to the lack of evidence to  support
         that claim;

     ii) There is insufficient evidence to show that  the  appellant's  wife
         had retained continuity of residence as a qualified person for  any
         five-year period, given the lack of evidence  of  her  working,  or
         otherwise being a qualified person;

    iii) There is insufficient evidence to show when  the  appellant's  wife
         ceased working or that this was as a result  of  her  either  being
         temporarily unable to work owing to illness or, in the alternative,
         that she met the conditions set out in any of regulation 6 (2) (b),
         (ba), (c) or (d) owing to the lack of evidence of  her  being  duly
         recorded as unemployed or having taken any training;

     iv) The appellant's wife has not reached retirement age, nor  is  there
         sufficient evidence to show that she has terminated activity due to
         permanent incapacity, and so she does not meet the  requirement  of
         regulation 5;

      v) Accordingly,  the  appellant  has  not  shown  that  his  wife  has
         exercised her rights continuously, and so his  residence  here  has
         not been lawfully for  a  period  of  five  years  (regulation.  15
         (1)(b)).  Nor has he shown that he is the family member of a person
         who has ceased activity (regulation 15(1)(d)).

     vi) As the appellant is still married to  his  wife,  he  cannot  be  a
         person who has retained the right of residence, and  so  he  cannot
         meet the requirements of regulation 15(1)(f).

37. Accordingly, for these reasons, in re-making the decision  we  are  not
    satisfied that the requirements of the EEA Regulations were met.    For
    these reasons, we find that the appellant has failed to satisfy that he
    meets the requirements of the EEA Regulations and we re-make the appeal
    by dismissing it.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

38. We remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Signed                                  Date 26 July 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

