
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
ea/10136/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 September 2018                     |On 11 October 2018                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           mr mohammad karim sahak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it was the Respondent who brought  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, I shall refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. This is the remaking of a decision in the Appellant's appeal  following
    my error of law decision, promulgated on 24 May 2018 (annexed  to  this
    decision, below).

 3. After the error of law hearing, an oral  case  management  hearing  was
    conducted on 5 July 2018.  Issues were discussed and directions issued.
     The most important question in the Appellant's case was whether he had
    acquired a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom under the
    relevant Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  either
    because of a work history between 2006 and 2011 or alternatively on the
    basis that he had been forced to permanently cease work in 2011 due  to
    ill-health.  Mr Sahak did his very best, together with  the  assistance
    of his family members, to obtain further  documentary  evidence.   Some
    further evidence was sent in prior to the case management  hearing  and
    some additional evidence has been produced at the resumed hearing.  All
    of this evidence has been admitted  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules.




Re-making the decision

 4. Whilst I do recognise that the Appellant has attempted to find  further
    evidence to support his case, I am not satisfied that he  has  in  fact
    acquired a permanent right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   My
    reasons for this are as follows.

 5. In respect of whether he resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
    period of five years as a worker between  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom and 2011,  the  precise  dates  relating  to  this  period  are
    important.  I accept that the Appellant arrived here in December  2006.
    On his case he had to stop work because  of  ill-health  in  May  2011.
    That period is therefore less than five years in total.  On that  basis
    a permanent right of residence could not have been acquired.   Further,
    there is no documentary evidence before me in relation to  the  claimed
    employment during the period in any event.  I appreciate that HMRC  may
    not have been able to provide information themselves due to the passage
    of time, but there is simply no paperwork of any sort  in  relation  to
    the claimed employment.  On balance I am not satisfied that  there  was
    continuous employment during this period.

 6. In respect of the permanent cessation of  work  in  2011,  the  medical
    evidence before me is unclear and in my view  insufficient  to  support
    the claim that work was no longer possible, on a permanent  basis,  due
    to ill-health.  I have looked  carefully  at  the  GP  letter  and  the
    limited GP record printouts that have been provided by  the  Appellant.
    There is mention of "vertigo" and "dizziness" but it  is  by  no  means
    clear either what the cause of this was or, more  importantly  for  the
    purposes of this appeal, whether the consequence of any conditions  was
    such that work was no longer possible on a permanent basis.  In respect
    of the GP records, there is mention in 2011 of  what  is  described  as
    "primary prevention of cardiovascular disease" but no further detail is
    provided.  I  have  no  letters  from  specialists  or  such  like.   I
    appreciate that the Appellant has sought  to  try  and  obtain  further
    information from the Department of Work and Pensions and it may be that
    they no longer hold relevant information on his circumstances in  2011.
    However, on the evidence that I do have I am not satisfied that  health
    conditions were such at that point that any employment was  simply  not
    possible on medical grounds.  In light of the above I conclude that the
    Appellant has not been able to satisfy the  requirement  of  Regulation
    15(1)(a) or 15(1)(c) of the 2006 Regulations.  On this basis his appeal
    must fail.

 7. I do wish to add a couple of further  points,  however.   In  initially
    refusing the Appellant's application, the Respondent  had  doubted  the
    claimed relationships between the Appellant and certain family  members
    residing in the  United  Kingdom,  in  particular  his  wife  and  four
    children.  Over  the  course  of  proceedings  through  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal it has become very clear that  there
    are  genuine  familial  relationships  here.  Aside  from   documentary
    evidence supporting the claim, family members have attended  the  three
    hearings before me and Ms Kenny has very fairly taken no issue with the
    claimed relationships at the remaking hearing.  I find as a  fact  that
    the Appellant is the husband of his wife and the  father  of  his  four
    children, all of whom  reside  in  this  country.   Furthermore,  I  am
    willing to accept that the family unit  all  reside  together.  On  the
    basis of the registration document provided by the Appellant at today's
    hearing I also find that his eldest son, Pajwak Sahak, was issued  with
    a document confirming a permanent right of residence on 31 July 2018.

 8. Whilst it is of course a matter for the Appellant and his family it may
    be that they  would  consider  submitting  a  new  application  to  the
    Respondent on the basis of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  other
    members of his family.  That is a matter that the family needs to think
    about and may wish to seek legal advice upon.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 8 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/10136/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 May 2018                          |                                    |
|                                        |....................................|
|                                        |...                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MOHAMMAD KARIM SAHAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Therefore the Secretary of State is once more the  Respondent
    and Mr Sahak is the Appellant.   This is a challenge by the  Respondent
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen  (the  judge),
    promulgated on 19 February 2018, in which he  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 8  August  2016,  which  in
    turn was a refusal to issue a registration certificate as  confirmation
    of a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The Appellant is a Dutch national.  It appears as though he arrived  in
    this country in 2006.  By an application made on 11 May 2016 he  sought
    a registration certificate.  The application was  put  forward  on  the
    basis that he had retained his status as a worker in this country as  a
    result of having to cease employment due to illness.  In  October  2015
    he became entitled to a state pension once he had reached  the  age  of
    sixty-five.  The Appellant had also stated that he was married and  had
    three children, two of whom  were  over  the  age  of  twenty-one.   In
    refusing the application the Respondent stated that the  Appellant  had
    failed to provide evidence of past employment and had failed to provide
    evidence that he was unable to work due  to  illness.   The  Respondent
    also rejected  the  claimed  familial  relationships  asserted  by  the
    Appellant in his application.

The judge's decision

 3. The Appellant was unrepresented at the hearing.  It is unclear what was
    actually said before the judge as the decision  is  particularly  brief
    (as is the Record of Proceedings).  It seems as  though  the  Appellant
    had at some point asserted  that  he  was  actually  a  self-sufficient
    person under the Regulations and therefore qualified for a registration
    certificate on that basis.  The judge records that a schedule of income
    and expenses had been provided at the hearing showing  that  the  joint
    family income was in excess of the expenses (that schedule is  on  file
    as  a  handwritten  document).   The  judge  then  concludes  that  the
    Appellant was indeed a self-sufficient person  "operating  within  that
    family household" and was therefore a qualified person under Regulation
    6 of the Regulations.  The appeal was allowed on that basis.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds contend that the judge had failed to address  the  question
    of whether the Appellant had had comprehensive sickness  insurance,  as
    required by Regulation 4 of the Regulations.  It is also said that  the
    judge failed to address the issue of whether the Appellant was in  fact
    dependent upon other members of his family unit  (assuming  that  there
    was a family unit).

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  on
    22 March 2018.

The hearing before me

 6. The Appellant attended the hearing along with  his  family  members  (I
    appreciate that the Respondent does not accept the  relationships,  but
    for ease of reference I shall refer to them in  this  way  for  present
    purposes).  He remains unrepresented.  With the assistance of a  Pashtu
    interpreter I provided a full introduction as  to  the  nature  of  the
    proceedings and the relevant issues to be discussed.

 7. Mr Clarke relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that there  was
    simply no evidence of any sickness insurance.  He also  submitted  that
    there were no findings on the familial relationships.  I then asked the
    Appellant a number of questions in order to  try  and  clarify  certain
    issues.  He quite candidly accepted that  he  had  never  had  sickness
    insurance in the United Kingdom.  He confirmed that he had come to this
    country in 2006.  Initially he told me that  he  had  stopped  work  in
    October 2015  after  which  he  received  a  state  pension.   He  then
    corrected this and told me that he had in fact finished  work  in  2011
    when illness (in particular vertigo) prevented him from  continuing  in
    employment.  He told me that prior to this he had been an employee  and
    paid all of his taxes.  He said that he had very little evidence of his
    work.  When asked whether he had relevant medical evidence relating  to
    the vertigo he showed me two pages of GP patient record printouts.

Decision on error of law

 8. I conclude that the judge materially erred in  law.   When  making  his
    decision the  judge  approached  the  Appellant's  circumstances  on  a
    different basis from that put forward in the application and considered
    by the Respondent at first instance.  A judge is in principle permitted
    to consider alternative  scenarios  provided  of  course  that  a  fair
    opportunity is given to both parties to address the issues.

 9. The problem in this case is that once the judge decided to look at  the
    issue of self-sufficiency,  all  of  the  relevant  requirements  under
    Regulation 4 had to be complied with  before  the  Appellant  could  be
    considered a  qualified  person  under  Regulation  6.   One  of  these
    requirements is that the  Appellant  had  held  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance.  The judge did not deal with this issue and it is now  clear
    that the Appellant has never had such insurance.   On  this  basis  the
    Appellant could not have been a self-sufficient person  and  the  judge
    erred in concluding otherwise.

10. In light of this I  conclude  that  I  should  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

Disposal

11. I have considered whether the case should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal and have  concluded  that  there  is  no  need  for  this.   I
    appreciate that no factual findings  have  been  made  as  regards  the
    claimed familial relationships, but in  my  view  I  can  quite  easily
    undertake this exercise for myself.  In any  event,  in  my  view  this
    issue is not at the core of the Appellant's appeal.  Rather, there is a
    real possibility that the Appellant has acquired a permanent  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom, an issue so far overlooked by everyone
    concerned.  On the face of it the Appellant arrived in this country  in
    2006.  He claims to have been employed up until 2011 at which point  he
    ceased his activity due to illness (vertigo).  If this is the  case  he
    might either have acquired a permanent right of residence as a "worker"
    for five continuous years, or under Regulation 5(3) of the  Regulations
    and with reference to Regulation 15(1)(c).  Before a proper  conclusion
    can be reached  on  this  core  issue  further  evidence  is  required.
    Ideally all of this would have been anticipated and  relevant  evidence
    submitted for  this  hearing.   However,  the  Appellant  is  not  only
    unrepresented but the issue of permanent residence has not been flagged
    up previously.

12. In light of the above I have decided to retain this appeal in the Upper
    Tribunal and adjourn the remaking decision in order that the  Appellant
    has the opportunity to obtain relevant evidence.  As I  made  clear  to
    him at the hearing itself, this evidence will consist of the following:

      a) a letter from HMRC relating to his employment history in the United
         Kingdom from 2006 to 2011;

      b) any employment evidence that he may already have in his possession;

      c) GP records including, importantly, hospital  letters,  relating  to
         the Appellant's medical conditions  (in  particular  vertigo)  from
         2011 or thereafter.

13. This evidence should be sought as quickly as possible.  In my  view  it
    would be right to hold a Case Management  Hearing  in  order  that  the
    evidential position could be reviewed in due course.  Depending on what
    emerges, it may be that the Respondent takes a view of the  Appellant's
    case or that a further oral hearing is required.

14. I will issue more detailed directions as a separate document.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a Case Management Hearing before me on a  date  to
be confirmed.



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 22 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
