

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/10987/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2 October 2017                         |  On 4 October 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                pierre ninjoh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Nwaekwu, Counsel instructed by Moorehouse
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Cameroon
    born on 8 January 1985.  This appeal arises from the decision of the
    Secretary of State dated 25 August 2016 to refuse the claimant's
    application for a residence card as confirmation of a right of
    residence as a spouse of an EEA national under Regulation 6 of the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The claimant claimed his wife (hereinafter "the sponsor") was employed
    by a company called Revor Limited and therefore was a qualified person
    under Regulation 6(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 3. The Secretary of State took issue with this for three reasons.
    Firstly, enquiries were made showing Revor Limited was dissolved on 17
    November 2015.  Secondly, several bank statements from the sponsor's
    NatWest Bank account indicated funds were paid to her by a company
    called "Trevor Limited" rather than "Revor Limited".  Thirdly, the
    Secretary of State considered the NatWest documents to not be of the
    expected standard.

 4. The claimant's appeal was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Swaniker on the papers.  The judge found that Revor Limited had re-
    registered shortly after it dissolved and, having regard to the wage
    slips and bank statements before him, was satisfied the sponsor had
    been employed by Revor Limited during the relevant period.

 5. The Secretary of State appealed.

 6. Although several arguments are made in the grounds of appeal Mr Duffy
    stated that only one argument was being pursued which was that the
    judge failed to resolve a conflict on a material matter which is that
    several of the sponsor's bank statements refer to a company called
    Trevor Limited whereas the sponsor claims to have worked for and been
    paid by a company called Revor Limited.

 7. Mr Nwaekwu, on behalf of the claimant, accepted that the judge had not
    explicitly dealt with this issue but argued that the error, if there
    was one, was not material as it was clear that the sponsor had worked
    for Revor Limited and the addition of a 'T' was merely a typographical
    error.

 8. I agree with Mr Duffy that the judge made a material error of law.  One
    of the key arguments of the Secretary of State in the letter refusing
    the claimant's application was that there was a discrepancy between the
    name of the company in the NatWest documentation and on the payslips.
    It was incumbent upon the judge to address this issue and the failure
    to do so was an error of law.

 9. After delivering my decision in respect of there being an error of law,
    I advised the parties I would proceed to re-make the decision.

10. In remaking the decision, I have preserved the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal in respect of the dissolution of Revor Limited and the
    reliability of the NatWest documentation.  The judge's reasoning on
    these issues is clear and I note that these discrete issues were not
    pursued by Mr Duffy. Accordingly, the only issue before me in re-making
    the decision is the discrepancy in the name of the sponsor's employer
    between the payslips and several entries in the NatWest documentation.

11. Mr Nwaekwu submitted into evidence (with my permission) a letter from
    Revor Limited apologising for what it described as a typographical
    error in the company being described as Trevor Limited rather than
    Revor Limited.

12. I am satisfied that on the balance of probabilities that payments
    identified as being from Trevor Limited on the NatWest Bank accounts
    are in reality from the sponsor's employer, Revor Limited.  I reach
    this conclusion for three reasons. Firstly, the payments from Trevor
    Limited correspond to payslips from Revor Limited both in terms of when
    the payments were made and the amount of money paid.  Secondly, Revor
    and Trevor are very similar words with only one letter distinguishing
    them and I therefore consider it plausible that a typographical error
    of this nature was made.  Thirdly, Revor Limited have explained in a
    letter that a typographical error was made.

13. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the evidence demonstrates that the
    sponsor has been employed by Revor Limited such that she is a qualified
    person under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.  The claimant's
    appeal is therefore allowed.

Notice of Decision

  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
      law and is set aside.


  15. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


  16. No anonymity direction is made.




|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  4 October 2017               |

