
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
ea/10019/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                           |
|On 24th October 2017               |             On 4th December 2017     |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                               mrs RABIA ALAM
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kamal (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, Mrs Rabia Alam, appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore sitting at Taylor House  on
    24th August 2017.  The Appellant had appealed against the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for a Residence Card as Confirmation
    of a Right to Reside in the United Kingdom pursuant to Regulation 6  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The single but important issue
    before the judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  had  provided  adequate
    evidence demonstrating that her EEA partner was currently  economically
    active  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-employed   person.    The
    Appellant's husband is Mr Alam and he is a national of Austria.

2.    The grant of permission in this  case  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page sets out the background to the original appeal and I refer to  it.
    At paragraphs 2 and 3 it is said as follows,

         "2.      The basis for  the  Respondent's  decision  was  that  the
             Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  provided
             adequate evidence demonstrating that  her  EEA  family  member
             (spouse) was currently economically active in the UK as a self-
             employed person.  At paragraph 19 of the  decision  the  judge
             said that the appeal must fail due to the absence of  credible
             and reliable evidence demonstrating economic activity  on  the
             part of the Sponsor at the time of the application that he was
             a self-employed person under Regulation 6.  An  issue  in  the
             appeal was whether taxi drivers working for Uber are employees
             or self-employed.  The error  of  law  complained  of  in  the
             application for permission to appeal is that the  judge  erred
             by relying on an unlisted case before the Employment  Tribunal
             which was still due to be heard on 17 and 18 September 2017 in
             the Employment Appeal Tribunal on the issue of whether a  Uber
             driver would be treated as an employee or  self-employed.   It
             is argued that the judge was wrong to treat the  Appellant  as
             an employee and ask for evidence of an employment letter  from
             Uber.  Permission to appeal is granted on this ground.


         3. The application for permission to appeal also  seeks  permission
             to appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  judge  has  disregarded
             evidence.  The  application  states  'the  Appellant  provided
             plenty of evidence in the hearing bundle of 122 pages to prove
             that the Sponsor was in  economic  activity  at  all  material
             times but it was also ignored'.  This is a sweeping  statement
             that  is  not  sufficiently  particularised  to  identify   an
             arguable error of law.  I do  not  grant  permission  on  this
             ground.   Permission  is  granted  to  appeal  on  the  issues
             surrounding the status of Uber drivers only."

3.    At the hearing before me morning, I heard submissions  initially  from
    Mr Kamal. He submitted that the  Judge  had  materially  erred  in  law
    because the issue of  whether  Uber  drivers  are  employees  or  self-
    employed was irrelevant in this case.  He said that in  any  event  the
    position  was  that  there  was  significant  evidence  from  the  HMRC
    documents and calculations in the bundle at the Tribunal to  show  that
    there was self-employment.  Mr McVeety assisted  the  Tribunal  to  say
    that in relation to that  ground  there  was  no  opposition  from  the
    Secretary of State and that on that  basis  the  appeal  would  not  be
    opposed.  Mr Kamal took me to other aspects of the appeal and said that
    it should be allowed.  Mr McVeety's  position  was  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal and for  the
    documentation to be properly evaluated and considered.

4.    Insofar as the issue in relation to  Uber  drivers  is  concerned  and
    whether there is a contract of service or contract for  services  is  a
    very interesting legal issue particularly in relation to the  so-called
    "gig economy" and these are terms of art in Employment Tribunal.  I  am
    sure there will be further appeals in respect of that case.  But I have
    to say that I agree with both of the representatives in respect of  the
    matters as they currently stand. The Judge simply got  this  aspect  of
    the case wrong in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  The  matters  in
    relation  to  Uber  and  the  case  at  the  Employment  Tribunal  were
    irrelevant for the purposes of the issues that the Judge had to decide.
     It also appears that the  Appellant  was  very  much  taken  by  quite
    surprise in seeing the Judge's decision because it does not  seem  that
    the Judge raised the matter  as  an  issue  with  the  parties  at  the
    hearing.  In the circumstances, there is a material error of law.   The
    Appellant has not had a fair hearing.  The appropriate course therefore
    is for there to be a complete rehearing  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    None of the current findings shall stand.  The hearing will be  on  all
    issues and that will take place at Taylor House.  The only direction  I
    give is that there be a Bengali interpreter (not Sylheti).

Notice of Decision

There is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed: Abid Mahmood                    Date: 24 October 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


