
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11268/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (RCJ)           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 March 2019                     |On 02 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               shaminder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S A Salam, Solicitor of Salam Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national  of  India  date  of  birth  13  January  1976
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 2  September  2016  to
    refuse an application for a permanent residence card as confirmation of
    his right to reside in the United Kingdom as the former spouse of  [OJ]
    an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).

2.   The basis of that refusal was  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided
    sufficient evidence to show that he had a retained right  of  residence
    following  his  divorce  from  an  EEA  national  in  accordance   with
    Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

3.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington  who  on
    2 October 2017 dismissed his appeal under the Regulations.   Permission
    to appeal that decision was given on 29 September  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C A  Parker.   His  appeal  having  been  dismissed  the
    enquiries were further made as  to  the  basis  of  the  refusal.   The
    Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 29 January 2018 on the basis that
    the Judge had directed himself appropriately and was entitled  to  find
    that the evidence did not show she was exercising treaty rights at  the
    appropriate time and that the Judge's conclusions were  fully  reasoned
    and properly open to him.

4.   Before me Mr Jarvis properly identified that in  fact  so  far  as  the
    issues were concerned the evidence showed, as did the Judge's decision,
    that Ms [J] had between the appropriate dates  been  exercising  treaty
    rights as an EEA national and covering the period required so  too  had
    the Appellant been exercising employment in the United Kingdom.  In all
    other respects it was accepted that the marriage had lasted  more  than
    three years of which the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom at
    least one of those years and that the marriage had been dissolved.

5.   The evidence showed in the  light  of  the  case  law  particularly  of
    Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088  that  in  fact  at  the  date  of  the
    commencement of proceedings the Appellant had discharged the evidential
    burden of showing that the requirements of  the  Regulations  had  been
    met.   The  evidence  therefore  did  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Regulations at the material time and Mr Jarvis correctly accepted  that
    there was no other basis upon which his appeal failed.   Accordingly  I
    find the Judge in his decision was in error of law and accordingly  the
    Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.
6.   The following decision is substituted in the light of the  unchallenged
    evidence.  The appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order was sought nor is one required.


Signed                                  Date10 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

A fee award was not sought and much of the outcome of this appeal is  driven
by a greater realisation of the relevant date  albeit  that  Baigazieva  was
reported as long ago as April 2018.

In these circumstances the after arising  information  and  dates  tends  to
show beyond doubt now that the appeal should succeed but  no  fee  award  is
appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 10 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



