
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11443/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 15 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                jennifer [l]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal of Counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Watson that she is not  entitled  to  a  derivative
    right of residence as the carer of her mother, pursuant  to  Regulation
    15(4A) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The appellant is a  Jamaican  citizen  and  her  mother  is  a  British
    citizen.  It was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant
    is currently her mother's primary carer.

 3. The application was made on 8 March 2016 and was  therefore  considered
    under the 2006 Regulations, not the  2016  Regulations.  The  appellant
    lives together with her mother, her sister, and her  sister's  children
    aged 22, 17, 12 and 8.  When she made this application,  the  appellant
    had been living unlawfully in the United Kingdom for fifteen years.

 4. The appellant's mother has complex medical needs; she has a combination
    of vascular dementia and Alzheimer's, together  with  type  2  diabetes
    which has caused renal impairment. She was said  to  be  untrusting  of
    people she did not know.  There  was  no  up-to-date  medical  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  and  no  evidence  as  to  what  Social
    Services provision was available. There was in the decision an arguable
    factual error as to which other members of the family had diabetes, but
    I do not consider  that  to  have  been  operative  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 5. The appellant is not able to work in the United Kingdom because she  is
    here unlawfully: the First-tier Tribunal accepted that she had been her
    mother's primary carer for a number of years.  It was accepted that the
    appellant accompanied her mother to all her appointments.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal held that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated
    that her mother would be unable to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
    another EEA state, if the appellant were required to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appeal was dismissed.

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 8. The appellant in her grounds of appeal argued that such Social Services
    support  as  her  mother  received  was  accessed  solely  through  the
    appellant's assistance, and that there was "nothing but  an  assumption
    that other bodies will step in to fill the vacuum that will be left  if
    the appellant is removed".

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant  was  the
         primary care-giver for her mother and it would be to  her  mother's
         detriment if the appellant left the United Kingdom.  It is arguable
         that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the
         mother's standard of living would not be so badly affected that  it
         fell  below  a  reasonable  level.    The  grounds  are  arguable."
                                [Emphasis added]

10. The test set out in the passage in italics in the grant of  permission,
    whilst it is identifiable in the grounds, is not  the  subject  of  any
    decided authority and is not the correct test, as Ms Vidal accepts.

Rule 24 Reply

11. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the respondent.



Upper Tribunal hearing

12. The applicable provision in the  2006  EEA  Regulations  is  Regulation
    15A(4A):

         "Derivative right to reside

         15A  (1)      A person ("P") who is not an exempt  person  and  who
             satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5)
             of this Regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside
             in the United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the  relevant
             criteria...


         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
              (a) P is  the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  ("the
         relevant British citizen");
             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and
             (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
                  the UK or in another EEA  State  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave. ..."

    It was not in dispute that the appellant's  mother  is  not  an  exempt
    person, nor that the appellant is her primary carer and that her mother
    is a British citizen residing in the United Kingdom.

13. The issue in this appeal was whether the appellant's  mother  would  be
    unable to reside in the United Kingdom or  another  EEA  state  if  the
    appellant were required to leave.  Both parties relied on the  guidance
    of the Court of Appeal given by Lord  Justice  Irwin,  with  whom  Lady
    Justice Thirlwall and Lord Justice Lindblom agreed, in Patel and Others
    v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  2028
    and in particular at [72]-[75] and [80]-[83] thereof.

14. At [75], Irwin LJ acknowledged impressive strength of  family  life  in
    relation to the appellants Shah and Bourouisa and the determination  of
    their British citizen parents to stay with the family and  move  abroad
    if the husband and  father  were  to  leave.   I  am  told  today  that
    unfortunately, given the present  state  of  the  appellant's  mother's
    dementia, she is no longer in a position to reach  a  similar  decision
    about her future.

15. Paragraphs [81]-[83] are of the most assistance in the  Patel  decision
    and are as follows:

         "81. I  recognise  the  force  of  the  submission  that  if  state
             provision in terms of medical or social services care is  both
             a right of the dependent adult and is in fact  available  then
             the class of dependent adults who can demonstrate "compulsion"
             to follow a non-British carer abroad may be limited.   I  also
             recognise that devotion to and care of elderly  frail  parents
             is to be applauded and praised not  condemned.   It  is  clear
             that Mr Patel is to be praised for his admirable care  of  his
             parents.  But I do not see any error  in  the  legal  approach
             taken by the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal in this
             case.  The question remains compulsion.

         82.  And it further seems to me that the evidence in this case  was
             too equivocal to amount to compulsion however  one  looked  at
             the matter.  There was absolutely no doubt as to the  parents'
             devotion to their son or his to them.  Were  he  to  leave  to
             India there was no doubt that  the  parents  said  they  would
             follow despite the findings below but that really  represented
             their cultural and individual commitment to each other.   That
             again is choice not compulsion.

         83.  Objectively  the  choice  was,  and  presumably  still  is,  a
             difficult choice.  ...  Part of the appellant's case was  that
             medical facilities would be more limited in India  as  I  have
             indicated  above.   However,  if  remaining  in  England,  the
             parents will be faced with medical  and  social  care  support
             that is likely to be lesser in  quality  (and  certainly  more
             impersonal) than the care currently  provided  by  their  son.
             Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson considered,  on  the  evidence  he
             heard, it was inevitable the parents  would  in  fact  remain.
             But even if that were wrong, this situation can in no  way  be
             regarded as one of compulsion to leave."

16. The facts in this case are  weaker  than  the  stated  facts  in  Patel
    because of the other family members who share  accommodation  with  the
    appellant's mother: the appellant's sister, and four nieces and nephews
    aged at least 22, 17, 12 and 8.  It is said that because they  work  or
    study they would not be able  to  fill  the  role  that  the  appellant
    currently fills, but there is no up-to-date evidence  one  way  or  the
    other about that.

17. The appellant has cared for her mother, and she is to be applauded  and
    praised, not condemned, for what she has done for her parent.  However,
    the factual matrix is not capable of demonstrating a compulsion for the
    mother to leave the EEA if the appellant is removed, even if  she  were
    still sufficiently well to decide to go with her daughter.  The reality
    is that her Alzheimer's and vascular dementia is now  so  serious  that
    she may soon require enhanced support  from  social  services,  perhaps
    even residential care.

18. It remains open to the appellant to make an Article 8 ECHR  application
    on family and private life grounds.

19. I am satisfied that the appellant has  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    showing that her removal would compel her mother to leave the  EEA  has
    not been demonstrated.  The requirements of Regulation  16(2)  are  not
    met and the appellant is not entitled to a derivative right to reside.

20. There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and dismiss
    the appeal.


Signed:       Judith A J C Gleeson                        Date:  25  October
2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

