

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                  Appeal Number: EA122302016
                                                                 EA122282016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 26 June 2017                           |on 27 June 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MARVIN MIRANDA
                              JENNIFER MIRANDA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: no appearance.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox ('the Judge') promulgated on 5  April
        2017 in which the Judge dismissed Mr and Mrs Miranda's  appeals  on
        EEA grounds but allowed the appeals as it  was  said  the  decision
        under challenge was "in breach of community law" which is taken  to
        be a reference to Article 8 ECHR.
     2. The Secretary of State was granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
        basis it is accepted the EEA Regulations were not  engaged  in  the
        appeal but that in allowing the appeal on  article  8  grounds  the
        First-tier Tribunal Judge may have erred in  law  in  not  applying
        Amirteymour and Others (EEA Appeals; Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 466.



Error of law


     3. Mr and Mrs Miranda, born on 11 February 1961 and  11  October  1968
        respectively are citizens of the Philippines. On  10  August  2016,
        they applied for EEA Family  Permits  as  the  parents  of  an  EEA
        national studying in the UK.
     4. Neither Mr nor Mrs Miranda  attended  the  hearing  as  their  home
        address is in Crete. They asked the Judge to determine  the  matter
        on the papers.
     5. The basis of the appeal is a claimed entitlement to a derived right
        of  residence  pursuant  to  Regulation  15A  of  the   Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the  Regulations).  The
        Judge  at  [19]  found  Mr  and  Mrs  Miranda  did  not  meet   the
        requirements for a derived right  of  residence  as  there  was  no
        suggestion that their son, the EEA national, would  have  to  leave
        the UK. As such  the  respondent's  decision  was  held  to  be  in
        accordance  with  the  EEA  regulations  which   is   an   arguably
        sustainable finding in relation to which permission to  appeal  has
        not been granted in any event.
     6. The Judge found that by virtue of section 84  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 he was required to consider whether
        the decision breached Mr and Mrs Miranda's  community  law  rights.
        Although nationals of the Philippines the address they provided for
        the appeal is in Crete indicating they are within the territory  of
        the European Union.
     7. The Judge was aware of the decision in Amirteymour and Others  (EEA
        Appeals; Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 466  as  specific  reference  is
        made to this case at [23 - 24] in the following terms:


         23.  I am aware that in Amirteymour and Others (EEA Appeals; Human
             Rights) [2015] UKUT  466  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  an
             appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal  in
             an appeal under the EEA Regulations. However, I  am  satisfied
             that the Appellant's circumstances are very different  to  the
             applicants in Amirteymour. Although  the  applicants  in  that
             case were all seeking to rely on derived rights  of  residence
             under the EEA regulations, they all resided in the UK and were
             over stayers. The decision did not  formally  seek  to  remove
             them (no section 120 notice had been served). In addition,  it
             was open to them  to  make  an  application  under  the  Rules
             (including Appendix FM). I also note that the tribunal did not
             consider whether the applicants could rely on rights under the
             Charter.


         24.  Unlike the applicants in Amirteymour in the present case, the
             ECM considered whether the decisions breached the  Appellant's
             human rights and concluded that the decision did not interfere
             with their Article 8  rights.  In  the  alternative,  the  ECM
             concluded that  any  interference  is  justified  to  maintain
             effective   immigration   control,   is   proportionate    and
             appropriate.


     8. In [25] the Judge concluded that having  found  he  could  consider
        whether the decision is in breach of  an  EU  citizen's  article  8
        rights he would adopt the step by step approach set out in  Razgar.
        The problem is that nowhere in  the  preceding  paragraphs  of  the
        determination does  the  Judge  consider  whether,  notwithstanding
        comments made by the ECM, the appellants have a right of appeal  on
        Article 8 grounds.
     9. The first point to note is that the decision under appeal  is  that
        of the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) dated 22 August 2016  and  not
        the review of decision by the Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  which
        upheld the decision.
    10. The ECO refused the application for the EEA Family Permit but  made
        no decision in relation to Article 8  ECHR.  The  ECM  conducted  a
        review followed receipt of Mr and Mrs Miranda's appeal. The grounds
        of appeal challenge only the  EEA  decision  as  the  section  that
        requires completion for a  human  rights  decision  has  been  left
        blank. There was therefore no appeal under  the  Human  Rights  Act
        lodged by Mr and Mrs Miranda.
    11. The second point is that illustrated by the decision of  the  Court
        of Appeal in Amirteymour v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353, handed down  on  10  May  2017,  in
        which the Court heard the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
        of the Upper Tribunal.
    12. Giving the lead judgment Lord Justice Sales, when  considering  the
        issue of jurisdiction to consider Article 8 in an  appeal  pursuant
        to regulation 26(1) said at [36 - 40]:
              36. In my view, the only situation in which the Tribunal  has
                  jurisdiction to consider a general case based on Article 8
                  (not concerning a decision to remove the appellant) in  an
                  appeal pursuant to regulation 26(1) is where the Secretary
                  of State or an immigration officer serves a  notice  under
                  section 120 of the 2002 Act - sometimes called a "one stop
                  notice": see AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the
                  Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076; [2011]  1  WLR  385,
                  para. [3]  -  requiring  the  appellant  to  set  out  the
                  entirety of his case as to why he says he is  entitled  to
                  remain in the UK. Paragraph 4(8) of Schedule 2 to the  EEA
                  Regulations provides that section 120 shall apply  "if  an
                  EEA decision has been taken or may be taken"  in  relation
                  to the individual concerned. Paragraph  1  of  Schedule  1
                  provides that section  85  of  the  2002  Act  applies  in
                  relation  to  an  appeal  pursuant  to  regulation  26(1).
                  Section 85(2), read as adjusted for that context, provides
                  that "if an  appellant  under  regulation  26(1)  makes  a
                  statement under section 120, the Tribunal  shall  consider
                  any matter raised in the  statement  which  constitutes  a
                  ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against
                  the decision appealed against"; and in my  view  for  this
                  purpose the reference  to  grounds  of  appeal  listed  in
                  section 84(1) is to be taken to be a reference to all  the
                  grounds  of  appeal  in  that  provision,  including  also
                  paragraphs (a) and (f).
              37. The object of a "one stop notice" under section 120 is to
                  make the applicant bring forward his whole case  regarding
                  his claim to be allowed to remain in the UK so that it can
                  be considered in one go in all its aspects, either by  the
                  Secretary of State or (after the Secretary  of  State  has
                  taken a relevant decision) by the Tribunal  on  an  appeal
                  which is on foot in respect of such a decision. Where such
                  a notice is  served,  the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
                  consider all claims made in response to it, whether or not
                  they were raised before the Secretary of State at the time
                  she made the relevant decision against which the appeal is
                  brought: see AS (Afghanistan); Lamichhane v  Secretary  of
                  State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 260;  [2012]
                  1 WLR  3064,  [43]  (Stanley  Burnton  LJ);  and  Patel  v
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72;
                  [2014] AC 651 at [44] (Lord Carnwath  JSC)  and  [67]-[70]
                  (Lord Mance JSC). The effect of para. 4(8) of  Schedule  2
                  to the EEA Regulations and para. 1 of Schedule  1  to  the
                  EEA Regulations (read with section 85(2) and  (3)  of  the
                  2002 Act) is to enable the Secretary of State  to  require
                  the applicant for a decision  regarding  his  entitlements
                  under  the  EEA  Regulations  to  bring  forward  all  the
                  immigration  claims  on  which  he  seeks  to   rely   and
                  incorporate them into his application to be considered  in
                  one go as part of that application or, where the Secretary
                  of State has already made an adverse EEA decision  in  his
                  case, to require the applicant to bring  forward  all  the
                  immigration  claims  on  which  he  seeks  to   rely   and
                  incorporate them in his appeal against that  decision,  to
                  be considered in one go by the Tribunal.
              38. The claims which might  be  asserted  in  response  to  a
                  section 120 "one stop notice" could include  claims  based
                  on the Immigration  Rules  as  well  as  claims  based  on
                  Article 8 or other Convention rights. In my opinion, where
                  this occurs the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to  an
                  appeal  against  an  EEA  decision  brought  pursuant   to
                  regulation 26(1) will be expanded to cover all the  claims
                  raised by the appellant in his response to the section 120
                  notice, including both the claims based on the Immigration
                  Rules and general claims based on Convention rights. It is
                  only by giving this effect to the section 120 notice  that
                  the object which it is intended to have,  to  ensure  that
                  all immigration claims by that appellant are dealt with in
                  one go through a simplified and truncated  procedure,  can
                  be achieved. The effect given to a section 120  notice  by
                  para. 4(8) of Schedule 2 and by  para.  1  of  Schedule  1
                  (read with section 85(2) and (3)) in the context of an EEA
                  decision and an appeal against an EEA  decision  therefore
                  includes an expansion  of  the  claims  which  are  to  be
                  regarded as included  in  the  relevant  application  made
                  under the EEA Regulations and of the jurisdiction  of  the
                  Tribunal to consider such claims on an  appeal  against  a
                  relevant EEA decision. Accordingly,  for  example,  if  in
                  answer to a section 120 notice served in the course of  an
                  appeal against an EEA decision the applicant for leave  to
                  remain puts forward  a  claim  based  on  the  Immigration
                  Rules, the Tribunal determining that appeal will also have
                  jurisdiction to determine that claim, notwithstanding  the
                  fact that para. 1 of Schedule 1  to  the  EEA  Regulations
                  states that the grounds of appeal in section 84(1)(a)  and
                  (f) of the 2002 Act relating to the Immigration  Rules  do
                  not apply in respect of an appeal pursuant  to  regulation
                  26(1). Service of  a  notice  under  section  120  confers
                  jurisdiction on the Tribunal in any appeal then on foot to
                  deal with all claims made in response to the notice.
              39. No procedural unfairness to the Secretary of State arises
                  from  treating  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction   as   being
                  expanded in this way. Such an  expansion  of  jurisdiction
                  only occurs when the Secretary of State  or  the  relevant
                  immigration official opts to serve a section  120  notice.
                  By opting to serve such a notice they take the risk of  an
                  expansion of  the  claims  to  be  addressed  in  existing
                  proceedings in order to secure the benefit of  being  able
                  to deal with all claims definitively  and  promptly  in  a
                  single set of proceedings: see Patel v Secretary of  State
                  for the Home Department at [69] (Lord Mance JSC).
              40. Turning to the facts of the present case, no section  120
                  notice was served by the Secretary  of  State.  Therefore,
                  the jurisdiction which the FTT was  required  to  exercise
                  was the limited  basic  jurisdiction  which  arises  under
                  regulation 26(1),  without  any  expansion  by  virtue  of
                  section 120 and section 85(2) of  the  2002  Act  and  the
                  related provisions  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  Under  the
                  Tribunal's basic jurisdiction under regulation 26(1),  the
                  FTT had no power to entertain  the  appellant's  new  case
                  based on Article 8.
    13. There is no evidence in this appeal that the ECO served  a  section
        120  notice  upon  Mr  and/or  Mrs   Miranda.   Consequently,   the
        jurisdiction the First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to exercise
        was that which arises under regulation  26(1)  as  advised  in  the
        notice of refusal which was exercised out of country,  pursuant  to
        regulation 27(1)(c) of the Regulations. Under regulation 26(1)  the
        First-tier Tribunal had no power to entertain what  amounted  to  a
        new case based on Article 8 ECHR.
    14. I find the Secretary State has made out that the  Judge  materially
        erred in law in proceeding to determine the appeal by reference  to
        Article  8  ECHR  when  it  has  not  been  made  out  he  had  any
        jurisdiction to do so.
    15. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so far as  that
        Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  ECHR.  The
        dismissal of the appeal pursuant to the Regulations stands as there
        is no legal error made out in relation to the same.
    16. The Upper Tribunal has  no  jurisdiction  to  remake  the  decision
        relating to Article 8 ECHR.


Decision

    17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge.  I  am  unable  to  remake  the
        decision for want of jurisdiction.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 June 2017












