
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/12644/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                      |                                     |
|At:  Birmingham, City Tower           |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 6th April 2018                    |          On: 13th April 2018        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              MUSTAFA MOHAMMED
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms Norman, Counsel instructed by Syeds
Solicitors
For the Respondent:                Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 28th June 1980.  He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Asjad) to dismiss his appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him a 'derivative' right of residence in the UK with reference to
    Regulation 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006.


 2. The Respondent accepted, by way of her letter dated 6th  October  2016,
    that the Appellant is a direct relative  of  an  EEA  national:  he  is
    father to his minor son, a Polish national residing in the UK.   It was
    further accepted that  the  Appellant  shares  responsibility  for  the
    child's care with  the  child's  mother.  The  Respondent  nevertheless
    declined to recognise any right of residence:


              i) Because the evidence did not establish that  the  child  in
                 question had comprehensive sickness insurance and so  could
                 not  be  considered  a   "self-sufficient   person"   under
                 Regulation 15A(2)(b)(ii);


             ii) Because the person with joint responsibility for  the  care
                 of the child was an exempt person: the child's mother is  a
                 Polish national;


            iii) There was no evidence that the child would be  required  to
                 leave the  UK  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be  refused  a
                 residence card. The child lives with his mother who  would,
                 on the evidence available, remain in the UK.


 3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal did not deal with any of these  three
    issues, but came up with a whole other reason to  dismiss  the  appeal,
    that being that the child was financially dependent  upon  his  father,
    whose permission to work in the UK was in doubt: even if his employment
    is lawful he had at best leave extended by s3 of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 and in those circumstances his income could not be relied upon  to
    create a 'self sufficiency' for the child: MA & Others (EU  National  -
    self sufficiency - lawful employment)  Bangladesh  [2006]  UKAIT  00090
    applied.


 4. The grounds take exception  to  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  on  several
    fronts, not least that the  Tribunal  did  not  mention  its  thinking,
    invite submissions on it or give the parties an opportunity to  address
    it on the authorities later cited.


 5. Before me Mr  Mills  conceded  that  the  Tribunal  had  so  erred  but
    contended that it made no difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal
    because the evidence had not established that any of the three concerns
    raised in the refusal letter had been addressed.


 6. Ms Norman maintained that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  was  wrong
    but conceded that the Appellant could not establish a derivative  right
    of residence under the Regulations because  his  former  partner,  with
    whom he shares care of their 11 year-old son, is a Polish national  and
    is therefore an 'exempt person'.


 7. In light of the realistic concessions made by both parties  I  set  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  for  error  of  law.  The
    decision is remade as follows:  "the  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the
    Regulations".



    Decisions


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.


 9. The appeal is dismissed.


10. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                6th April 2018








