
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: EA/12704/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2018                          |On 5 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                Cecilia Awuah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Wangui instructed by R Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of Mrs Awuah against the respondent's decision of
    5 August 2015, refusing an application for a residence card.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal.  There is the reference, which is perhaps the key
    point  of  challenge  at  paragraph  26,  that  the  normal   statutory
    declaration, confirming the details of the marriage is missing in  this
    case.  That is clearly wrong and that is common ground and that is  the
    main basis upon which Mr Clarke, on behalf of the respondent,  concedes
    that the decision does contain a material error of law.

2.   The judge was also  concerned  about  discrepancies  in  the  evidence,
    discrepancies as to the date of the marriage, which was stated  in  the
    marriage certificate  in  contrast  to  what  the  appellant  said  and
    differing explanations given by the appellant as to why the dates  were
    different; and also a lack of evidence to support the claim that  there
    were two marriages, a customary marriage  and  an  ordinance  marriage,
    which had different dates.  That was a matter that was  unsupported  in
    the evidence of the judge.  However, she did go on to accept  that  the
    husband, the sponsor, is a qualified person.

3.   Mr Clarke argues that the case should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    and Ms Wangui argues that in fact once it is accepted  that  the  judge
    erred with regard to the statutory declarations, since there  was  one,
    then the requirements of a valid marriage are made out in this case and
    the appeal can be allowed outright.  I  think  though  that  there  are
    ongoing matters of concern  in  this  case  which  need  consideration.
    Although it was not in the most immediate decision letter the statutory
    declaration was subjected to challenge in an  earlier  decision  letter
    and it is not clear whether that is a matter that is going  to  require
    consideration by a judge, in other words it is not  clear  whether  the
    respondent sticks to those concerns, but  there  are  also  the  issues
    about the date of the marriage and the different  forms  and  types  of
    marriage which concerned the judge and I think that those  are  matters
    that need to be clarified also.

4.   So, although the finding with regard to the fact that the sponsor is  a
    qualified person is preserved, the other matters I  think  are  matters
    that need further exploration and clarification before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, so the matter is remitted for consideration afresh by another
    judge in Birmingham, but with that particular finding of the  sponsor's
    qualifying status being preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 1 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

