
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12481/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12  January 2018                          |On 15 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                           VIANNY MARGARITA ZABALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW YORK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:                Not legally represented
For the Respondent:                     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 21 April 1979,  is  a  national  of  the
    Dominican Republic and not Dominica. On 1 September  2016  she  applied
    for a family permit as the family member of her sister, Jimenez Zabala,
    who is a Spanish citizen, living in the United Kingdom.

2.   Her application was refused on 21 September 2016 on the basis that  she
    had not submitted sufficient evidence to establish that she was  wholly
    or mainly dependent upon her sister or that her dependency was  one  of
    necessity, as opposed to  choice.  She  appealed  and  in  a  decision,
    promulgated on 4 May 2017, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kaler  concluded
    that the  decision  did  not  attract  a  right  of  appeal  and  that,
    therefore, she had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  following  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and on  20  November  2017
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted her permission to  appeal  in
    the light of the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Khan  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer sought a stay pending  decisions  in
    the Supreme Court in the cases of Khan and SM (Algeria). I refused  his
    application on the basis  that  the  decision  in  Khan  was  presently
    binding on the Upper Tribunal. The HOPO then accepted that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In her grounds of appeal, the Appellant asserted that she  had  applied
    for a visa, as opposed to a residence card.  However,  her  application
    for entry clearance was clearly made in the category of a family member
    of an EEA National and she paid  a  fee  for  an  application  in  this
    category. The confusion may have  occurred  because  she  said  in  her
    application form, in answer to question 82, that she  wanted  to  visit
    her sister. In answer to question 137, she also said that she wanted to
    come to the United Kingdom for a short visit.

6.   However, the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the EEA Regulations") do not provide for an extended family member to
    "visit" an EEA national in the United Kingdom or provide  them  with  a
    right  of  admission  under  regulation  11  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
    Therefore, she needed to apply for a family permit and  this  was  what
    she had applied for.

7.   It was on this basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kaler  found  that
    she had no jurisdiction. However, Sala is no longer good law  following
    the Court of Appeal's decision in Khan.

8.   As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler  did  err
    in  law  when  finding  that  she  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    Appellant's appeal.


DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 12 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


