
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA 13646 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2018                          |On 4 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between
                           Narguis Zulay Horsford
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trussler, counsel, instructed by Kinas
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is a resumed hearing.  I have already given reasons for  finding  an
error of law and setting aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
Those reasons are appended hereto. I ordered the matter came before me  and
gave directions.

2. This morning the parties have been able to consider the state of the  law
and the evidence available and agreed that the appeal should be allowed.

3. I allow the appeal pursuant to Rule 40(3)(b) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   The  parties  consented  to  me  not  giving
written reasons.  Suffice it to say that the appeal is allowed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 September 2018              |

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA 13646 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 June 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Narguis Zulay Horsford
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trussler, Counsel instructed by Kinas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW & DIRECTIONS

1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
State that she was not entitled to a residence card as the spouse of an EEA
national who had been continuously enjoying treaty rights for five years in
the United Kingdom.

2. It was the Secretary of State's case that  the  claimant  had  not  shown
that  her  partner,  the  EEA  national,  had  been  earning  or  otherwise
exercising treaty rights throughout the relevant  period.   The  First-tier
Tribunal came to a different view.  The First-tier  Tribunal  was  entirely
satisfied that the claimant's husband had been earning but found  that  the
earnings had been dishonestly hidden from HMRC and for  that  reason  could
not be counted.

3. There are two difficulties with this.

4. First, whilst the  judge  should  not  be  reluctant  to  find  that  the
necessary income was not declared if that is what the evidence showed,  the
judge should not have reached the conclusion that  the  claimant's  partner
was acting dishonestly without putting  her  on  notice  so  that  she  had
opportunity of answering such a serious allegation.  The  grounds  go  some
way to showing that the appellant might have an answer.

5. I am far from satisfied that the answer is necessarily sound  but  it  is
plainly arguable and the appellant, I  am  satisfied,  is  entitled  to  an
opportunity to correct those findings that her husband has been dishonest.

6. The second problem is that I am not satisfied that the judge is right  to
conclude that the dishonesty concerning the appellant's taxation meant that
the employment that was carried out cannot be relied upon for the  purposes
of establishing the exercise of treaty rights.

7. The judge has relied on two decisions which I have considered  and  found
helpful but it is not clear to me presently that  the  kind  of  dishonesty
alleged here, namely genuine work  honestly  undertaken  but  not  declared
properly to the Revenue for the purposes of taxation, means that  the  work
should be disregarded.  This is a point which, if the allegation  of  fraud
made by the judge stands up to scrutiny, will become highly pertinent.

8. In all the circumstances  I  have  decided  that  the  proper  place  for
disposing of this is in the Upper Tribunal.

9. This appeal will be listed for final determination in the Upper  Tribunal
before me if reasonably practicable.

10. I direct that no later than seven days before the day fixed for  hearing
the appellant serve on the respondent and  the  Tribunal  all  evidence  on
which she seeks to rely in support of the contention that the work that has
been established was work on which appropriate tax was paid (if such be the
case) and a skeleton argument from each party addressed to the question  of
whether work undertaken by the appellant's husband but not accounted for to
the Revenue is work to be considered for the purpose  of  deciding  if  the
appellant has established a right as the partner  of  a  person  exercising
treaty rights.

11. It may be that I will eventually agree with the view taken by the First-
tier Tribunal but at present I regard the point as arguable  and  I  direct
the parties to address their minds specifically to it.








|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 28 June 2018                  |
|Judge                                |                                     |

