

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/13715/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 March 2018                           | On 29 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                EMRUL HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Aly, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 8 November 2016 refusing him a derivative right of  residence  under
    reg. 15(4A) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") as the primary carer of his wife.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10  March  1965.   He
    has a poor immigration history.  He says that he entered the  UK  on  a
    false passport in 2001 and again in July 2008.  On 22 June 2003 he  was
    served with notice as an illegal entrant  following  which  he  claimed
    asylum.  His application was refused, and his appeal was  dismissed  on
    21 August 2003.  In July 2004 he applied for indefinite leave to remain
    which was refused.  In April and June 2013,  he  made  applications  on
    human rights grounds but both were  refused.   On  8  January  2016  he
    applied for a derivative residence card which was refused  on  8  March
    2016 and on 11 May 2016 he made a further application which  was  again
    refused and is the subject of this appeal.

3.    He claims to be the primary carer of  his  wife,  a  British  citizen.
    They married in a civil ceremony on 2 July 2013 following  a  religious
    ceremony on 12 November 2012.  The respondent refused  the  application
    on the basis that, although the appellant claimed  to  be  the  primary
    carer of his wife, it appeared that this was by choice as  he  had  not
    provided any evidence that her condition was so severe that she  needed
    a carer or that she was wholly dependent upon him.  The respondent  was
    not satisfied that adult social services could not provide her with any
    required care.  The appellant had said that when was away at  work  for
    three days a week, his wife was cared  for  by  other  family  members.
    There was no evidence that they would be unable to care for her  should
    he be required to leave the UK and he had failed  to  demonstrate  that
    his wife would be unable to reside in the UK if her carer were required
    to leave.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

4.    At the hearing the appellant produced documentary  evidence  including
    medical evidence, in a bundle indexed and paginated 1-53 and the  judge
    heard oral evidence from the appellant, his wife and her son.   He  set
    out his findings at [24]-[35].  He identified a number of discrepancies
    in the evidence relating to whether the  appellant  was  in  employment
    that was paid or unpaid and how he travelled to his place of work [25]-
    [26].  The judge said at [27] that faced with these contradictions,  he
    had to conclude that neither the appellant nor his wife  were  credible
    witnesses.  It had also emerged in the course of cross-examination that
    until very recently his wife's son and daughter-in-law had been  living
    in the same house as the appellant and his wife, but it was  said  that
    they had moved out about two months before the hearing.  The judge  did
    not accept that this was the case and found on balance that the  family
    were still residing with the appellant and  his  wife  [29].   He  also
    noted that the appellant's wife had a daughter living in Luton with her
    family and that  she  was  likely  to  be  available  to  provide  some
    assistance [30].

5.    The judge was not satisfied that the medical evidence  was  sufficient
    to enable him to conclude that the appellant was acting as  his  wife's
    carer to anything like the extent claimed [31].  However, the appellant
    not only had to show that he was her primary carer but also that if  he
    was required to leave the UK, she would be "unable to  reside"  in  the
    UK.  He referred to the Upper Tribunal decision in Ayinde  and  Thinjom
    (Carers - Reg. 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 560 where it was  held  that
    the carer had to establish as a fact that the person cared for would be
    forced to leave the UK.  The judge was not satisfied that this had been
    shown. For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.




The Grounds and Submissions

6.    In the grounds of appeal, it  is  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the evidence in  the  round  and  in  particular  the  medical
    evidence from the GP and the diabetes specialist nurse and  members  of
    the family.  Secondly, it is argued that the judge  misinterpreted  the
    term  "primary  carer"  and  the  fact  that   the   appellant's   wife
    occasionally had assistance from others did not exclude  the  appellant
    from being the primary carer who did the vast majority of the work.

7.    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    judge identifying the following matters as arguable:

         (i)       The  judge  had  arguably  approached  and  assessed  the
             evidence contrary to EU principles of  purposive  construction
             but had weighed the evidence hypercritically on the  issue  of
             whether the appellant was shown to be the  primary  carer  and
             whether his wife would be unable to reside in  the  UK  if  he
             were required to leave.


         (ii)     Credibility had appeared to be the focus  of  the  judge's
             concern.  There appeared arguably to be an absence  of  regard
             to whether the appellant's wife was a  vulnerable  witness  in
             accordance with the Tribunal Practice Direction of  2010  and,
             if so, this would have affected the approach to the assessment
             of her evidence including the various discrepancies identified
             and whether she would leave the UK if her husband had to go.


         (iii)    The judge had referred to the  relative  lack  of  medical
             evidence but there were letters from the GP and a report  from
             a diabetes specialist nurse and it was arguable that the  GP's
             evidence was assessed hypercritically and  the  evidence  from
             the nurse appeared to make no appearance in assessing  whether
             the appellant was the primary carer of his wife.


         (iv)     When assessing whether the appellant's  wife  would  leave
             the leave the UK there was arguably an absence of real  regard
             for the conjugal basis of the relationship which  appeared  to
             be unchallenged but rather there appeared to be an  assumption
             that NHS care, the support of the children  and  other  family
             ties in the UK would naturally fall into place and replace the
             emotional benefits of the close care provided by a husband for
             his wife.


         (v)      The decision arguably disclosed an inadequacy  of  reasons
             concerning the totality of the material evidence.

8.    In her submissions Ms Aly adopted  the  arguments  identified  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal.  She submitted that the judge had failed
    to take a global and purposive construction to the evidence, had relied
    too much on his findings  on  credibility  and  had  not  taken  proper
    account of the medical evidence.  The appellant's wife should have been
    treated as a vulnerable witness  and  her  evidence  should  have  been
    assessed in that context.  Apart from a reference to her frailty, there
    was nothing to show that her evidence had been assessed in the light of
    her vulnerability.  She submitted that the  medical  evidence  had  not
    been properly analysed.  There was sufficient evidence to show that the
    appellant was the primary carer.  The judge had failed to  take  proper
    account when assessing whether his wife would leave the UK of the  fact
    that they were husband and wife.  In summary, the judge had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons, so she  submitted,  for  his  decision  and  had
    failed to analyse the evidence properly.

9.    Ms Everett submitted that the grounds were  misconceived  as  was  the
    grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   There  was  no  substance  in  the
    submission that the judge had applied a wrong approach to the test  for
    the grant of a  derivative  right  of  residence,  which  was  a  quite
    stringent test.  It had to be shown firstly that the appellant was  the
    primary carer and the concerns the judge expressed about  the  evidence
    on that issue were fully justified by the  matters  he  had  identified
    relating to the appellant's work and whether other family  members  had
    continued to live in their home and secondly, that his  wife  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK if he had to leave.  There was no reason  to
    believe that the judge did not take full account of the extent  of  the
    family relationship when considering whether the appellant's wife would
    be unable to reside in the UK.  He had  taken  proper  account  of  the
    guidance in Ayinde and Thinjom and had reached a decision open  to  him
    on the evidence.

Assessment of the Issues

10.   In order to qualify for a derivative residence card, the onus  was  on
    the appellant to show that he met the provisions of reg. 15(4A) of  the
    2016 Regulations, namely that he was the primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen residing in the UK and that she would be unable  to  reside  in
    the UK or in another EEA state if he were  required  to  leave.   These
    provisions were considered by the Upper Tribunal in Ayinde and  Thinjom
    and in particular the requirement that it had  to  be  shown  that  the
    person cared for would be unable to reside in the  UK  if  her  primary
    carer had to leave.  The Tribunal's conclusions on this issue were  set
    out in [51] and in the italicised headnote as follows:

         "(i)     The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance
             of the rights  attaching  to  the  status  of  European  Union
             citizens identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-
             34/09 is limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights
             as defined in Article 20.


         (ii)     The provisions of reg. 15A of the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006  as  amended  apply  when  the
             effect of removal of the carer of a  British  citizen  renders
             the British citizen no longer able to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom or in another EEA state. This requires  the  carer  to
             establish as a fact that the British citizen will be forced to
             leave the territory of the Union.


         (iii)    The requirement is not  met  by  an  assumption  that  the
             citizen will leave and does not  involve  a  consideration  of
             whether it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom. A comparison of the British citizen's standard
             of living or care if  the  appellant  remains  or  departs  is
             material only in the context of whether  the  British  citizen
             will leave the United Kingdom.


         (iv)     The Tribunal is required to  examine  critically  a  claim
             that a British citizen will leave the Union if the benefits he
             currently receives by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
             unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he  claims  he
             will be forced to settle."

11.   I now turn to the submissions. I am not satisfied  that  it  is  shown
    that the judge  applied  an  incorrect  or  unlawful  approach  to  his
    assessment of the evidence  by  failing  to  follow  EU  principles  of
    construction or that he weighed the evidence hypercritically.  The fact
    that the judge was aware of the correct approach to the  assessment  of
    issues relating to EU law is clear from his reference in  [32]  to  the
    fact that, although such provisions have to be interpreted  broadly  so
    as to give effect to the purpose of the Regulations, in  this  case  to
    facilitate the  free  movement  of  nationals,  the  word  "unable"  to
    continue to reside in the UK in the Regulations was still  a  difficult
    one to demonstrate nor am I satisfied that when the decision is read as
    a  whole  can  it  be  said  that  the  judge  weighed   the   evidence
    hypercritically.

12.   It was for him to make findings of fact and to decide what  inferences
    could properly be drawn  from  his  findings  of  primary  fact.   When
    considering the evidence about the appellant's work, he was entitled to
    note that there was a contradiction between the evidence set out in his
    wife's statement that they were dependent on his earnings from his work
    and her oral evidence saying that she did not know whether his work was
    paid or unpaid.  It was also for the judge to decide what inferences to
    draw from the evidence that the appellant worked 70 miles away from his
    home three days a week, the suggestion being that this was for  two  or
    three hours voluntary work.  The judge was  entitled  to  comment  that
    whatever the true position about the distance, pay or hours worked,  it
    was for the appellant to show what the  position  was  and  that  there
    should have been no difficulty in providing such evidence, but none had
    been produced.  The judge was also entitled to comment that it was only
    in the course of cross-examination that the issue arose  about  whether
    her son and daughter-in-law's family were  still  living  in  the  same
    household as the appellant and his wife and that,  if  the  family  had
    moved out two months previously, he would have expected this to be  set
    out in the witness statements and to be supported by  some  documentary
    evidence.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  were
    properly open to him.

13.   It was argued that the appellant's wife should have been treated as  a
    vulnerable witness and that her  evidence  should  have  been  assessed
    accordingly.   This  issue  does  not  appear  to  have   been   raised
    specifically at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  the
    appeal necessarily raised  the  issue  of  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's wife was a vulnerable person as someone cared for primarily
    by her husband.  The  judge  did  comment  that  the  appellant's  wife
    appeared to be extremely frail and had to  be  helped  to  the  witness
    chair [11] but he had to assess  not  simply  the  appearance  but  the
    reality of her medical condition and  its  consequences.   When  making
    that assessment he had to consider the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  in
    particular the contents and extent of the medical evidence.

14.   This leads to the issue of whether the judge  failed  to  take  proper
    account of the medical evidence relating to the appellant's wife.   The
    judge dealt with this at [31], commenting that the conditions diagnosed
    by her GP were unsurprising in a woman of 70 and highlighting  that  in
    his letter of support, the GP had said that she was  at  high  risk  of
    heart disease, but this was  not  the  same  as  suffering  from  heart
    disease.  This was a comment open to the judge, as was his comment that
    there was no assessment of matters such as her mobility or her  ability
    to carry out her day-to-day tasks for the purpose of obtaining benefits
    or carers allowance.  There was a report  from  a  diabetes  specialist
    nurse which the judge was clearly aware of as he referred to it in [25]
    albeit in the context of recording that the appellant worked  70  miles
    away from home for three days a week and that other family members were
    required to provide support for his wife.

15.   There is no reason to believe that the judge left that report  or  any
    other medical evidence  out  of  account  when  assessing  whether  the
    appellant was his wife's primary carer.  It was for him to decide  what
    inferences to draw from the evidence in relation to  the  provision  of
    care, particularly in the light of  the  evidence  that  the  appellant
    worked away from home three days a week and that other  family  members
    provided support during this period.  The judge was entitled to comment
    at [32] that it may well be that the appellant was her  main  supporter
    to the extent that she required care but how much care she required and
    how much he provided was difficult to ascertain as he  did  not  accept
    that their evidence was credible. I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in law in the way he approached the assessment of the evidence of
    the appellant's wife.  It was for him to assess the extent to which she
    required care and the extent of her  vulnerability,  but  the  evidence
    taken as a whole failed to satisfy him to the required standard of  the
    care she in fact required or that the appellant was her primary carer

16.   It is then argued that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    conjugal basis of  the  relationship  between  husband  and  wife  when
    considering whether it was shown that the  appellant's  wife  would  be
    unable to reside in the UK if he were required to leave.  The  conjugal
    relationship of husband and wife is relevant to that issue but is by no
    means determinative.  As the Upper Tribunal pointed out in  Ayinde  and
    Thinjom at [54], whilst a minor child could survive without his parents
    in that adoption, foster care or  a  children's  home  may  provide  an
    adequate level of care, such alternative care was  only  likely  to  be
    contemplated  if  there  were  serious   reasons   for   breaking   the
    relationship between a child and one or both of the parents but elderly
    adults could more readily survive without a family  member  to  act  as
    their carer if there were adequate support mechanisms to  provide  them
    with alternative care to an appropriate standard.  Whilst it was beyond
    the range of proportionate responses that a minor should go  into  some
    form of alternative care to enjoy his EU rights were both  his  parents
    required to leave, the same consideration did not normally apply to the
    infirm or the elderly.

17.   At [56] the Tribunal said that the fact that children were in need  of
    specific forms of protection was acknowledged by the UN  Convention  on
    the Rights of the  Child  and  the  immigration  rules  reinforced  the
    special position of  children, it being  an  exception  to  the  public
    interest in favour of removal if it was established that removal  would
    be "unduly harsh" for a qualifying child but no  comparable  system  of
    regulation applied to the  needs  of  the  elderly,  certainly  in  the
    context of recognising the rights of family members to maintain  family
    life together.  The Tribunal held  that  this  distinction  informed  a
    consideration of the Zambrano principle when applied to  persons  other
    than minor children.

18.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  it  had  been  shown  that  the
    appellant's wife would have no choice but to leave the UK.  It had  not
    been a  point  made  in  their  witness  statements,  although  it  was
    addressed in oral evidence, and in this context the judge was  entitled
    to comment that it took two attempts for the appellant and his wife  to
    agree that she would have to leave [34].  The judge found at [35]  that
    from a purely medical point of view the  withdrawal  of  the  care  and
    support provided by the appellant would not have a  significant  impact
    on his wife's treatment or day to day activities given the availability
    of other family members, the diabetes specialist  nurse  or  other  NHS
    support.  He was not satisfied that the appellant's wife would in  fact
    prefer to leave, let alone be unable to  remain  in  the  UK:  she  was
    British citizen, she would have to leave her children and grandchildren
    in the UK apart from the advantages of free medical care.  This  was  a
    finding of fact properly open to the judge for the reasons he gave.

19.   Finally, I am satisfied that with the decision is  read  as  a  whole,
    there is no inadequacy of reasons.  The judge has explained why he  was
    not satisfied that the appellant had  shown  either  that  he  was  the
    primary carer or that his removal would lead to a situation  where  his
    wife would be unable to reside in the UK.

20.   Accordingly, I am not satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in  law.   He
    reached findings and conclusions properly open to him the evidence  for
    the reasons he gave.

Decision

21.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and  its  decision  stands.
    No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
         Dated: 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
