

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/13716/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th April 2018                        | On 3rd May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                             jesse affum kwakye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Appiah of Counsel, instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    James promulgated on 13 October 2017, in which the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to revoke his EEA Residence Card dated 16 November
    2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 5 January  1986  who  had
    been  issued  with  an  EEA  Residence  Card  on  26  January  2015  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as a person  in
    a durable relationship with an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights.
    That followed an initial application for an EEA Residence Card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  United  Kingdom,
    which was refused by the Respondent on the  basis  that  there  was  no
    valid marriage, it having been conducted by proxy in Ghana but  not  in
    accordance with all of the required  formalities.   That  decision  was
    upheld on appeal by Judge  Higgins  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  2
    October 2014, albeit also finding in the alternative that the Appellant
    was in a durable relationship and therefore could be considered by  the
    Respondent for an EEA Residence Card as an extended family member under
    Regulation  17(d)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations").

 3. The Respondent revoked the EEA Residence Card on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's ex-partner has completed a public statement on 20 June 2016
    confirming that the relationship no longer subsisted,  they  no  longer
    live together nor do they intend to live together in the future.  As  a
    result, the Respondent considered that the Appellant was no longer in a
    durable relationship and therefore could not continue  to  satisfy  the
    requirements in Regulation 8 of the EEA  Regulations.   The  revocation
    was specifically under Regulation 8(5) and 20(2) of the same.

 4. The Appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  were  on
    the basis that although he accepted he was now estranged from  his  EEA
    national partner, he had a new partner working in  the  United  Kingdom
    who is a British citizen, with whom he began a  relationship  in  March
    2016 and they were expecting their first child together.   The  grounds
    set out the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  for
    someone to be  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  partner,  relying  on
    satisfaction of the same and on Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights, such that he had an alternative  basis  of  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. Judge James dismissed the appeal, having considered it on  the  papers,
    in a decision promulgated on 13 October 2017.   It  was  noted  in  the
    decision that there was a  lack  of  any  documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant in support of his appeal and noted that having accepted  that
    he was no longer an extended family member of an EEA national since  at
    least March 2016,  the  EEA  appeal  against  the  revocation  decision
    automatically failed and had to be  dismissed.   The  conclusion  being
    that the Respondent was correct factually and  legally  to  revoke  the
    residence permit.  In relation to the ground submitted as to the  grant
    of leave to remain on the basis of family life under Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules, it was noted that no such application had been  made
    to the Respondent and  therefore  no  decision  by  the  Respondent  to
    consider on appeal.  Finally, the First-tier Tribunal  stated  that  it
    had no jurisdiction to consider an appeal on Article 8 grounds.



The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals  on  two  grounds,  first,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was mistaken in  considering  that  the  Appellant  was  still
    seeking an oral hearing when he had requested that the appeal should be
    determined on the papers, and secondly proceeded on the mistaken  basis
    that the Appellant had failed to file and serve any evidence, a  bundle
    having been faxed to the First-tier Tribunal on 2  October  2017  which
    contained written  submissions,  case  law,  marriage  certificate  and
    letter from the Ghana High Commission dated 25 April 2014.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on 26 February 2017 on
    the basis that there was  an  arguable  procedural  unfairness  in  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. At the oral hearing, there was some discussion between the  parties  as
    to the basis  on  which  the  appeal  was  proceeding  given  that  the
    documents which were forwarded  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  not
    before Judge James when making his decision, did not engage at all with
    the actual decision being appealed, namely the  revocation  of  an  EEA
    Residence Card issued under Regulation 8 of  the  EEA  Regulations  but
    instead focused upon whether or not the Appellant should in  fact  have
    been issued with an EEA Residence Card as a spouse rather  than  as  an
    extended family member.

 9. The thrust of the written submissions on behalf of the  Appellant  sent
    to the First-tier Tribunal were that the  previous  decision  of  Judge
    Higgins, which relied upon  the  Upper  Tribunal  decisions  in  Kareem
    (proxy marriages) Brazil [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC)  and  TA  and  others
    (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC), was  in  error  given
    that the Court of Appeal had overturned  those  decisions  in  Awuku  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  1303.   As
    such, it was claimed that in fact the  Appellant  had  entered  into  a
    valid customary marriage recognised under Ghanaian law (with  a  letter
    from the High Commission confirming its validity) and should have  been
    issued with an EEA  Residence  Card  under  Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations as a spouse.  At the time of the hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the marriage was still subsisting  and  therefore  there
    would be no grounds to revoke a Residence Card issued  on  the  correct
    basis under Regulation 7.  There were no written submissions about  the
    actual decision taken by the Respondent nor any further evidence  about
    the new relationship relied upon.

10. Separately, it was apparent by the date of the hearing before me,  that
    the Appellant claimed to have divorced his  EEA  national  spouse  such
    that whether or not he should have been issued with  an  EEA  Residence
    Card as a spouse or an extended family member, he  could  not  arguably
    now rely on either Regulation 7 or  8 of the EEA Regulations as a basis
    of stay in the United Kingdom.   However,  Counsel  for  the  Appellant
    confirmed at the oral hearing that although  the  Appellant  considered
    himself to  be  divorced,  this  was  completed  further  to  customary
    practice and had not been recognised as a legally valid divorce in  the
    United Kingdom.  For this reason, I accepted that the  appeal  had  not
    been rendered academic by a change in the Appellant's circumstances.

11. Counsel for the Appellant pursued the appeal before  me  on  the  basis
    that it was required to protect the Appellant's position and that there
    was an important issue outstanding as to whether or not he should  have
    been issued with an EEA Residence Card on a different  basis.   It  was
    suggested that this historic matter could validly be  resolved  in  the
    context of the current proceedings by either the Upper Tribunal  or  if
    the case is remitted, to the First-tier Tribunal.





Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the two grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal,  on
    the first ground, I do not find that there was any error or mistake  by
    the First-tier Tribunal as to whether the Appellant  had  requested  an
    oral or paper hearing.  It is clear  from  the  file  and  reading  the
    decision as a whole  that  although  an  oral  hearing  was  originally
    requested, there was a later request for  a  decision  on  the  papers,
    together with an indication that further evidence or documents would be
    forthcoming on behalf of the Appellant.

 2. On the second ground, there is no dispute that there was  a  procedural
    irregularity  on  this  case.   The  Appellant  had  submitted  further
    documents in support of the appeal within the deadline directed by  the
    First-tier Tribunal which were not before Judge James when  making  his
    decision on the papers.  However, this is what is likely to be  a  very
    rare case in  which  a  procedural  irregularity  could  have  made  no
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  This is because  the
    nature of the additional documents  filed  by  the  Appellant  and  the
    written submissions made, still do not actually challenge  in  any  way
    the decision made by the Respondent to revoke an EEA Residence Card  on
    the basis that he was no longer in a durable relationship and therefore
    could not satisfy the requirements for an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  an
    extended family member under Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.

 3. The case put on behalf of the Appellant in  those  written  submissions
    and reiterated before  me  today,  is  not  one  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could have adjudicated upon in the  context  of  the  decision
    under appeal, nor is there  any  legitimate  route  by  which  what  is
    essentially now a historic dispute over a previous decision could  have
    been resolved by the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant was of course at liberty to appeal the previous  decision  of
    Judge Higgins if he considered it contained an error  of  law  (because
    the decisions it relied upon were themselves in error, as in  Awuku  or
    otherwise), or in the alternative, the Appellant  has  always  been  at
    liberty to make a further application to  the  Respondent  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card on the basis that he was the spouse of an  EEA  national
    exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Although   that
    relationship is accepted to have broken down, the current circumstances
    are that the divorce has not been recognised as valid such that if  the
    Appellant is correct as to the  validity  of  his  marriage,  he  still
    remains married to an EEA national and there is potential scope for the
    historic position to be resolved.  It is not clear whether there  would
    be any real benefit to the Appellant in so doing, but that is a  matter
    for him to consider outside context of this appeal.

 4. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on the basis that although there was a
    procedural  irregularity  in  that  the  documents  submitted  by   the
    Appellant were not before Judge James when making his decision  on  the
    appeal, this was not material to the outcome of the appeal which  would
    inevitably have been dismissed.  There was no challenge to the legal or
    factual basis for the Respondent's decision to revoke the EEA Residence
    Card issued under Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.   The  Appellant
    has always accepted that that  relationship  had  broken  down  at  the
    latest by March 2016 such that he could not  continue  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     27th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

