
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/13121/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2018                          |On 09 March 2018                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              Silvester Aksamit
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gribble sitting at Manchester  on  17  March
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to remove him under Regulation 19(3)(a) of the Regulations  2006,
    as he was specifically to be considered to be  a  person  who  was  not
    exercising Treaty rights because he failed to  provide  information  to
    the Home Office when prompted  to  show  that  he  was  exercising  his
    rights.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction,
    and I do not consider that the appellant requires anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 18 December 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons: "It is arguable that the Judge did
    not consider the concession by the respondent in the  response  to  the
    PAP letter of 28 October 2016 that the appellant had worked in the  UK.
    Whilst this is not a concession that he was working at the date of  the
    hearing, it is arguably material when assessing proportionality."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Poland, whose date of birth is 9 January
    1980.  He claims to have entered the UK in either 2010 or 2011.  On  17
    June 2015 he was convicted of an offence of burglary  committed  on  15
    September 2014, and he was sentenced to 2 months' imprisonment.  On  23
    May 2016 he was served with IS151A and ISI15B EEA  Notices  and  appeal
    papers, via recorded delivery. He was thereby informed of the  decision
    to remove him on  the  ground  that  he  had  not  shown  that  he  was
    exercising Treaty rights.  He was  also  required  to  report,  but  he
    failed to do so, and so was he deemed to have absconded.

 4. On 2 October 2016, the appellant was arrested  by  Cheshire  police  at
    premises  in  Crewe,  where  he  was  found  sleeping  rough.   He  was
    subsequently interviewed by immigration officers.  Following  this,  he
    was arrested, served with enforcement paperwork and detained at  Morton
    Paul Immigration Removal Centre, pending removal from the UK.

 5. Fadiga & Co came on the record for the appellant, and they sent a  pre-
    action protocol ("PAP") letter to the Home Office on 18  October  2016,
    challenging the proportionality of the respondent's decision to  remove
    the appellant from the UK.  They submitted that the decision to  remove
    the appellant was disproportionate and illegal, as  he  was  exercising
    treaty rights and he was a person of good moral character.

 6. The Home Office replied to the PAP letter on  28  October  2016.   They
    acknowledged that he had demonstrated that he had been working  in  the
    UK.  However, it was noted that he was encountered by the police  on  2
    October 2016 "sleeping rough".  It was considered that the  appellant's
    removal from the UK was proportionate for the following reasons:

         -    He had been sentenced to 2 months' imprisonment for burglary;

         -    He was given 30 days to appeal the decision to remove him from
         the UK and he had failed to appeal within the time limit;

         -    "He appears to be working in the UK sporadically  and  despite
         his claim to have  been  working  since  April  2016  he  has  only
         provided 2  weeks  of  payslips  for  the  2  weeks  prior  to  his
         detention";

         -    Despite him claiming to have worked  in  the  UK  since  April
         2016, he had failed to obtain a place of residence;

         -    Although his mother lived in the  UK,  he  was  no  longer  in
         contact with her;

         -    He had submitted  no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
         socially and culturally integrated into the UK.

 7. The Home Office went on provide additional commentary on  some  of  the
    above points.. The solicitors claimed that the appellant had failed  to
    exercise his right of appeal as he had lost his paperwork and  did  not
    realise the importance of lodging the appeal.  However,  the  appellant
    had been served with the relevant notices in May, and he  was  given  a
    month to appeal, and he  failed  to  do  so.  He  was  advised  of  the
    importance of attending and reporting events, but he failed to  do  so.
    Following the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  comply  with  reporting
    conditions, an enforcement  visit  was  conducted  to  the  appellant's
    alleged place of residence on 7 September 2016.  The appellant was  not
    encountered, and his mother advised that she had  not  seen  him  since
    March 2016.  The appellant was deemed an absconder, and  he  was  later
    encountered on 2 October 2016 and detained.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal against the decision to remove him  came  before
    Judge Gribble sitting in Manchester on 17  March  2017.   Both  parties
    were  legally  represented.   The  Judge  noted  that  the  documentary
    evidence before him included a refusal dated 28 October 2016 in respect
    of an application made by the appellant for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  Ms Bremang, instructed by Fadiga & Co, confirmed  that
    Judge Gribble was only  hearing  an  appeal  against  the  EEA  removal
    decision made on 23 May 2016.

 9. The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant, and his  attention
    was directed to the documentary evidence which had  been  assembled  in
    the appellant's bundle.

10. In her closing submissions, Ms Young for the Home Office submitted that
    the appellant was not exercising  Treaty  rights  and  so  removal  was
    proportionate.  She submitted that  the  bundle  did  not  contain  any
    original documents, and there was no good reason for not producing  the
    originals. There was a gap in  his  employment  record.  There  was  no
    evidence that he had been working in November and  December  2016.   He
    had provided no bank statements to show payment in of  money  into  his
    account.

11. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Bremang submitted that the documents  in
    the bundle from Acorn Recruitment showed that he had worked from  2008.
    She acknowledged that there were some  gaps  in  his  employment.   She
    invited the Judge to accept the appellant's oral evidence that  he  was
    working now, although she accepted that the most recent documentary  of
    him working was contained in payslips  for  25  September  2016  and  2
    October 2016.

12. The Judge's findings of fact were set out in paragraphs [23] to [28] of
    his subsequent decision.  The Judge held that  the  appellant  had  not
    satisfied him to the required standard of the balance of  probabilities
    that he was working in May 2016 or subsequently.  This was because  his
    oral and documentary evidence was not satisfactory.  His oral  evidence
    was vague and dismissive as to why he had no originals of the  payslips
    he provided for that period.  He did  not  say  how  the  payslips  for
    Impact CS got into the bundle.  His excuse for not  bringing  originals
    was that he was rushing for a train, and this was not accepted  in  the
    light of how long he had to prepare and how important it  was  to  show
    that he was exercising Treaty rights.  He produced no  bank  statements
    to show cheques being paid into a bank account, either in May  2016  or
    at the current time.  The bank statements would be relatively  easy  to
    obtain, in his view, and they would have gone a long way to support his
    assertion that he was exercising Treaty rights.  Therefore, he was  not
    satisfied to the required standard that the  appellant  was  exercising
    Treaty rights in May 2016 or at the date of the hearing.

13. On the issue of proportionality, the Judge  found  that  the  level  of
    abuse of rights was significant because he was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant was exercising Treaty rights.  He was squatting in  May  2016
    on his own account, and it was also clear  that  there  had  been  some
    criminal activity.  The  appellant  did  not  abide  by  the  reporting
    requirement, and he could not be satisfied that the appellant  was  now
    exercising Treaty rights.

14. In terms of his personal circumstances, there was no  letter  from  his
    mother with whom he said that he had been living until either  February
    2016 or January 2017.  He was  a  young,  healthy  man.   His  personal
    circumstances showed that he was not particularly integrated within the
    UK society, because he had not abided by reporting requirements, he had
    committed a crime for which he was imprisoned,  and  he  spoke  limited
    English despite (on his account) having spent almost 10  years  in  the
    UK.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. In advance of the hearing before me to determine whether  an  error  of
    law was made out, the appellant's solicitors unsuccessfully applied  to
    the Upper Tribunal for an adjournment.  When giving written reasons for
    refusing the adjournment request, the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  that  a
    Polish Interpreter would be provided if the appellant chose  to  attend
    in person.

16. In the event, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.
     I was satisfied that the appellant and his legal representatives  were
    aware that the hearing was taking place, and had chosen not to  attend.
    So I was satisfied that it was in  accordance  with  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing in the appellant's absence.

17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller produced a copy of the response to the PAP  letter
    referred to by Judge McWilliam. She submitted that the  Judge  had  not
    erred in law in failing to take the  PAP  response  into  account  when
    assessing proportionality.

18. She explained that the  removal  decision  of  23  May  2016  had  been
    preceded by the appellant being served with  an  EEA  Questionnaire  in
    which he was asked to  provide  evidence  of  the  exercise  of  Treaty
    rights.  The appellant had not completed this Questionnaire, and  hence
    the removal decision had been triggered.

Discussion

Alleged Irrationality

19. The primary case put forward by the appellant's representatives is  one
    of irrationality.  It  is  pleaded  that  it  was  irrational  for  the
    Presenting Officer to submit that  the  appellant  was  not  exercising
    Treaty rights when the Home Office had acknowledged the opposite in the
    response to the PAP letter.

20. It is not suggested that Judge Gribble was shown the  response  to  the
    PAP  letter,  and  thus  it  is  the  respondent  who  is  accused   of
    irrationality, rather than the  Judge.   However,  the  argument  runs,
    since the decision  of  23  May  2016  is  unlawful  in  the  light  of
    concession in the PAP letter, the Judge should have allowed the  appeal
    to the limited extent that the decision to remove the appellant was not
    in accordance with the law.

21. The reasoning in the grounds of appeal is very muddled.  If  the  Judge
    was unaware, as he was, of the response to the PAP letter, he could not
    make a judgment as to whether its contents retrospectively  cast  doubt
    on the lawfulness of the removal decision of 23 May 2016.

Whether Material Unfairness resulting from non-disclosure of PAP response

22. Although this is not the case put forward in the grounds of  appeal,  I
    ask myself the question whether the non-disclosure of the  response  to
    the PAP letter has led to material unfairness.  I answer this  question
    in the negative for two reasons.

23. Firstly, the solicitors acting for the appellant in the  appeal  before
    Judge Gribble were the same firm of solicitors as had received response
    to the PAP letter.  So, if they considered that the  contents  of  this
    letter were material to the appeal before Judge Gribble, it was open to
    them to ensure that he had sight of it.

24. Secondly, the concession made in the PAP response was not  unequivocal.
    The Home Office accepted that the appellant  had  worked  in  the  past
    "sporadically".  The Home Office did not concede in  the  PAP  response
    that this meant that there was no longer a proper basis for maintaining
    the decision to remove the appellant.

Whether Judge was perverse to find the Appellant was not  exercising  treaty
rights in May 2016 or at the date of the appeal hearing

25. Before Judge Gribble, it was not in  dispute  that  the  appellant  had
    worked in the UK in the past.  On his own case,  he  had  worked  until
    2014, but he had then ceased working for some two years.  The issue  in
    controversy was whether he had resumed working  for  Acorn  from  April
    2016 - and thus was working for Acorn in  May  2016  when  the  removal
    decision was served - and whether he had carried on  working  up  until
    the date of the hearing.

26. The appellant's solicitors submit that the Judge made findings of  fact
    on these issues which  were  unreasonable.   It  is  pleaded  that  the
    documentary evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  established  on  the
    balance of probabilities  that  the  appellant  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights in May 2016, and that he had carried on exercising Treaty rights
    on a continuous basis thereafter.

27. The threshold for establishing perversity/unreasonableness  in  factual
    findings is a very high one.  I  consider  that  the  Judge  has  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant had not discharged  the
    burden of proving that he was exercising Treaty rights in May 2016  or,
    more importantly, at the date  of  the  hearing;  and  hence  that  the
    decision to remove him was proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 3 March 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge












