
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/13002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2018                          |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            Afeez Abiola Adeyemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 29 March  2018  Judge  Boyes  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, against a decision made by the respondent on 17  October  2016
    refusing to grant him permanent residence.
2.   The file shows that the appellant was sent  notice  of  appeal  at  his
    last known address.  He  has  not  provided  any  explanation  for  his
    failure to appear before  me.   In  such  circumstances  I  decided  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of one of  the  parties  and  I
    heard briefly from Ms Willocks-Briscoe.

3.   The appellant's grounds  sought  to  argue  that  he  was  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal because he had taken reasonable steps to  provide
    documentary evidence including the fact that he had  commenced  divorce
    proceedings.

4.   I have no hesitation in rejecting the appellant's  grounds;  indeed,  I
    struggle to understand why permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge
    Hollingworth.  In order to succeed in his appeal  the  appellant  would
    have to show that his EEA national spouse had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights for five continuous years.  He cannot rely on  regulation  10(5)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 because at
    the date of the hearing he was still not divorced.  Their marriage took
    place on 1 May 2010.  The evidence produced by the appellant to support
    his claim that his partner had been exercising Treaty rights  for  five
    continuous years at best demonstrated that  she  was  employed  between
    2010-2013.  The appellant failed to produce any  satisfactory  evidence
    to show that his wife was either  resident  in  the  UK  or  exercising
    Treaty rights between 2014 - to the date of hearing.  He also failed to
    demonstrate that he had taken all reasonable steps to  obtain  evidence
    relating to his wife's employment for the requisite  period.   Even  if
    (as the appellant argued) he could rely, in order to  trigger  retained
    rights, on the fact that he  commenced  divorce  proceedings  in  April
    2017, that does not assist him since there is still a  substantial  gap
    of approximately four  years.   The  judge  was  indubitably  right  to
    dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

5.   For the above reasons I find that the appellant's grounds are not  made
    out and accordingly the decision of Judge Boyes must stand.

6.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2018
     [pic]


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

