

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
EA/14267/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 February 2018                    |     On 20 February 2018            |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                            BENITA CHARLES JOSEPH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr G. Dolan, Counsel
For the respondent:          Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  05
    December 2016 to refuse to issue a residence card recognising  a  right
    of permanent residence as the family member of an EEA national.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  C.  Chapman  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 19 September 2017. The judge  noted
    the background to the appeal, including the  fact  that  the  appellant
    made two applications for a residence card. The first application for a
    residence card as a family member was refused in a  decision  dated  26
    April 2016. The second application for a permanent residence  card  was
    refused on 05 December 2016 [6-8]. The judge went on to consider  which
    decision was the relevant decision. The judge noted that the First-tier
    Tribunal records indicated that the appeal had been lodged against  the
    second decision dated 05 December 2016. There was no evidence  to  show
    that an appeal had been lodged against the first decision "but  because
    there was no presenting officer available to assist the Tribunal at the
    hearing, I was unable to have the Respondent's records  checked."  [9].
    In the absence of clarification from a Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    the judge decided to consider both matters [10]. The judge returned  to
    the difficulty that the absence of a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    caused when he repeated at [28]  that  he  was  "not  assisted  by  the
    absence of a presenting officer in this appeal."

3.    The judge went on to summarise the events at  the  hearing.  It  seems
    clear that his reference in [8]  to  the  appellant,  witnesses  and  a
    representative  being  in  attendance  was  an   error   arising   from
    insufficient proof reading. It is clear from the rest of  the  decision
    that the judge was aware that the appellant was not in  attendance  and
    did not have a legal representative [19]. Nothing turns on the error at
    [18]. The judge went on to state  that  the  appellant  nor  any  legal
    representative attended the hearing although her husband attended [19].
    Her husband (the EEA sponsor) said  that  she  was  unwell.  The  judge
    observed that there was no evidence to show that she was too unwell  to
    attend a hearing [21]. He also noted that the appellant's husband  only
    consulted a legal representative shortly before the hearing even though
    the appellant had been notified of the hearing  since  June  2017.  The
    firm was not on record and there was no evidence to  suggest  that  the
    appellant had prepared for the appeal or intended to "engage  with  the
    appeal process" [23]. For these  reasons  the  judge  decided  that  he
    should proceed with the appeal in the absence of the appellant.

4.    The judge went on to hear evidence from the EEA  sponsor.  He  records
    the evidence as follows:

            "24.  I therefore heard evidence from the sponsor. I  asked  him
           questions to help him present his evidence,  which  he  answered
           through the interpreter. He confirmed that  he  had  not  worked
           since 2013. He had been  received  ESA,  because  of  his  heart
           conditions, but this had been stopped. He appealed  against  the
           decision the  Social  Security  Tribunal,  but  his  appeal  was
           dismissed approximately three or four months ago. Since then, he
           has been in receipt of jobseekers allowance. He has documents at
           home to prove this but he has not brought them with him. He has,
           with  his  previous  application,  provided  documents  to   the
           Respondent,  and  to  his  legal  representatives,  proving  his
           employment, receipt of ESA, and the Appellant's residence in the
           United Kingdom, but has not retrieved  these,  or  brought  them
           with him."

5.    The judge went on to dismiss the  appeal  because  the  appellant  had
    failed to produce any evidence to show  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person or had been a qualified person for a continuous period
    of five years for  the  appellant  to  acquire  a  right  of  permanent
    residence. He concluded that  the  appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof [29-31].

6.    The appellant appeals the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the  ground
    that it was procedural unfair of the judge to proceed to determine  the
    appeal in circumstances where the appellant was too  unwell  to  attend
    and the respondent was also unrepresented.




Decision and reasons

7.    It is clear from the notice of appeal that the appellant  was  seeking
      to appeal the decision dated 05 December 2016 to  refuse  to  issue  a
      permanent residence card. Section 2(f) of  the  appeal  form  asks  an
      appellant to state the date of the  Home  Office  decision.  The  form
      indicated that the appeal was brought against the  decision  dated  05
      December 2016 and was lodged on 19 December 2016. This  was  the  only
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.    The judge took steps to  check  whether  the  appellant's  last  known
      legal  representative  intended  to  attend  the  hearing.   He   gave
      unarguably sustainable reasons to explain why there  was  insufficient
      evidence to explain the appellant's  absence.  There  was  no  medical
      evidence or detailed explanation of the appellant's medical conditions
      or any indication of when  she  might  be  well  enough  to  attend  a
      hearing. The appellant had been aware of the reasons for refusing  the
      application since December 2016, and had been notified of the  hearing
      in June 2017, but there was little evidence to  show  that  there  had
      been any preparation for the appeal. It was open to the judge to  take
      these matters into account as part of his assessment. Given  that  the
      main issue related to whether the EEA sponsor was a  qualified  person
      for a continuous period of five  years  it  seems  unlikely  that  the
      absence of the appellant would have made any  material  difference  to
      the outcome of the appeal. The  relevant  witness,  the  EEA  sponsor,
      attended the hearing and was available to answer questions.

9.    Although I have found that many of the judge's reasons for  continuing
      with the appeal in the absence of the appellant were open  to  him  to
      make in the circumstances,  after  having  considered  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision as a whole, I find that  there  are  two  issues  of
      concern, which taken together, render the decision unsustainable.

10.   Unfortunately, it is increasingly common  for  appellants  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal to be  unrepresented  at  a
      time when the framework of UK immigration law, including European law,
      has become increasingly complex.  Many of those who appear before  the
      Tribunal might face other obstacles to understanding the process  such
      as language barriers or limited literacy  and  education.  Others  may
      have vulnerabilities such as their age or state of  health  that  will
      need to be considered. Judges at all levels must always  be  alert  to
      what measures might be required to ensure a fair hearing.

11.   If an appellant, or in this  case  a  relevant  witness,  attends  the
      Tribunal in person there is a duty on the judge to assist  the  person
      to  provide  information  that  might  be   relevant   to   a   proper
      determination of the appeal. Although it was open to the judge to take
      into account the fact that the appellant had  failed  to  produce  any
      further evidence in support of the appeal, it was  not  a  case  where
      there had been no appearance on behalf of the appellant. The fact that
      the EEA sponsor attended indicated  that  she  wanted  to  pursue  the
      appeal.

12.   The first issue of concern is the  fact  that  the  sponsor  told  the
      judge that he had evidence at home that might have been  relevant.  If
      the appellant was legally represented one might expect the evidence to
      have been filed with the First-tier Tribunal before the hearing. In my
      assessment procedural fairness  dictated  that  the  judge  needed  to
      consider whether it might have been necessary to adjourn the appeal at
      that stage in order to  give  the  appellant  a  fair  opportunity  to
      produce the evidence. Even if the judge decided not to adjourn, a fair
      opportunity could have been given to the sponsor to file the  evidence
      for consideration within a short period of time after the  hearing.  I
      cannot  see  that  this  would  have  caused  any  unfairness  to  the
      respondent given that she chose not to attend the hearing.

13.   Although this issue is of some concern,  taken  alone,  it  might  not
      have been sufficient reason to conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision involved the making  of  an  error  of  law  given  that  the
      appellant had been on notice of the need to provide  further  evidence
      in support of the application since December 2016.  However,  combined
      with  the  second  issue,  I  have  concluded  that  the  decision  is
      unsustainable.

14.   My second concern relates to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to
      consider relevant matters. The judge clearly  asked  the  EEA  sponsor
      some questions about his work history in the last few years,  but  the
      questions appeared limited. There is nothing in the  decision  or  the
      record of proceedings to suggest that the judge asked the EEA  sponsor
      for a full history of his period of residence in the UK. It is unclear
      when the sponsor first arrived in the UK or whether he had completed a
      continuous period of five years  residence  as  a  'qualified  person'
      before he stopped work due to illness in 2013.

15.   Because the appellant was unrepresented, and in the absence of a  Home
      Office Presenting Officer, it was incumbent on the judge  to  consider
      all matters that might be relevant to a proper  determination  of  the
      appeal. Even though the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      limited, it appears to indicate that the EEA sponsor might  have  been
      issued with a permanent residence card before he stopped work in 2013.
      If that is the case it was arguable that the fact that he stopped work
      in 2013 due to illness was not relevant if  he  had  already  acquired
      permanent residence. It was not necessary for the EEA sponsor to  show
      that he was exercising rights of free movement to continue  to  reside
      in the UK if he had acquired a right of permanent residence.

16.   The respondent's bundle is poorly prepared and failed to  comply  with
      directions. It contains an incomplete application form and  the  wrong
      decision letter dated 26 April 2016. The documents  contained  in  the
      bundle do not appear to relate to the decision dated 05 December 2016.
      A copy of that decision  was  forwarded  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      separately. No doubt the lack  of  clarity  that  gave  rise  to  some
      concern was caused by the failure  of  the  respondent  to  compile  a
      bundle  of  documents  relating  to  the  permanent   residence   card
      application.

17.   The application form contained in the respondent's  bundle  is  signed
      and dated 16 November 2015, which appears to indicate that it  related
      to the earlier application for a residence card as  a  family  member,
      which was refused on 26 April 2016. For the purpose of this  point  it
      may not matter whether it was the correct form or not.  Section  8  of
      the application form contained in the respondent's bundle is  entitled
      "Sponsor has permanent residence". Question 8.2 states that a document
      was issued in 2010  although  other  details,  such  as  the  document
      reference number, were not  included.  Section  9B  at  paragraph  9.2
      stated that a registration certificate was issued on 07  October  2010
      and gave the relevant reference number.

18.   The judge had already expressed concerns about the absence of  a  Home
      Office Presenting Officer. Had  he  considered  the  evidence  in  the
      bundle it should have become apparent that  there  were  matters  that
      needed to be clarified with the EEA sponsor, and  if  necessary,  with
      the assistance of  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.  The  limited
      evidence before the Tribunal  did  not  even  relate  to  the  correct
      application. If there was any doubt as to whether the EEA sponsor  had
      acquired a right of permanent residence the details  could  have  been
      checked. If the appellant had been residing in  the  UK  with  an  EEA
      national who had a right of  permanent  residence  since  2010  it  is
      likely that the outcome of the appeal could have been different.

19.   The First-tier Tribunal's  failure  to  assist  the  sponsor  to  give
      relevant evidence in support of the appeal, and the difficulties noted
      by the judge as a result of the absence of a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer, were exacerbated by the  failure  to  consider  what  limited
      evidence was before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Given  the  conflicting
      information  contained  in  the  earlier  application  form   fairness
      dictated that the issue of whether the sponsor might have  acquired  a
      right of permanent residence at an earlier stage  was  material  to  a
      proper determination of the appeal. The First-tier Tribunal failed  to
      consider a material issue and whether fairness required an adjournment
      to resolve the issue.

20.   For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
      involved the making of an  error  of  law.  It  was  agreed  that  the
      appropriate course of action was to  remit  the  appeal  for  a  fresh
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

21.   As the judge was right to observe, the appellant produced no  evidence
      in support of the appeal and only gave vague reasons  for  failing  to
      attend the hearing. If the appellant is equally inactive in  preparing
      for the next hearing she can have not expectation  of  success.  I  am
      conscious of the fact that the appellant is unrepresented and may have
      language or other barriers to understanding what  evidence  she  might
      need to produce in support of the appeal. To this end she may want  to
      consider the following points.

        i) The appellant will need to show that she has resided in  the  UK
           as a family  member  in  accordance  with  European  law  for  a
           continuous period of five years.
       ii) A full history of her husband's residence in the UK, including a
           detailed schedule of when he was in work and when he was not  in
           work due to illness or unemployment will assist  the  First-tier
           Tribunal to assess the case.
      iii) If the  appellant's  husband  has  been  issued  with  residence
           documents, it will be  important  to  include  copies  of  those
           documents. In particular, it  will  be  important  to  determine
           whether  the  appellant's  husband  has  acquired  a  right   of
           permanent residence, and if so, when.
       iv) If the appellant is unable to  attend  the  next  hearing  as  a
           result of illness medical evidence should be provided to explain
           why she is too unwell to attend.

22.   The above points are not exhaustive and  are  intended  to  assist  an
      unrepresented appellant to compile relevant evidence. The appellant is
      reminded that the burden of proof remains on her to show that she  has
      acquired a right of permanent residence as the family member of an EEA
      national.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law

The decision is set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 15 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








