

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00922/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated                |
|On 30 May 2017                         |On 01 June 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                         RUWAN KUMAR HAPUTHANTHRIGE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H. Kannangara, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters who, by a  determination
      promulgated on 26 September  2016,  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a
      decision of the respondent,  made  on  5  June  2015,  to  refuse  her
      application for leave to remain as the unmarried partner  of  [MW],  a
      British citizen, with whom she  said  she  had  been  in  a  same  sex
      relationship since August 2014.


   2. The primary reason given by the judge for dismissing  the  appeal  was
      that, although he accepted that the appellant and [MW] lived  together
      in the same  accommodation,  he  made  a  finding  of  fact  that  the
      appellant and [MW] were not, in fact, in a same  sex  relationship  as
      they claimed to be, and that their evidence to that effect was untrue.
      He dismissed the appeal both under the immigration rules and on  human
      rights grounds.


   3. In the grounds upon which the appellant sought permission to appeal it
      was observed that by the time of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal the  appellant  and  [MW]  had  been  living  together  in  a
      relationship akin to marriage for two years. But, quite apart from the
      fact that the judge found that there was no such relationship at  all,
      as the requirement of E-LTR 1.2 is that they  must  have  been  living
      together in such a relationship for at least two years  prior  to  the
      date of the application, that took them  no  further  so  far  as  the
      Immigration Rules are concerned.


   4.  The  next  challenge  raised  in  the  grounds  was  to  the  adverse
      credibility finding made by the  judge  in  respect  of  the  asserted
      relationship.  The  judge  gave  two  reasons  for  finding  that  the
      appellant and [MW] were not in the relationship they  claimed  to  be.
      First, he had recorded at paragraph 27 of his  determination  that  in
      evidence [MW] said she had not travelled abroad but, as could be  seen
      from the copy of her passport produced, before  the  relationship  was
      said to have been formed in August 2014 she had in fact  travelled  to
      Thailand in 2011 and 2012 and to Burma in April 2014 until 1 May 2014.
      This led the judge to conclude,  at  paragraph  30,  that  there  were
      "significant discrepancies" in her evidence which caused the judge  to
      doubt her credibility. Second, although  the  judge  found  it  to  be
      "understandable" that the appellant had not told her  relatives  about
      being  in  a  lesbian  relationship,  he  found  it  damaging  to  her
      credibility that she had not produced evidence from friends testifying
      to their relationship.




   5. There are a number of serious difficulties with that  reasoning.  Most
      importantly, it is not apparent from the record of proceedings made by
      the judge nor the recollection of Mr Kannangara, who  appeared  below,
      that either of those concerns were raised either with the appellant or
      [MW]. If they had been, there may have been an explanation that  would
      have caused the judge not to hold those matters against the appellant.
      Secondly,  I  do  not  accept  that  those  two  reasons  are  legally
      sufficient to support a finding of fact that the relationship did  not
      exist. Thirdly, the existence of the relationship was not specifically
      disputed by the respondent in the refusal letter and  so  it  was  not
      immediately apparent to the appellant why additional evidence of  that
      might be required.


   6.  For these reasons, I am entirely satisfied that this was a finding of
      fact not reasonably open to the judge on the evidence. His failure  to
      raise with the appellant a matter he proposed to take against her that
      was not on its face in play and so she could not deal  with  it,  also
      discloses legal error.


   7. The question, therefore, is whether that error of law was material  to
      the outcome of this appeal. For the reasons that follow, it  is  clear
      that it was not.


   8. Mr Kannangara accepts, and is plainly  correct  to  do  so,  that  the
      appeal could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  not  least
      because it was the appellant's own case that the relationship began in
      August 2014 and so had not existed for at least two years at the  date
      of the application. Therefore, he accepted also that the appeal  could
      succeed only on the basis of rights protected  by  article  8  of  the
      ECHR.


   9. I have explained why the judge made an error of law  in  finding  that
      the account of the  appellant  and  [MW]  of  their  relationship  was
      untrue. That finding of fact cannot stand and must be considered to be
      of no effect at all. However, the judge determined the article 8 claim
      in the alternative, on the basis that he was wrong to find untrue  the
      claim of the appellant and [MW] that they  were  in  the  relationship
      claimed. At paragraph 31 of his determination the judge said:


           "In case I were held to be in error on this, I have gone  on  to
           consider the other matters under Article 8."


      There is no challenge raised in the grounds  to  this  aspect  of  the
      decision of the judge, and nor could there be, as  the  analysis  that
      followed was one plainly open to the judge on the evidence. Therefore,
      even though the judge was wrong to reach his primary finding  of  fact
      that the appellant and [MW] were not in the relationship they  claimed
      to be, as he was correct to find that the  appeal  could  not  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules and there is no challenge  raised  to  his
      determination of the Article 8 claim on the basis of the  relationship
      as asserted, the legal error made by the judge was not a material  one
      and so his decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

Summary of decision:

        i) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no material  error  of
           law error of law and the decision of the judge  to  dismiss  the
           appeal shall stand

          ii) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 30 May 2017

