
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00808/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th October 2016                      |On 12th October 2016             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                        EYIOWUAWI ANUOLUWAPO TAJUDEEN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha of Counsel, instructed by Carl Martin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 15th May 1971. He came
       to the UK as a student in 2005. He had  an  extension  of  leave  to
       remain in that capacity until 31st July 2008. He made an out of time
       application for further leave as a student in August 2008  but  this
       was refused on 10th January 2010. On 27th April 2015  the  appellant
       made a human rights application to  remain  in  the  UK,  which  was
       refused on 5th June 2015. He was by this time married to  a  citizen
       of Nigeria who is also an over-stayer in the UK, since  she  entered
       as a visitor in 2007 and was  not  granted  an  extension  of  leave
       thereafter. They have four children ZT born in June 2005 (in Lagos),
       JT born in the UK in August 2007, AT born in the UK in November 2009
       and IO born in September 2013. His appeal against  the  decision  to
       refuse his human rights claim was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Pullig in a determination promulgated on the 5th April 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Nicholson on 5th September 2016 on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  making  unclear
       findings as to whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  two  older
       children (who had been in the UK for more than 7 years) to leave the
       UK, which was arguably material given s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of law

    4. Mr Ngwuocha relied upon the grounds of appeal. He was  not  familiar
       with R on the Application of MA (Pakistan) & Ors  v  Upper  Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705  so  he
       was given time to read this decision, which I advised him was highly
       relevant to this matter.  He argued,  in  summary,  that  there  was
       insufficient appreciation of the fact that the two older children of
       the appellant had lived in the UK for seven years and to their  best
       interests and to the reasonableness of their being expected to leave
       the UK, and no specific consideration as to whether  this  qualified
       these children under paragraph 276ADE  (1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules in their own right.

    5. Ms Ahmad argued, in summary, that although there had been a  failure
       to look at the appeal under the Immigration Rules ultimately all  of
       the correct questions  had  been  asked  and  all  of  the  relevant
       material considered in concluding it was not a breach of  Article  8
       ECHR to require this family to leave. It had been  appreciated  that
       it was in the best interests of the children to  remain  in  the  UK
       with their parents and weight was given  to  their  seven  years  of
       residence, however ultimately it was proportionate  to  require  the
       children and their parents to leave. The decision  was  entirely  in
       keeping with the guidance given  by  the  Court  of  appeal  in  the
       decision in MA (Pakistan).

Conclusions - Error of law

    6. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider  whether
       the appellants qualified under the  Immigration  Rules,  and  moving
       immediately to a consideration outside of the Immigration  Rules  in
       the findings section of the decision at paragraph 60 onwards.  There
       is  no  concession  that  the  cases  were  not  argued  under   the
       Immigration Rules recorded in the submissions  for  the  appellants.
       There is no explicit finding as to whether it would be reasonable to
       expect the two child appellants, ZT and JT,  to leave  the  UK  when
       they had more than seven years residence in the UK at  the  time  of
       application to leave, and  thus  could  potentially  have  qualified
       under paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.

    7. There is however consideration as to whether  the  appellants  could
       succeed under s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act
       2002. In relation to this provision the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
       that ZT had spent nine years in the UK and JT eight years in the  UK
       and that it is in their best interests that they remain  in  the  UK
       receiving the education they current get  here,  see  paragraph  73.
       Whilst this is said to be only one factor in the overall balance  at
       paragraph 79  of  the  decision,  at  paragraph  80  the  First-tier
       Tribunal gives the "circumstances and best interests" of ZT  and  JT
       "very considerable weight" in deciding whether it was  proportionate
       to require them, and their family, to leave. Also  at  paragraph  65
       their presence in the UK for at least seven years is described as "a
       serious factor".

    8. The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) concluded at paragraph 13  that
       the tests in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
       s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  are
       similarly framed, and that  whether  the  child  can  reasonably  be
       expected to leave should be approached  in  the  same  way  in  each
       context.  Thus  if  the  analysis  under  s.117B  (6)  is  correctly
       conducted by the First-tier Tribunal there will be no material error
       of law.

    9.  MA (Pakistan) ultimately, in the context  of  the  decision  in  MM
       (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, holds at paragraph  46  that  a
       child's seven year period of residence should be seen as a  starting
       point that  an  appellant  should  succeed  under  these  provisions
       "unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary". It is also said
       that "there must be a very strong expectation that the child's  best
       interests will be to remain in the UK with his parents as part of  a
       family unit, and that must rank as a primary  consideration  in  the
       proportionality assessment", see paragraph 46 of the decision. It is
       clear from paragraph 49 of the decision in  MA  (Pakistan)  that  it
       will not be proportionate to remove the family/ reasonable to expect
       the children to leave unless there  are  "powerful  reasons  to  the
       contrary". It is clear from the extract from EV (Philippines)  cited
       at paragraph 48 that such powerful reasons might  include  the  poor
       immigration history of  the  parents  in  overstaying,  particularly
       where there were not overwhelming factors making it in  the  child's
       best interests to remain in the UK but where this is simply the case
       on balance.

   10. In the light of the guidance provided in MA (Pakistan) I do not find
       that the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred  in  law.  It  was
       clearly appreciated that the best interests of the children were  to
       remain in the UK given their period of residence and engagement with
       their education in this country. Their over seven years'  period  of
       residence  was  given  weight,  and   their   best   interest   very
       considerable weight in  considering  the  proportionality  of  their
       removal. This was not a case where any family member had any  health
       problems or other special needs, or  any  particular  reasons  other
       than inferior education and poverty in the country  of  origin  were
       identified as factors in the children's best interests in staying in
       the UK. It was a case where the First-tier Tribunal found  that  the
       parents would be able to find work and accommodation in  Nigeria  to
       provide for their children given their  educational  qualifications.
       It was not believed that the family would be destitute  if  returned
       to Nigeria, and these findings, at paragraph  78  of  the  decision,
       have not been challenged at irrational in any way. It is also a case
       where  both  parents  had  poor  immigration  histories:  both   had
       overstayed for many years (see paragraph 75 (1) of the decision).

   11. As is said at paragraph 74 of MA (Pakistan), when the  Court  looked
       at the challenge to the decision in MA itself: "It may be that other
       judges would have struck the balance differently, but  the  question
       is whether this judge reached a conclusion which was  open  to  him.
       Given that he was required  to  have  regard  to  the  wider  public
       interest in effective immigration control, I do not  think  that  he
       did." The decision I reach in this appeal is likewise that the First-
       tier Tribunal could lawfully reach the  conclusion  that  the  child
       appellants with more than seven years residence could reasonably  be
       expected to leave the UK on the current interpretation of this test.

   12. This decision would of course be different if the interpretation  of
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules and  s.117B(6)  of
       the 2002 Act which Lord Justice Elias would have favoured (and  sets
       out at paragraph 36 of MA (Pakistan), absent his  decision  that  it
       was ultimately correct to follow MM (Uganda), is found by  a  higher
       court to be correct.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2.  I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal of the appellants.



Signed: Fiona Lindsley                             Date: 12th October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



