
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00286/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2019                    |On 31 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 BADHAN PAUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Saini, instructed by Lawmatic Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will continue to refer  to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  although  technically  the
    Secretary of State is the appellant in  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (Bahdan Paul) appealed the respondent's  decision  dated
    10 December 2018 to refuse a human rights claim. The respondent was not
    satisfied that the appellant met the 'Suitability' requirements of  the
    immigration rules because it was alleged that he  obtained  a  previous
    English language certificate by deception. The appellant fell far short
    of the long residence requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)
    of the immigration rules. The respondent found that there were no 'very
    significant obstacles' to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh,  a
    country where he was still likely  to  have  linguistic,  cultural  and
    familial ties. There were no other exceptional circumstances to justify
    granting leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated  on  06  June  2019.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had prepared a lengthy witness statement, which outlined  his
    qualifications and gave details about the English language test he says
    he took in 2012 [5-10]. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and
    noted the submissions made by the parties [13-16]. He went on  to  make
    the following findings:

         "19.     The Respondent has simply failed to discharge  the  burden
             of proving that the Appellant has deployed deception  in  this
             case. Due to the efforts of the Appellant himself there  is  a
             USB stick that purports to prove that the Appellant deployed a
             proxy for his test.  Yet,  there  is  absolutely  no  identity
             document or other way of  referring  this  USB  stick  to  the
             Appellant. It is  evidentially  useless.  There  is  no  other
             evidence other than the generic evidence that  the  tests  for
             the 20th June  2012  were  cancelled  or  invalidated  due  to
             cheating. There  is  no  specific  evidence  relating  to  the
             Appellant at all. The burden of disproving dishonesty does not
             fall upon the Appellant.

         20.      In reality, the Appellant has provided cogent and detailed
             evidence of his participation in the tests  on  the  20th  and
             22nd June 20102 (sic). It is an oddity of this case  that  the
             Respondent appears not to take issue at  all  with  the  tests
             undertaken at the college on the 22nd June 2012.

         21.      Moreover,  the  Appellant  has  outlined  his  educational
             history in the UK over the period 2012-2015 and this  includes
             achieving a BA and MBA. The Tribunal agrees, as  a  matter  of
             common sense, therefore, that he would have no need to  deploy
             a proxy to obtain a basic ETS qualification.

         22.      In the view of the Tribunal, the Respondent has failed  to
             prove dishonest in this case (sic). It follows that the appeal
             of the Appellant relating to the issue of ETS is allowed.

         23.      Contrary to the assertion of Mr Turner, the  Tribunal  has
             no power to grant leave to remain in the UK.  It  is  not  the
             decision maker and the decision to grant or not to grant leave
             to be here is a matter for the Respondent.

         24.      However, so far as this appeal relates  to  the  issue  of
             ETS, it is allowed. It is then a matter for the Respondent  to
             make a decision as to whether the Appellant is  or  should  be
             granted further leave to remain in the UK (sic)."

4.    The Secretary of State's original  grounds  were  poorly  pleaded  and
    unparticularised. At the hearing, Mr Lindsay distilled the grounds into
    the following points:

      i) The judge failed to assess the  evidence  according  to  the  three
         stage approach outlined in SM & Qadir (ETS - Evidence -  Burden  of
         Proof) [2016] UKUT 229;

    (ii)   The judge failed to take into account relevant evidence produced
         by the Secretary of State.

Decision and reasons

5.    The judge did not approach the assessment in  a  structured  way  with
    reference to the relevant case law. That matters  not  as  long  as  he
    identified the correct principles and applied them  with  reference  to
    the relevant evidence. However, because he did not conduct a structured
    approach beginning with consideration of the evidence produced  by  the
    Secretary of State, in order to consider whether it met the  evidential
    burden of proof, he failed to  take  into  account  evidence  that  was
    relevant to a proper assessment of the allegation of deception. Had  he
    conducted a structured assessment he may have observed that in addition
    to the 'generic evidence' he noted, but did not refer to in any  detail
    at [19], that there was other relevant  evidence  in  the  respondent's
    bundle that needed to be considered and weighed  against  the  evidence
    produced by the appellant in response.

6.    Had the generic evidence consisted solely of  the  witness  statements
    of Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington, combined with  the  'look  up
    tool' print out confirming the cancellation of the test  as  'invalid',
    it would have been sufficient to meet the initial evidential burden  of
    proof and the  judge  could  have  gone  on  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant had provided an innocent explanation in response:  see  SM  &
    Qadir.

7.    Clearly the judge considered the  appellant's  evidence  detailed  and
    credible [20]. However, the evidence produced by the respondent did not
    include entirely generic evidence relating to fraud in English language
    test centres. The respondent's bundle also contained a 'look  up  tool'
    print out relating to the specific college where the appellant says  he
    took the test. The print out confirmed that out of 129 tests  taken  on
    20 June 2012 53 were deemed 'questionable' (41%)  and  76  were  deemed
    'invalid' (59%) by ETS. In other words, all the tests taken on that day
    at Seven Oaks College were cancelled and none were deemed to be  valid.
    The judge failed to consider or give proper  weight  to  this  evidence
    when assessing the credibility of the evidence given by  the  appellant
    in response to the allegation. Having heard evidence from the appellant
    it is possible, but not inevitable, that the judge might have  come  to
    the  same  conclusion.  Nevertheless,  it  was   still   necessary   to
    demonstrate that he had weighed relevant evidence  that  supported  the
    respondent's case as part of the overall assessment.

8.    The mere fact that the appellant could speak English and had  obtained
    a BA Hons  degree  and  an  MBA  while  studying  in  the  UK  was  not
    necessarily a  determinative  factor.  The  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether there could be other reasons  why  a  person  might  engage  in
    fraud: see MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450 at [57].

9.    Although it was not pleaded in the  grounds  of  appeal,  there  is  a
    further point that is so Robinson obvious that it  cannot  be  ignored.
    The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim. The only available ground of appeal was that his  removal
    in consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  The  judge's  task  was  to  make  findings  in
    relation to that sole ground of appeal. His findings at [22-24]  failed
    to engage with that core task.

10.   The parties also anticipated this point. I was referred  to  what  was
    said at [37] in Khan v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1684. It was suggested that
    the Secretary of State's statements in the note produced in  that  case
    might have informed the way in which the First-tier Tribunal approached
    this appeal. That case was brought in the context of an application for
    judicial review. The Secretary of State said that in cases where  leave
    was curtailed and would in any event have expired without  any  further
    application being made, she would provide a further opportunity for the
    individual to apply for leave without holding any previous gap in leave
    caused by an erroneous ETS decision against the applicant.

11.   If this was behind the reasoning given by First-tier Tribunal  it  was
    not explained with reference to the decision in Khan.  The  appellant's
    immigration and educational histories were not considered. He was  able
    to complete a first degree and an MBA despite the  curtailment  of  his
    leave. Even if it was open to him to make a further application without
    prejudice, given his existing qualifications, his  plans  for  academic
    progression were somewhat unclear. The bundle included applications for
    MSc  courses  in  Human  Resource  Management,  International  Business
    Management, Management (Entrepreneurship)  and  Digital  Marketing  and
    Analytics. On the face of it the appellant did  not  meet  the  private
    life requirements of the immigration  rules.  The  appellant's  witness
    statement  did  not  attempt  to  argue  that  there  would  be   'very
    significant obstacles' to his integration in Bangladesh for the purpose
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and the case did not appear to be argued  on
    that basis. All of this needed to be taken into  account  in  assessing
    the human rights claim. In purporting to allow the appeal based  solely
    on the ETS  allegation  the  judge  failed  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant's removal in consequence of the decision  would  be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

12.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of errors on points of law and must be set aside. The usual  course  of
    action would be for the Upper Tribunal to remake  the  decision  unless
    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party of the  opportunity
    for the case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge failed to determine the core issue in  the  appeal.  In  such
    circumstances, it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed      [pic]      Date 30 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

