
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00643/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2017                              |On 22nd May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                               Md Rashid Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gribble promulgated on 18 October 2016, in which his appeal against the
    decision to refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    private and family life dated 22 December 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  24  May  1990,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on 14 November 2009 with  valid  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 Student to 31 December 2011.  He made  a  further
    application for leave to remain as a student on 14 November 2011  which
    was unsuccessful and his appeal against that refusal was  dismissed  in
    2012.  On 20 April 2015, the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a parent.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on  22  December  2015  for  the
    following  reasons.   First,  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability criteria in S-LTR.1.6 as his presence was not conducive  to
    the public good by reason of his conduct,  character  and  associations
    such that it is undesirable for him to stay in the United Kingdom.  The
    Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant had  fraudulently  obtained
    ETS English language certificates from tests on 21  February  2012,  20
    March 2012 and 18 April 2012.

 4. Secondly, the Appellant did not meet the eligibility criteria for leave
    to remain as a partner or as a parent as it was not  accepted  that  he
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship as claimed.  Thirdly,  the
    application  was  refused  on  private  life  grounds  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules on the same suitability  grounds  as
    above and on eligibility grounds that there were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his return to Bangladesh where  he  has  resided  for  the
    majority of his life and where  he  has  retained  knowledge  of  life,
    language and culture.

 5. Finally, the Respondent considered whether there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules but did not find any.  The Respondent considered  the
    Appellant's child, a British Citizen, with whom it was accepted he  had
    a parental relationship, and her  best  interests  in  accordance  with
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  but
    considered it reasonable for her to remain in the United  Kingdom  with
    her mother.

 6. Judge Gribble dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
    October 2016 on all grounds.  Judge  Gribble  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant used deception in the English language tests he took  between
    February and April 2012 and that  he  had  not  given  a  plausible  or
    innocent explanation for the invalid test results.  The  reasons  given
    were the Appellant's lack of a coherent  account,  including  a  change
    from stating that he took a genuine test to  having  not  attended  the
    hearing centre or taking the test at all.

 7. In relation to family and private life,  Judge  Gribble  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms
    Begum and that they had a daughter together.  There was little evidence
    of any significant private life.  Overall Judge Gribble found that  the
    Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom   would   not   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life, by reference  to  the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the best interests  of
    the Appellant's daughter, which were to remain in the care of  both  of
    her parents.

 8. For the purposes of section 117B(6), Judge Gribble found that it  would
    be reasonable for the Appellant's daughter to leave the United  Kingdom
    due to her young age and that she would be  moving  with  her  parents;
    that there were no medical needs which could not be met in  Bangladesh;
    that both parents were capable of  working  in  Bangladesh,  speak  the
    language and are familiar  with  the  culture  so  could  assist  their
    daughter in language skills; that there are  wider  family  members  in
    Bangladesh and support from UK family  members  and  finally  that  she
    would retain her British Citizenship and could  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom in the future.

 9. The other factors taken into account under section 117B were  that  the
    Appellant could speak English, that he was not financially  independent
    and that he had remained unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  since  2012
    and therefore less weight was to be attached to his family and  private
    life.  Separately, significant weight was given to the Appellant's  use
    of deception in the United  Kingdom;  his  ability  to  reintegrate  in
    Bangladesh and that he could make an application for entry clearance to
    return to the United Kingdom.

The appeal

10. The Appellant appeals on two grounds, first, that  the  Respondent  had
    not met the burden of proof in  the  allegation  that  he  had  applied
    deception in his English language tests and that the Respondent had not
    acted in accordance with her own  guidance  as  to  evidence  required.
    Further, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give  reasons  for  the
    findings made on this point and failed to take into account that he had
    passed an English language test in 2011.  Secondly, that the First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to take attach sufficient weight to his  daughter's
    British Citizenship and that it would be unreasonable for her to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  In this regard, Judge Gribble failed to  undertake
    an assessment of best interests in accordance  with  EV  Philippines  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Appleyard on 6 March 2017  on
    both grounds, albeit with a view that the first ground  of  appeal  was
    much weaker than the second.

12. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied on the written grounds
    of appeal only on the first ground and in relation to the second  round
    relied in oral submissions primarily on the  Respondent's  'Immigration
    Directorate Instructions on Family Migration: Appendix FM  Section  1.0
    B, Family Life (as a Partner  or  Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-Year
    Routes' from  August  2015.   It  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not taken this into account when reaching the decision  on
    the reasonableness of the child leaving the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    however accepted that neither party had submitted the guidance  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the  course  of  this  appeal.   In  any  event,
    reliance was placed on paragraph 11.2.3 to the effect that  other  than
    in cases of criminality it  is  not  usually  reasonable  to  expect  a
    British Citizen child to leave the EU with a parent or  primary  carer;
    although it may be appropriate  to  refuse  to  grant  leave  when  the
    conduct of the parent gives rise to considerations of such weight as to
    justify separation.  The examples given are criminality  falling  below
    the threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules  and  a
    very poor immigration history, such as where the person has  repeatedly
    and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.  In the present  case,
    it would need to be assessed as to whether the Appellant's  actions  by
    overstaying and applying deception in the English language tests (if he
    is unsuccessful on the first ground of appeal) amounted to a very  poor
    immigration history  with  deliberate  and  repeated  breaches  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In any event, a decision-maker  and  therefore  the
    First-tier Tribunal, must consider the  impact  on  the  child  of  any
    separation in such cases.

13. Overall, it was submitted that there was a material error of law in the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the   reasonableness   of   the
    Appellant's child going to Bangladesh with him.  The  consideration  of
    the alternative by Judge Gribble  that  the  Appellant  could  make  an
    application for entry clearance also did not take into account that any
    such application could be refused under the general grounds of  refusal
    in paragraph 322 (11) of the Immigration Rules.

14. In response, the Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  that  there
    was no material error of law in the decision.  On the first  ground  of
    appeal, it is clear that as in SM and Qadir v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229
    (IAC), the Respondent had discharged the initial  burden  of  proof  to
    establish deception and  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that no plausible and innocent explanation had been  given  in
    response by the Appellant was a lawful and rational one to reach on the
    basis of the evidence before it.

15. The findings on deception and on the first ground  of  appeal  set  the
    context for the second ground  of  appeal  and  reasonableness  of  the
    Appellant's child leaving the United Kingdom must  be  assessed  within
    this context.  It was submitted that the  Appellant  has  a  very  poor
    immigration history and has deliberately breached the Immigration Rules
    as shown by the finding of deception.  The decision  of  Judge  Gribble
    took into account  all  of  the  relevant  factors  and  circumstances,
    including that the child was a  British  Citizen  and  gave  sufficient
    weight to that factor.  However,  in  all  of  the  circumstances,  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom was proportionate  and  the
    best interests of the child were outweighed for the reasons given.   It
    was submitted that there was no material error of law given that on the
    facts this was the only lawful conclusion that could have been  reached
    on the appeal.

Findings and reasons

16. In relation to the first ground of appeal, the Respondent  has,  in  SM
    and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department ETS - Evidence -
    Burden of Proof) [2016] UKU 00229 (IAC), been found to  have  satisfied
    the initial evidential burden  of  proof  with  deployment  of  generic
    evidence about ETS testing and evidence by way of the results from  the
    ETS  look-up  tool  that  specific  certificates  are   invalid.    The
    Respondent relied both on the generic evidence and the ETS look-up tool
    showing the Appellant's test was invalid in this case and there was  no
    further requirement at  this  stage  for  her  to  provide  audio  file
    evidence or further analysis of test records  to  establish  deception.
    The burden then  shifted  to  the  Appellant  to  provide  a  plausible
    innocent explanation for the outcome.   Judge  Gribble  found  that  he
    failed to do so having given two fundamentally inconsistent alternative
    explanations, first in his original grounds of appeal and draft witness
    statement that he had genuinely undertaken the  English  language  test
    and provided details of that test (which I note was the  position  that
    appeared to be maintained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal) and the position presented orally at the First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing that he simply did not attend the tests at  all.   Judge
    Gribble gave  sufficient  and  lawful  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was confused, vague and inconsistent such that  he
    had not provided a plausible  explanation  for  the  test  result,  nor
    discharged the burden he faced on this.

17. Further, there was no material  error  of  law  in  failing  to  attach
    positive weight to the Appellant's English language test passed in 2011
    given that there are in any event other reasons why a person  may  have
    used a proxy test taker and this could not in any  event  outweigh  the
    other significant problems with the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  the
    tests in 2012.

18. For these reasons, I do not find any error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment  and  reasoning  in  upholding  the  Respondent's
    decision on suitability under the Immigration Rules in Appendix FM  for
    reasons of deception.

19. As to the second ground of appeal, I do not  find  that  there  is  any
    material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in assessing the  best
    interests of  the  Appellant's  daughter,  the  reasonableness  of  her
    leaving  the  United  Kingdom  nor  in  the   overall   assessment   of
    proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Judge Gribble clearly recognised that  the
    Appellant's daughter was a British Citizen and therefore  a  qualifying
    child  for  the  purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in paragraph 34 of the  decision.   It
    was further  specifically  recognised  that  she  would  not  lose  her
    citizenship if she moved to Bangladesh with the Appellant and that  she
    could return for visits to  extended  family  and  United  Kingdom  and
    return permanently when she was older.  Although there  is  no  express
    statement to the effect that significant weight is attached to the fact
    that the Appellants child as a British Citizen, it is clear  that  that
    has been taken into account alongside a detailed consideration  of  all
    of her circumstances in the United Kingdom and her best interests.   As
    a primary finding, her best interests were to remain  in  the  care  of
    both of her parents but there were no overriding reasons as to why that
    should be in the United Kingdom as opposed to in Bangladesh.  There  is
    no inconsistency in the assessment of best interests with  the  factors
    to consider set out in EV (Philippines).

20. There is nothing to suggest that the Respondent's guidance relevant  to
    this point was brought to the attention of the First-tier  Tribunal  by
    either party, however I do  not  consider  that  the  failure  to  have
    reference to it makes a material difference  in  the  circumstances  of
    this appeal.  The Appellant's daughter is not being required  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and may remain here  with  her  mother  if  they  so
    choose such that she could continue to enjoy the  benefits  of  British
    Citizenship from within the territory.  That possibility of the  family
    being split was expressly considered by Judge Gribble in  paragraph  35
    the decision.

21. However, in all of the circumstances, lawful and rational reasons  were
    given as to why it would be reasonable for  her  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom with both parents and this is clearly a case which falls within
    one of the examples of circumstances given in the Respondents  guidance
    about where leave to remain  may  be  refused  to  an  applicant.   The
    assessment of reasonableness for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was in accordance with the
    Court of Appeal's decisions in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 wherein it was  confirmed  that
    the assessment of reasonableness required  regard  to  be  had  to  the
    conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant to  the  public
    interest.

22. As found by the First-tier Tribunal, this Appellant does  have  a  very
    poor immigration history.  He has remained  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2012 and failed to leave  despite  being  served  with  a
    IS151A notice on 24 October 2013.  He has been found  to  have  applied
    deception in English language tests in 2012 which is a clear deliberate
    breach of the Immigration Rules.   These  are  significant  factors  in
    favour of the public interest in maintaining immigration control  which
    outweigh the argument that family life established in circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom  when  the  Appellant  was  here  unlawfully  should
    prevail, as  per  the  findings  in  paragraph  36  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  For these reasons, I do not find that there was a
    material error of law on the second ground of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date         19th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


