
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00908/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 29 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LOVEPREET [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                                                  (Claimant)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Cleghorn, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
(Claimant)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by a citizen of India, who was born in July 1992.  He is
the respondent in the Upper Tribunal however for convenience, I will be
referring to him as the claimant.  His appeal is against the deportation
decision that was made on 29 December 2017 following a conviction on 17
November 2016 of conspiring to commit immigration offences for which he was
sentenced to 30 months imprisonment the following day.  He had arrived in
the UK on 19 September 2009 as a student and on expiry of his visa was
arrested in relation to the offences that led to his conviction which
revolved around a sham marriage to an EU national that had taken place in
2012.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson allowed the appeal against the
deportation order on human rights grounds in her decision dated 9 August
2018.  The judge considered the case with reference to s. 117C of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and was satisfied that there
were no insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's integration into India
but that it would be unduly harsh for the children of his relationship with
a British national, GG to relocate to India.  Their best interests lay with
having both parents present and in the light of the significant role that
the claimant played in their lives, the judge in terms considered that it
would be unduly harsh on them for the claimant to be absent.

For reasons given in my decision dated 8 May 2018 (annexed hereto), I
concluded that the judge had erred in law in reaching her decision which
predated KO (Nigeria) & Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  In essence, I
considered that the judge had erred in response to the challenge by the
Secretary of State by embarking on a proportionality exercise when
considering the undue harsh element of s. 117C and failed to give adequate
reasons why the threshold in s. 117C(5) had been reached in relation to the
impact on the children of the claimant's deportation.  There had been no
challenge to the finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
go with the claimant to India and, as to the ambit of the issues in this
remaking of the decision, it was accepted that this would turn on
consideration of whether the claimant's deportation would be unduly harsh
on the children.   The outcome would be determinative of the appeal as
acknowledged by Ms Cleghorn.  Ms Pettersen accepted that the best interests
of the children were served by them remaining with their parents in a
family unit as was indeed acknowledged by the Secretary of State in the
supplementary decision dated 11 July 2018.

The claimant gave evidence along with his partner GG, adopting their
earlier and updated witness statements.  This was accompanied by a number
of letters of support from a wide range of friends, other family members
and more recent neighbours in Sunderland where they now live.  The evidence
of the claimant and his partner, which is undisputed, is that their
relationship began in 2012 when the claimant was working in a shop below
the flat where the claimant lived.  They have two daughters born in 2015
and 2016.  After service of the claimant's custodial sentence, a third
child was born to GG by a different father for whom the claimant is a
father figure.  In some distress GG explained the circumstances leading to
the birth of her youngest child.  Her mother had warned her in terms that
it was unlikely that the claimant would be around after serving his
custodial sentence.

The claimant's immediate family regularly visited him in prison and they
resumed living together in September 2018, the period between then and
release being attributable to delays occasioned by the social workers
report and the need to obtain accommodation.   GG's mother's antipathy
towards the claimant has not lessened and her visits to the family home are
at Christmas and for "festivals", the last being at Easter when she called
by to give Easter eggs to the children.  GG considers that she does not
have a relationship with her mother.  Her father visits but is unable to
stay over due to restrictions on the extent to which he can be with
children.  Other family members visit from time to time.  The evidence from
witnesses who are not relatives speak of the affection and regard they held
for the family, including the claimant.  The evidence without question
points to a close-knit family group which has survived the impact of the
claimant's incarceration and the mixed reception the relationship has
received in GG's wider family.  The social worker's report refers to the
bond between the claimant and the oldest children and I have no doubt that
he is genuine as he is in his affection towards the youngest despite not
being the biological father.  There is no evidence that any of the children
have health difficulties; GG referred in evidence to her concern that the
eldest child became depressed during the claimant's absence and she
considered this was best dealt with by visits to the prison.

Submissions included reference to the most recent decision of the Court of
Appeal on the approach to the issue I am to decide.  The Court (per
Holroyde LJ) in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 set out the
familiar legislative framework in particular Part 5A of the 2002 Act and
the relevant rules as follows:

      "25.    With effect from 28th July 2014 part 5A of Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has made specific provision in
      relation to the consideration of article 8 in circumstances such as
      the present.  Section 117A provides:

                  '117A Application of this Part

                  (1)  This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                      required to determine whether a decision  made  under
                      the Immigration Acts -

                      (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                           and family life under Article 8, and

                      (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                           the Human Rights Act 1998.

                  (2)  In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                      court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                      (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in
                           section 117B, and

                      (b)  in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign
                           criminals,  to  the  considerations   listed   in
                           section 117C.

                  (3)  In subsection (2),  'the  public  interest  question'
                      means the question of whether an interference with  a
                      person's right to respect for private and family life
                      is justified under Article 8(2).'

         26.   Section  117B  sets  out  a   number   of   public   interest
             considerations which are  applicable  in  all  cases.   It  is
             unnecessary for present purpose to refer to these  in  further
             detail.  It is however necessary to refer to  117C,  which  so
             far as is material provides:

                  '117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in   cases
                  involving foreign criminals

      (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

                  (2)  The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                      criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
                      deportation of the criminal.

                  (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                      been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  four
                      years or  more,  the  public  interest  requires  C's
                      deportation  unless  Exception  1  or   Exception   2
                      applies.

                  ...

                  (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                      subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or
                      a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                      qualifying child, and the effect of  C's  deportation
                      on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.'

      27. Also with effect from 28th July 2014, the Immigration Rules were
      amended to make provision for consideration of article 8 claims by
      persons liable to deportation.  So far as is material, the amended
      Rules provide:

                  '398.    Where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation
                      would be  contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations  under
                      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and

                      ...

                      (b)  the deportation of the person  from  the  UK  is
                           conducive to the public good and  in  the  public
                           interest because they have been convicted  of  an
                           offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a
                           period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  but
                           at least 12 months;

                      ...

                      the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim  will
                      consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                      if it does not, the public  interest  in  deportation
                      will only be outweighed by other factors where  there
                      are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

             399. This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  ...
                  applies if -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                      who is in the UK, and

                      (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                           at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the
                           date of the immigration decision; and  in  either
                           case

                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               live in the country to which the  person  is
                               to be deported; and

                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               remain in the UK without the person  who  is
                               to be deported; or

                  (b)  he person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                      with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British
                      Citizen or settled in the UK, and

                      (i)  the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                           person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and
                           their immigration status was not precarious; and

                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported,  because  of  compelling  circumstances
                           over and above those described in paragraph EX.2.
                           of Appendix FM; and

                      (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported.

                  ...

             399C.    Where a foreign  criminal  who  has  previously  been
                  granted a period of limited leave under this Part  applies
                  for further limited leave or indefinite  leave  to  remain
                  his deportation remains conducive to the public  good  and
                  in the public interest notwithstanding the previous  grant
                  of leave.'

      28. Thus Part 5A of the 2002 Act, and the amended Rules, together
      provide a structured approach to the application of article 8 in cases
      of deportation of a foreign criminal."

Holroyde LJ also set out the relevant case law citing extracts from NA
(Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 and MM (Uganda) before explaining KO
(Nigeria) as follows:

      "32.    However, in KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court took a different
      view as to the interpretation in this context of the phrase 'unduly
      harsh'.  At paragraph 22, Lord Carnwath (with whom the other Justices
      agreed) said that on its face, Exception 2 in section 117C of the 2002
      Act raises a factual issue seen from the point of view of the partner
      or child.  At paragraph 23 he went on to say:

      'On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly
      intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness'
      under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
      deportation of foreign criminals.  Further the word 'unduly' implies
      an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a 'due' level of
      'harshness', that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in
      the relevant context.  'Unduly' implies something going beyond that
      level.  The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1), that is
      the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.   One is
      looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily
      be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent.
      What it does not require in my view (and subject to the discussion of
      the cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of
      severity of the parent's offence, other than is inherent in the
      distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to length of
      sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT
      (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR
      240, paras 55 and 64) can it be equated with a requirement to show
      'very compelling reasons'.  That would be in effect to replicate the
      additional test applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences
      of four years or more.'

      33. At paragraph 32 of his judgment, Lord Carnwath again differed from
      the approach taken by Laws LJ in MM (Uganda).

      34. It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
      section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the comparative
      seriousness of the offence or offences committed by the foreign
      criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the effects of
      his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree of
      harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child or partner
      of a foreign criminal faced with deportation.  Pursuant to Rule 399,
      the tribunal or court must consider both whether it would be unduly
      harsh for the child and/or partner to live in the country to which the
      foreign criminal is to be deported and whether it would be unduly
      harsh for the child and/or partner to remain in the UK without him."

The facts involved in that case related to the impact of deportation of a
Jamaican national on his six UK born children aged variously between 3 and
15.  He lived with three who were sons of the claimant's current partner.
The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the claimant was very involved
the three children he lived with and that he played an important role in
their lives.  She found it unsurprising that the claimant and his partner
had given evidence that the latter would be unable to cope with the three
boys on her own in the light of her dependency on the former for his
emotional and practical day to day support.

By the time the case came before the Court of Appeal, KO (Nigeria), had
overruled MM (Uganda) on which the judge had relied.  Holroyde LJ explained
at paragraph [38] after referring to the difference of approach now
required by the Supreme Court:

      "38.    The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court to adopt an
      approach which differs from that taken by Judge Griffith and Judge
      Finch.  In the circumstances of this appeal, I do not think it
      necessary to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because it is
      no longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5) of the 2002
      Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for SAT and the
      children of PG's deportation against the seriousness of his offending.
       The issue is whether there was evidence on which it was properly open
      to Judge Griffith to find that deportation of PG would result for SAT
      and/or the children in a degree of harshness going beyond what would
      necessarily be involved for any partner or child of a foreign criminal
      facing deportation."

He continued at [39] and [40] with the application of the law to the facts:

      39. Formulating the issue in that way, there is in my view only one
      answer to the question.  I recognise of course the human realities of
      the situation, and I do not doubt that SAT and the three children will
      suffer great distress if PG is deported.  Nor do I doubt that their
      lives will in a number of ways be made more difficult than they are at
      present.  But those, sadly, are the likely consequences of the
      deportation of any foreign criminal who has a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with a partner and/or children in this country.  I accept
      Mr Lewis's submission that if PG is deported, the effect on SAT and/or
      their three children will not go beyond the degree of harshness which
      is necessarily involved for the partner or child of a foreign criminal
      who is deported.  That is so, notwithstanding that the passage of time
      has provided an opportunity for the family ties between PG, SAT and
      their three children to become stronger than they were at an earlier
      stage.  Although no detail was provided to this court of the
      circumstances of what I have referred to as the knife incident, there
      seems no reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an advantage
      for SAT and the children, in particular R, that PG was available to
      intervene when his son was a victim of crime.  I agree, however, with
      Mr Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious though it may
      have been, cannot of itself elevate this case above the norm.  Many
      parents of teenage children are confronted with difficulties and
      upsetting events of one sort or another, and have to face one or more
      of their children going through "a difficult period" for one reason or
      another, and the fact that a parent who is a foreign criminal will no
      longer be in a position to assist in such circumstances cannot of
      itself mean that the effects of his deportation are unduly harsh for
      his partner and/or children.  Nor can the difficulties which SAT will
      inevitably face, increased as they are by her laudable ongoing efforts
      to further her education and so to improve her earning capacity,
      elevate the case above the commonplace so far as the effects of PG's
      deportation on her are concerned.  In this regard, I think it
      significant that Judge Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment
      referred to the "emotional and behavioural fallout" with which SAT
      would have to deal: a phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises
      the effect on SAT of PG's deportation, but at the same time reflects
      its commonplace nature.

      40. So far as PG's offending history is concerned, I accept Mr Lewis's
      submission that neither the nature of the offences committed after PG
      had served his prison sentence, nor the overall passage of time, can
      assist SAT or the children now that KO (Nigeria) has made it clear
      that the seriousness of the offending is not a relevant consideration
      when determining pursuant to section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act whether
      undue harshness would be suffered."

In the course of her submissions Ms Petterson contended that the only
evidence regarding medical difficulties was the reference by GG to her
eldest daughter suffering depression for which no medical evidence had been
provided in support.  Whilst both parents asserted matters would be
difficult which was accepted in the majority of the case law is not the
test but a normal reaction a child might have.  She contended that great
distress did not amount to unduly harshness.  As to the length of time that
had passed between the claimant's arrest in 2011 and his ultimate
prosecution, he had pursued a number of applications to remain in the
United Kingdom.  Rehabilitation was not a factor in assessing the undue
harshness.

Ms Cleghorn's submissions focussed on what should be the correct approach
to the assessment of undue harshness in the light of the recent approach
taken by the Court of Appeal and argued that there was a risk of conflating
the test with that for those in the serious category of sentence (using the
description in NA (Pakistan).  There was no authority on the precise point
and she also argued that with reference to the Upper Tribunal decision in
RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123
(IAC) permitted consideration of factors in the instant case such as the
creation of family life after the claimant had been arrested in 2011.   She
submitted that the strength of the family relationship was a relevant
factor which she contrasted with the circumstances of those where there was
less of a bond evidenced by the volume of work in the family courts.  A
finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to live in India
elevated the position of those who could go abroad to those who could not.
She argued that the claimant, his wife and children were a remarkable
family in terms of their closeness evidenced by the numerous visits to
prison and it was a rare case where there was such a degree of commitment
including the youngest child.  The problem for the family was that there
were no other close family members and she reminded me of the many
character approvals that had been provided in the evidence.

I am satisfied on the evidence that the deportation of the claimant will
remove a significant bulwark from the lives of the three children and their
mother which will be the lessor for his absence.  Their family life will
continue without him and GG's own wider family will come forward to help
but the demands on her and her ability to cope with such a young family
will be a struggle.  There will be times when she will feel not only
disheartened but also experience a profound sense of loss.  These are the
inevitable consequences of the splitting up of a close loving nuclear
family.

It will be harsh for the children and indeed for GG were the claimant to be
deported.  The approach to be taken was clearly set out by Lord Carnwath in
[23] in KO (Nigeria).  On the facts of this case however, the evidence does
not show there is something going beyond the level of harshness which is
"acceptable or justified".  The fact that a family is close-knit and
mutually supportive represents an ideal which many families meet.
Interference with such a relationship is unfortunately commonplace in the
sense that inevitably all will be affected by separation.  In my judgment,
without more, it would not be unduly harsh on the children for the claimant
to be deported.  I reach this decision not without some reluctance and have
admiration for the way in which this family have survived their
difficulties.

In his short judgment in PG (Jamaica), Hickinbottom LJ observed at [46]:

         "46. When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy
             for the entirely innocent children involved.  Even in
             circumstances in which they can remain in the United Kingdom
             with their other parent, they will inevitably be distressed.
             However, in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has
             made clear its will that, for foreign offenders who are
             sentenced to one to four years, only where the consequences
             for the children are "unduly harsh" will deportation be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent with article 8 of the
             ECHR.  It is important that decision-makers and, when their
             decisions are challenged, tribunals and courts honour that
             expression of Parliamentary will.  In this case, in agreement
             with Holroyde LJ, I consider the evidence only admitted one
             conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will be for
             his children, for none of them will it result in undue
             harshness."

Sadly here too, the evidence in this case points to only one conclusion.
This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date  22 August 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
