
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00918/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                      mrs Nancy Muthoni Gicheru Boothby
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Kenya, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 4th December 2017 to
    refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK under Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  her  family  life  with  her
    partner, Peter Robert Boothby.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  J  Parker
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 13th July 2018.   The
    Appellant now appeals with permission granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker on 27th July 2018.

 2. The issue raised in this appeal is narrow.  The Appellant's application
    for  leave  to  remain  was  refused  because  she  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility English language requirement under paragraph E-LTRP.4.1. to
    4.2.

 3. The Appellant had entered the UK on 6th September 2014  with  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of her partner valid until 20th May 2017.  On 24th
    April 2017 she applied for further leave to remain on the  same  basis.
    The reasons for refusal letter notes that the Appellant applied  for  a
    second period of leave under the five year partner route of Appendix FM
    and noted that  in  the  Statement  of  Changes  to  Immigration  Rules
    published on 3rd November 2016 any applicant seeking further  leave  to
    remain as a partner after 30 months in the UK and whose leave to remain
    expired on or after 1st May 2017, must have passed an English  language
    test in speaking and listening at a minimum of level A2.  At  the  time
    of the application the Appellant did not provide evidence that she  had
    achieved  a  qualification  in  English   language   at   that   level.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State decided that she failed to fulfil E-
    LTRP.4.1A to E-LTRP.4.2. of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    and requested that her appeal be considered on the papers.   The  judge
    considered the appeal on the papers on 25th June 2017 and  set  out  at
    paragraph  3  that  he  took  into  account  the   Appellant's   bundle
    (consisting of the Grounds of Appeal) and the Respondent's bundle.  The
    judge considered the appeal in accordance with the guidance set out  in
    the case of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge noted that if  the
    Appellant satisfies the Immigration Rules it can be said that there  is
    no public interest in refusing to grant leave [18].  The judge accepted
    that the Appellant and her partner have family life  in  the  UK  [19].
    The judge considered the reasons  for  refusal  and  highlighted  that,
    apart from the English language requirement, the Appellant met  all  of
    the  suitability  requirements  and  the  eligibility  requirements  of
    Appendix  FM,  including  the  relationship  requirements,  immigration
    status requirements and financial requirements. The judge noted at [32]
    that the Appellant had not provided evidence that she had achieved  the
    A2 minimum level in relation to English language.  The judge  noted  at
    [34] that the Appellant had indicated that she was unaware of the  Rule
    change relating to the English language test and had offered to forward
    the A2 qualification when she passed it, but she had not done so.   The
    judge noted that in her correspondence the Appellant had indicated that
    she had been unable to undertake the English language test because  the
    Home Office had not returned her passport.  The  judge  indicated  that
    there were very few documents before him [40] and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  at  the
    relevant date there was a public interest served by the refusal.

 5. In her Grounds of Appeal the Appellant said that she had passed the  A2
    English language test and submitted with her Notice of Appeal a Trinity
    College London certificate in Grade 3 Speaking and Listening in English
    at CEFR  level  A2.1  which  she  had  passed  with  distinction.   The
    certificate was issued on 4th June 2018.  In her Grounds the  Appellant
    stated that she was ignorant of the  change  to  the  English  language
    speaking and listening qualification when she made her application.

 6. In granting permission Resident Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker
    considered it arguable that the judge, through no fault  on  his  part,
    made a mistake of fact which was capable of amounting to  an  error  of
    law because, before the date of the hearing the  Appellant  had  passed
    the requisite exam with distinction.  He also  considered  it  arguable
    that there  was  an  element  of  procedural  unfairness  in  that  the
    Appellant  could  not  provide  evidence  more  quickly   because   the
    Respondent had the Appellant's passport.

 7. At the hearing before me the Appellant said that she had  received  the
    results of her English language test on 2nd May 2018 and that  she  had
    sent a copy of her results to the Home Office on 3rd May.   She  handed
    in a letter from the  Home  Office  of  12th  June  2018  acknowledging
    receipt of the return of her passport which states:-

            "Your exam result has been noted and I am returning the  report
    to you.
         A case worker may request to  see  your  certificate  at  a  future
         date".

 8. Mr Bramble accepted, in light of this letter, that the certificate  the
    Appellant sent to the Home Office in advance of the hearing should have
    been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He  accepted  that  if  the
    judge had that piece of evidence he would have allowed the appeal.

Error of Law

 9. In this case, by the time the judge dealt with the appeal on the papers
    the Appellant had passed the required English  language  exam  and  had
    submitted evidence that she had done so to the Secretary  of  State  as
    acknowledged in the letter of  12th  June  2018.   As  accepted  by  Mr
    Bramble, this evidence should  have  been  before  the  judge  when  he
    considered the appeal on the papers.  The certificate  was  not  before
    the judge due to the failure on the part of the Home Office  to  submit
    it  to  the  Tribunal  in  advance  of  consideration  of   the   case.
    Accordingly, the judge did not have a crucial piece of evidence at  the
    date he considered the appeal.  This is a  mistake  of  fact  as  to  a
    material matter which amounts to a material error  of  law.   In  these
    circumstances I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking the Decision

10. No other aspect of the First-tier Tribunal decision has been challenged
    by either party.  I therefore preserve the other findings made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  provision  of  the  English  language
    certificate means that all of the requirements of Appendix FM have  now
    been met on the findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  along
    with what was accepted by the Secretary of State  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  In considering the matter under Article 8 I note  that
    the judge accepted that the Appellant and her partner have family  life
    in the UK and that the decision appealed against causes consequences of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.   The
    Appellant now meets the Immigration Rules.  In these  circumstances  it
    cannot be argued by the Secretary of State that the decision to  refuse
    her application for leave to remain  is  proportionate  to  the  public
    interest.  In these circumstances I allow the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 1st November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered the matter of a fee award and I decide that  a  fee  award
of any fee payable should be made in light of the fact  that  the  Appellant
provided the evidence to the Secretary of State in advance  of  the  hearing
in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 1st November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

