
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00390/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     GL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1982.  On 21 October 2015
    the respondent made a decision to refuse a human rights  claim  in  the
    context of a decision to make a deportation order against the appellant
    in the light of his criminal offending.  Supplementary reasons for  the
    decision were given in writing on 2 February 2018.

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 15 March  2002  as  a  visitor  with
    leave to enter for six months.  Further leave  applications  were  made
    which eventually resulted in the appellant being granted further  leave
    to remain until 30 March 2007.  However, on 4 April 2007 he was  served
    with notice of his being an overstayer.  There  then  followed  various
    further applications for leave,  the  setting  of  removal  directions,
    judicial review proceedings and further representations  until  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain until 9 September 2012.   He  was
    granted further discretionary leave on 10 October 2013 until 10 October
    2016.  Notice of intention to make a deportation order against him  was
    served on 8 June 2015.

 3. The appellant's  criminal  offending  can  be  summarised  as  follows.
    Between 15 October 2003 and 6 May 2015 he was convicted on 13 occasions
    in relation to various offences.  In particular, on 6 May 2015  in  the
    Crown Court  at  Nottingham  he  was  convicted  of  possession  of  an
    imitation firearm with intent to cause fear of violence  for  which  he
    received a sentence of 21 months' imprisonment.

 4. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  human  rights  claim
    (the deportation decision) was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M
    Hollingworth ("the FtJ") on 7 January 2018 following which  the  appeal
    was dismissed.

 5. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision and upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted contend,  in  summary,  that  the  FtJ
    erred in his assessment of undue harshness in terms  of  separation  of
    his children from him and in his failure  to  consider  the  Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. Before summarising the FtJ's decision and the grounds  and  submissions
    before me, it is useful to refer  briefly  to  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances in terms of relationships and  children.   He  has  seven
    biological children in the UK roughly between the ages of 3 and 15, and
    one stepchild.  It seems that he also has three  children  in  Germany.
    His children in the UK are from six  different  partners.   To  varying
    extents he has some degree of contact with most of them.

    The FtJ's decision

 7. It must be said, with all due respect to the FtJ, that summarising  his
    decision  is  not  altogether  straightforward  because  some  of   the
    paragraphs are very lengthy and contain a very many number of  findings
    in one paragraph.  For example, [14] is a page and a half long.

 8. The FtJ summarised the evidence that he had before him in terms of  the
    appellant's relationships with his eight children and one stepchild  in
    the UK from six  different  mothers.   He  identified  the  documentary
    evidence including the witness statements of the appellant and CW,  who
    is the mother of three  children,  two  of  whom  are  the  appellant's
    biological children.  He also summarised the submissions made on behalf
    of the parties.  In that summary there is reference to  the  report  of
    Charles Musendo, an independent social worker.  He noted that  all  the
    appellant's children were British citizens except for  the  three  that
    lived in Germany.

 9. At [11] the FtJ said that the essence of the appellant's case  was  his
    relationship with his children.   He  set  out  the  contact  that  the
    appellant has with the children and who their mothers are.  For clarity
    I give the first names of the children  notwithstanding  the  anonymity
    order. Doing so does not undermine the anonymity order which will still
    be effective in relation to the children if only their first names  are
    given and if neither the appellant nor their  mothers  are  identified.
    Thus, according to the FtJ's decision, Lemar is aged 15.  His mother is
    LR.  He sees Lemar after school about every other day for half an  hour
    to 45 minutes. The three children who live in Germany are aged  between
    11 and 14. There is no contact between them and  the  appellant,  phone
    contact having ended about a year ago.

10. Thomas is aged 12 and Alisha is aged 9.  Their mother is  TL  and  they
    live about five miles from the appellant.  Every Tuesday the  appellant
    picks up Alisha from gymnastics and takes her home.   Every  Friday  he
    sees both children for three hours.  Those  arrangements  had  been  in
    place at the date of  hearing  for  some  two  months.   Sometimes  the
    appellant picks up the children if TL has work commitments.

11. Logan is aged 7 and his mother is JF.  The appellant last saw Logan  in
    2014.  Family court proceedings have been stayed until after a decision
    has been made by the immigration courts.  There is indirect contact  by
    card.

12. Sade is aged 5 and her mother is JS.  The appellant last  saw  Sade  in
    October 2013.  Family court proceedings are taking place.

13. Jayden is aged 3 and his mother is CB.  They live about four miles from
    the appellant.  He takes Jayden to nursery three times a week but  does
    not see Jayden's mother.  There is also contact on  a  Sunday  for  one
    hour.

14. Giovanni is aged 3� and Shania is aged 5.   Their  mother  is  CW  (who
    provided a witness statement and gave evidence).  The appellant  visits
    their home every day and spends most of the day at that address.  Those
    arrangements also relate to Tianna who is the appellant's stepdaughter,
    the daughter of CW.

15. The FtJ said that he had taken the evidence of  the  appellant  at  its
    highest in respect of his relationships  with  all  the  children.   In
    relation to the expert report from Charles Musendo,  the  FtJ  accepted
    his expertise and noted  that  the  report  explained  why  its  author
    considered that the respondent's 'section 55'  consideration  had  been
    totally inadequate.

16. The FtJ then went on to state that he accepted that the appellant had a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with all the children in the UK and
    he  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  he  would  be  successful  in  the
    proceedings in the Family court and that either he  has  or  will  have
    contact with all the children in the UK.   He  said  that  the  factors
    relevant to the best interests of the children had been identified.

17. Referring again to the report of Mr Musendo, he noted that it was  said
    that family breakdown  would  have  significant  consequences  on  each
    family member and  especially  on  Giovanni.   He  noted  the  report's
    reference to "significant research" showing that separation of  fathers
    from children gave rise to problems in early and later development.  It
    was also noted that the views of the local authority social worker  and
    the appellant's ex-partner had also been referred  to  by  Mr  Musendo.
    The FtJ accepted his report in terms of the consequences of separation.



18. He concluded that it would not be in the children's best interests  for
    the appellant to be removed from the UK and also found that it would be
    in the best interests of those children in the UK to remain here.

19. Again at [12] he noted that the appellant's case was  not  advanced  on
    the basis of his being in a relationship (with a partner)  in  the  UK.
    At [13] he also said that the case had not been advanced  that  he  was
    the primary carer of any of the children in the UK, but on the basis of
    contact with those children.

20. At [13] there is reference to paragraphs  398,  399  and  399A  of  the
    Rules.  The FtJ reiterated his finding that the appellant has a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with the children in  the  UK  and
    that in relation to Family court proceedings decided the appeal on  the
    footing that such relationships would be established or re-established.
     He noted that all the UK children  are  British  citizens  except  for
    Lemar who had resided in the UK for at least seven years preceding  the
    date of the decision.

21. The FtJ next referred to the question of whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the UK  without  the  appellant  or
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to live  in  Jamaica.
    He went on to say this at [13]:

         "On the basis of my findings and in  applying  Section  55  I  have
         reached the conclusion that it would be harsh for the  children  to
         remain in the UK without the Appellant and that it would  be  harsh
         for the children to live in Jamaica.  I do not  find  that  it  has
         been established that it would be unduly harsh.  The Respondent has
         set out factors relating to the distinction between  harshness  and
         undue harshness in the correspondence to the Appellant.  I  do  not
         find that it has been established that there is undue harshness  or
         would be in contradistinction to harshness."

22. The FtJ referred again to the  report  of  Mr  Musendo.   Although  not
    entirely clear from his  decision,  he  referred  to  the  respondent's
    conclusions that as regards all the children with whom  the  respondent
    found that he had a genuine relationship, it would be unduly harsh  for
    them to live in Jamaica with the appellant.

23. At [14] he stated that he had proceeded "to  consider  the  concept  of
    undue harshness on the further and alternative  basis  of  taking  into
    account the wider public  policy  considerations  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant".  In this context he set out the history of the  appellant's
    offending from 2003 to 2015.

24. Some of his key conclusions were that the persistence  and  pattern  of
    the appellant's offending were of substantial concern.  He  noted  that
    Lemar is 15 and the first offences  committed  by  the  appellant  took
    place in August 2003.  He found that the appellant's children  had  not
    played any  part  in  dissuading  him  from  continuing  with  criminal
    offending and he had offended even after  being  given  notice  by  the
    respondent of the intention to make a deportation order against  him  .
    He said that the reasons given by the appellant  as  to  his  continued
    offending were "wholly insufficient".

25. He went on to state that he did not accept the appellant's  claim  that
    he was innocent of the offence(s) which led to his imprisonment for  21
    months (possession of an imitation firearm with intent).   He  referred
    to the qualifications that the appellant had  obtained  and  his  claim
    that he deeply regretted his offending.

26. However, he concluded that the courts had  given  the  appellant  ample
    time and opportunity to reflect on the  consequences  of  his  actions,
    given the community orders and supervision which had  been  imposed  by
    the courts.  He found that the appellant  had  "failed  singularly"  to
    take advantage of any of the measures offered by the courts which  were
    designed to prevent his further offending.  He further  found  that  he
    had had ample incentive to avoid further offending given  his  children
    and his relationships with them.

27. The FtJ said that he had taken into account the assessments made in the
    OASys Report.  He concluded that the wider public interest, taking into
    account all those factors in favour  of  the  appellant,  required  his
    removal.  His course of offending had been relentless and  the  gravity
    of it had deepened considerably.   He  had  effectively  spurned  steps
    taken by the courts to help him.  The FtJ said that he had  taken  into
    account all the matters advanced in the material put forward on  behalf
    of the appellant from the probation service and the evidence put before
    him.  He also referred to an expert report  from  Luke  de  Noronha  as
    regards the situation in Jamaica for those deported  there.   He  again
    mentioned s.55.

28. At [15], in relation to para 399A of the Rules, he concluded  that  the
    appellant had not become socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK
    and that his (criminal) record represented the antithesis  of  cultural
    integration.  Furthermore, the appellant had not been lawfully resident
    in the UK for most of his life, having arrived in 2002 aged 20.

29.  Lastly,  he  said  at  [16]  that  "I  do  not  find  that  compelling
    circumstances have been established  which  enable  me  to  proceed  to
    consider whether there would be a  breach  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules".

    Submissions

30. In his submissions Mr Jafferji relied on  the  grounds  in  respect  of
    which permission to appeal was granted.  He agreed that this is a  case
    in which KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53 applied in terms of the unduly harsh test.

31. It was submitted that there was no reference by the FtJ to s.117 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  or  any
    consideration of the case outside the Article 8  Rules.   The  case  on
    behalf of the appellant was very different outside the Rules from  that
    within the Rules.  It might be that with reference to  each  child  the
    threshold for undue harshness was not surpassed but the impact on CW in
    terms of the significant reliance that she has on the appellant  needed
    to be taken into account.  The FtJ had accepted what was  said  in  the
    report of Mr Musendo.  However, there was no engagement by the FtJ with
    the concerns expressed in that report on the impact  of  separation  of
    the children.

32. Those  matters,  as  well  as  the  lack  of  reference  to  s.117C  or
    consideration of the case outside the Article 8  Rules,  established  a
    clear error of law which was material.

33. In his submissions Mr Mills accepted that there were quite a number  of
    "issues" with the FtJ's decision, for example that it was not  set  out
    as clearly as it could be and there was a lack of reference to s.117 of
    the 2002 Act.  Nevertheless, it was submitted that the outcome  of  the
    appeal was inevitable in any event.

34. The FtJ had come to a very generous conclusion in terms of the parental
    relationships that  the  appellant  has  with  the  children.   He  had
    concluded that it was not in the best interests of the children for the
    appellant to be removed, which was in effect what Mr  Musendo's  report
    was directed to.

35. The FtJ had considered the issue of undue harshness at [13] and that is
    what a consideration of s.117C(5) requires.

36. It was true that it  had  been  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  in
    relation to a number of the children they could not go to Jamaica  with
    him.  What the FtJ said at [13] was 'KO- compliant'  in  terms  of  the
    issue  of  undue  harshness.   What  was  said  at  [14]  was  in   the
    alternative, applying a public interest approach to the issue of  undue
    harshness, and the law as it was at the time of the hearing before him.
     In any event, in [13] he had already done the  exercise  of  examining
    the issue of  undue  harshness  without  the  public  interest  factor.
    Furthermore,  according  to  KO  (Nigeria)  the  threshold  for   undue
    harshness is very high.

37. The only added factor on this issue was in respect of the  children  of
    CW  who  has  had  mental  health  problems,  including   anxiety   and
    depression.  However, there was no evidence that she would be unable to
    parent on her own.

38. At [15] the FtJ had referred to the private life  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The appellant did not have any subsisting relationship  with  a
    partner.

39. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the FtJ had  erred  in
    his approach at [16] where  he  said  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules that  needed  consideration.   However,
    the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  before  the  FtJ  that  his
    deportation would be unduly harsh in relation to the children and there
    were no compelling circumstances  which  otherwise  made  the  decision
    disproportionate.  Although at [16] there was a lack  of  reasons,  all
    that could be said on the issue was considered by the FtJ at [14].

40. In his reply, Mr Jafferji submitted that neither [13] nor [14]  of  the
    FtJ's decision could save it.  No reasons were given in [13] as to  why
    the appellant's deportation would be harsh but not unduly harsh.  Other
    aspects  of  [13]  were  simply  the  narrative  in  relation  to   the
    respondent's position in terms of the children relocating to Jamaica.

41. So far as the ability of CW to parent, Mr Musendo's report said that he
    was concerned about her ability to care for the  children  on  her  own
    without the appellant because of concerns about her mental health.   At
    [43] he had mentioned her referral to mental  health  services  and  an
    assessment in March 2017 indicating her  need  for  long-term  therapy.
    There was also the issue of the children's cultural background.

42. At [14] the FtJ had (improperly) taken into account the public interest
    issues in the assessment of undue harshness.   It  was  submitted  that
    there was in fact no conclusion at the end of that paragraph.

    Error of law - Assessment

43. Although there are some deficiencies in the FtJ's decision, the  actual
    challenge is only on the basis that he did not consider s.117C  of  the
    2002 Act and that there was no consideration of Article 8  outside  the
    Rules.  That 'outside the Rules' consideration is argued for on  behalf
    of the appellant in terms of a cumulative  assessment.   Thus,  it  was
    accepted on the appellant's behalf in submissions that it may  be  that
    with reference to each child individually the  unduly  harsh  threshold
    was  not  met  but  cumulatively,  and   taking   into   account   CW's
    circumstances, including her ability to parent without the appellant, a
    different outcome was possible.

44. Aside from the matters to which I have already referred, it seems to me
    that there is a lack of clarity at [13] in terms  of  whether  the  FtJ
    concluded that it would be unduly harsh both for the children to  leave
    the UK for Jamaica and for  them  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant.  I have quoted the particular passage  in  this  context  at
    [21].  In addition, it is not entirely clear to me what the  FtJ  meant
    at [16] by the following:

         "The Respondent has referred to consideration of the application to
         revoke the deportation order.  If these paragraphs apply  to  which
         the Respondent has referred I do not find  that  the  analysis  set
         forward by the Respondent has been rebutted."

45. It is true that the FtJ did not refer to s.117C and the various factors
    there set out.  However, I do not see in the submissions on  behalf  of
    the appellant, or indeed  otherwise  in  terms  of  the  evidence,  how
    express consideration of s.117C could have affected the FtJ's  analysis
    such as potentially to have led to a different outcome in favour of the
    appellant.  In relation to the matters that the FtJ  had  to  consider,
    most particularly the question of undue harshness,  those  are  matters
    that are contained in what are, in effect so far as they apply to  this
    appeal, the mirror provisions of the Rules.

46. As regards the issue of undue harshness itself, I do  not  accept  that
    the FtJ's decision betrays a lack of consideration of  the  independent
    social worker's report from  Mr  Musendo.   He  did  refer  to  it  and
    accepted its conclusions.  He found that it would not be  in  the  best
    interests of any of the children to be separated  from  the  appellant.
    Whilst it is true that he did not expressly refer to what was  said  in
    the report about CW in particular and her ability to parent on her own,
    it is nevertheless the case that at [13] the FtJ noted that it had  not
    been suggested that the appellant was the primary carer for any of  the
    children in the UK.  Elsewhere in his decision he  referred  more  than
    once to having taken into account the written and oral evidence of  CW.
    Furthermore, the FtJ had said at [11] that the case on  behalf  of  the
    appellant was, in essence, his relationship with his children.  At  [3]
    he referred to evidence  that  the  appellant  was  due  at  Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court on 16 March 2018 in relation  to  an  allegation  of
    assault on CW, albeit that she gave evidence in support of  the  appeal
    before the FtJ.  At [13] he said that  he  accepted  CW's  evidence  in
    relation to the best interests of the children.  It  is  reasonable  to
    conclude that that acceptance included what she had to  say  about  her
    ability to parent without the appellant.

47. Although there is criticism of the FtJ's analysis of the issue of undue
    harshness, notwithstanding some lack of clarity in his decision in this
    respect to which I have referred, I  am  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    legally sustainable analysis of the issue of undue harshness  in  terms
    of separation from the appellant.  The FtJ did not suggest, and  indeed
    nor did the respondent, that any of the children could  go  to  Jamaica
    with the appellant.  As to separation, as was  said  in  KO  (Nigeria),
    undue harshness represents a high threshold and means something  beyond
    mere harshness, which is also in fact what the FtJ said at [13].

48. Furthermore, it has long been held that the mere fact of separation  is
    not  a  sufficient  basis  from  which  to  conclude  that  a  person's
    deportation would be disproportionate in terms of its impact on  family
    life.

49. I do accept that at [14], impermissibly as it  now  turns  out  in  the
    light of KO (Nigeria), the FtJ went on to consider undue  harshness  in
    the context of the appellant's criminal  offending.   The  introductory
    sentence states that the FtJ considered that issue "on the further  and
    alternative  basis"  taking  into  account  the  wider  public   policy
    considerations.  However, I am not satisfied that what  is  undoubtedly
    an error of law in this respect  is  material.   The  FtJ  had  already
    decided that it was not unduly harsh for the appellant's  children,  or
    his stepchild, to remain in the UK without him.  I cannot  see  on  the
    evidence  anything  from  which  the  FtJ  could  have  concluded  that
    separation would be unduly harsh.  So, even accepting that his analysis
    in that respect could have  been  more  specific,  there  was  in  fact
    nothing significant before him on that issue beyond the  mere  fact  of
    separation and even taking into account CW's difficulties.

50. So far as a consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules is  concerned,
    the FtJ said at [16] that  there  were  no  "compelling  circumstances"
    sufficient for a consideration outside the Rules.  The phrase  used  in
    para 398(c) is very compelling circumstances over and above  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.  Whilst  therefore,  the  FtJ  did  not  express  himself
    correctly, having found that there were no "compelling"  circumstances,
    he could  hardly  have  concluded  that  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances".

51. Albeit in a way that could have been improved in terms of its structure
    and coherence, the FtJ's decision does involve a cumulative  assessment
    of all the relevant issues.  I  cannot  see  that  there  was  anything
    before the FtJ which could have led him to conclude that an outside the
    Rules consideration of Article 8 would have made any difference to  his
    decision.  Indeed, at the point of such consideration, public  interest
    issues undoubtedly do have a part to play as suggested by Mr  Mills  in
    his submissions.   Thus,  the  appellant's  lack  of  integration,  the
    persistence of his  offending,  the  seriousness  of  the  most  recent
    offence, and the FtJ's rejection of the  appellant's  excuses  for  his
    offending would no doubt have militated in favour of a dismissal of the
    appeal in that context also.

52. Accordingly, although I am satisfied that the FtJ did err in law in the
    respect to which I have referred, that error of law is not such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

    Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  However, its decision is  not  set  aside  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            16/05/19


