
                                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/00003/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |           Determination         |
|                                       |Promulgated                      |
|On 14 January 2016                     |           On 20 January 2016    |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

       1. This decision refers to the appellant in this  case  as  the  SSHD
          and the respondent as the appellant, as he was before  the  First-
          tier Tribunal ('FTT').  I have anonymised the appellant  in  order
          to protect the privacy of his minor child, who is referred  to  in
          this decision.


       2. The origins of this appeal are traceable to  a  decision  made  on
          behalf of  the  SSHD,  dated  13  February  2015,  to  deport  the
          appellant, a national of Malawi, from the United Kingdom ('UK').

Appeal Proceedings

       3. On 24  June  2015,  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  SSHD's
          decision was allowed by the FTT. The FTT concluded that  it  would
          be unduly harsh for the appellant's son,  P,  to  live  in  Malawi
          with him and to remain in the UK without him.   These  conclusions
          are based upon the following relevant factual findings  concerning
          P:


              i)  P  resides  with  his  mother  (who  is  no  longer  in  a
                 relationship with the appellant) but  spends  every  Friday
                 night with his father who also often  picks  him  up  after
                 school and feeds him [38];


             ii)  The  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with P [39];

            iii) P's mother does not wish to live in  Malawi  and  P  cannot
                 live in Malawi without her  cooperation  and  as  such  P's
                 relocation to Malawi  would  involve  separation  with  his
                 mother [40];

             iv) In practice P would be unable to  visit  the  appellant  in
                 Malawi and contact through modern  means  of  communication
                 would be "a great deal less" than P  is  used  to  enjoying
                 [41];

              v) P's best interests lie in remaining  in  the  UK  with  his
                 mother as his  primary  carer  and  seeing  his  father  at
                 weekends and sometimes after school [49];

             vi) The appellant is a good influence on P [49];

            vii) Since the appellant was released from prison  in  2010  the
                 relationship  between   him   and   P   has   "considerably
                 strengthened" [51];

           viii) The appellant's deportation would lead to the separation of
                 P and the appellant and this  is  "very  likely  to  be  of
                 indefinite duration" [51];

             ix)  The  mother  considers  that  P   would   be   "completely
                 devastated" if the appellant was no longer in the UK [53].


       4. The SSHD has appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission.




Error of law

       5. At the hearing I heard from Ms Johnstone and the appellant  before
          announcing my decision that the  FtT  had  erred  in  law  in  its
          application of the factual  findings  to  the  applicable  'unduly
          harsh' test.

       6. The FTT was correct to indicate that at the date of  the  hearing
          there was no guidance regarding the  correct  meaning  of  unduly
          harsh for the purposes of paragraph 399.  The FTT was of the view
          that it had to consider all the relevant  circumstances  but  did
          not direct itself to the requisite high threshold that needed  to
          be met i.e. the impact upon the child  needed  to  be  more  than
          harsh or difficult.  In failing to direct itself to the necessary
          high threshold that must be met I am satisfied that the FTT erred
          in law.

       7. I do not accept that the FTT's factual findings are infected by a
          material error of law.  The submissions to  this  effect  in  the
          grounds of appeal amount to no more than mere  disagreement  with
          those findings.

Re-making the appeal

       8. The appellant and Ms Johnstone accepted that the appeal should be
          re-made by me.  Ms Johnstone also accepted that in  light  of  my
          decision regarding the SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal,  the  factual
          findings of the FTT should be preserved.


       9. I heard brief evidence from the appellant and P's  mother.   They
          indicated that the factual circumstances  described  by  the  FTT
          remained accurate save that if anything the relationship  between
          P and the appellant has increased in strength.  Ms Johnstone  did
          not dispute the credibility of the evidence but submitted that it
          did not come close to meeting the requisite  threshold  required.
          Having heard from Ms Johnstone and the appellant  I  reserved  my
          decision, which I now provide with reasons.

      10. In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435  (IAC)  the
          Upper Tribunal concluded that in order to determine  whether  the
          consequences for a child will be unduly harsh, evidence will need
          to demonstrate that the  consequences  for  that  child  will  be
          excessively or inordinately severe or bleak taking  into  account
          all the circumstances.  This requires a high threshold to be  met
          and involves something more  than  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
          undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult  and  challenging"
          consequences.

      11. I must therefore decide whether or not  the  consequences  for  P
          will be excessively severe,  if  his  father  is  deported.   The
          preserved findings of fact from the FTT are clear: the close  and
          established parental relationship between  P  and  the  appellant
          will come to an abrupt and sudden end.  This  will  according  to
          P's mother cause P "complete devastation".  I should add that the
          appellant  and  P's  mother  are  no  longer  a  couple  and  the
          appellant's case is predicated  entirely  upon  his  relationship
          with P.

      12. For the avoidance of doubt I  have  decided  this  appeal  having
          followed the guidance in MAB.  Since MAB was promulgated  another
          Tribunal  decision  addressing  the  identical  issue  has   been
          promulgated - KMO (section 117 -  unduly  harsh)  Nigeria  [2015]
          UKUT 00543 (IAC).  KMO  takes  the  same  approach  to  the  high
          threshold to be applied when considering the meaning  of  'unduly
          harsh' but finds that the word 'unduly' requires consideration of
          the public interest considerations contained in section  117C  of
          the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002
          Act').

      13. I prefer the approach set out in MAB and apply its  reasoning  to
          the instant case.  I am satisfied that the MAB approach  is  more
          consistent with the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  wording  of  the
          relevant rule.  If there is ambiguity then the  stricter  reading
          should  not  be  adopted  without   particularly   good   reason.
          Furthermore in my view  the  MAB  approach  reflects  the  proper
          construction of section 117C.  This provides at  sub-section  (3)
          that  the  public  interest  requires  C's   deportation   unless
          Exception 2 applies.  Exception 2 applies where "...the effect of
          C's deportation on  the...child  would  be  unduly  harsh".    It
          follows that where Exception 2 applies the public  interest  does
          not require C's deportation.  The reason for  this  is  that  the
          public interest has already been factored into the parameters  of
          the relevant 'Exceptions' as  reflected  within  the  Immigration
          Rules.


      14. Following  the  MAB  approach  there  is  no  balancing  exercise
          requiring the public interest to be weighed.  My focus is  solely
          upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact upon P.   I  am
          satisfied that the application of 399(a)(ii)(a) can only  deliver
          one  answer:  P  cannot  live  in  Malawi  without  his  mother's
          cooperation and as such P's relocation to  Malawi  would  involve
          separation with his  mother  and  would  be  unduly  harsh.   The
          appellant and P's mother are no longer in a relationship  and  it
          would be unreasonable to expect her to reside in Malawi.

      15. I am also satisfied that the  application  of  399(a)(ii)(b)  can
          only deliver one answer: it would be unduly harsh for P to remain
          in the UK without his father, given that their close relationship
          cannot be continued in a meaningful sense.  Given  P's  age,  the
          particular family relationship cannot  be  maintained  by  modern
          means of communication and there will be a complete  fracture  to
          the relationship.  I also accept the  appellant's  evidence  that
          through him P has a number of very close friendships, which  will
          be lost upon his deportation.  I accept that P will be completely
          devastated emotionally and psychologically  if  his  relationship
          with his father ends. That is  not  a  devastation  that  can  be
          easily overcome but will continue throughout his life.

      16. In case I am wrong  about  the  guidance  in  MAB  I  confirm  my
          decision would be the same even applying the  KMO  approach.  The
          appellant's offending is of  concern  and  involved  the  use  of
          fraud.  In 2009 he was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment and in
          2010 to six  months  imprisonment.   He  was  then  convicted  of
          criminal damage in 2013 and given a conditional discharge for  12
          months.  He has not repeated his offending involving fraud  since
          2010.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
          appellant's offending is at the less serious end of the spectrum.
           This may be contrasted with the offending of Mr KMO.  Even  when
          the appellant's  offending  is  factored  into  the  exercise  of
          determining whether or not the impact of deportation upon P would
          be unduly harsh, applying the KMO approach, I am  satisfied  that
          that the answers remain the same as those set out  in  paragraphs
          14 and 15 above.


Decision

      17. The FTT decision contains a material error of law.   I  set  aside
          the decision but preserve the FTT's factual findings.


      18. I re-make the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 January 2016



