
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00612/2018
                                                               HU/00617/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 March 2019                         |On 03 April 2019             |
|                                         |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A K
                                     D K
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Miszkiel (counsel) instructed by E1 solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellants  because  the  second  appellant's  mental
health is discussed in these proceedings.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver, promulgated on  28/09/2018
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The First Appellant was born  on  17/07/1983  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh. The second appellant was born on 27/11/1990  is  a  national  of
Nepal. The appellants met each other in the UK. They had both  come  to  the
U.K. as students. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 6 June 2009.  The
second appellant entered the UK on 16 October 2010. The appellants met  when
they took part-time jobs at the same  supermarket.  Romance  blossomed,  and
they were married in the UK on 21 May 2013.

4.    On 30 November 2017 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
applications for leave to remain in the UK on article 8 grounds.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge M R Oliver ("the Judge") allowed  their  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision on article 8 ECHR grounds.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  19  October  2018  Judge  Saffer
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "It is arguable that in focusing on delay, the Judge has misapplied the
    relevant case law, and not engaged with sufficient clarity on the  core
    of the appellants' account. All grounds may be argued."

The Hearing

7.    For the respondent, Ms Everett moved the grounds of appeal.  She  told
me that the Judge failed to carry  out  a  proportionality  assessment  when
assessing the article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal. Ms Everett told me that  the
Judge failed to make findings in relation to  the  second  appellant's  poor
health. She took me to [17] of the decision and told  me  that,  there,  the
Judge makes contradictory and conflicting findings. She  told  me  that  the
Judge's decision was unduly influenced by the  Judge's  finding  that  there
had been delay in determining the  appellant's  application,  and  that  the
Judge's reasoning was influenced by the erroneous belief  that  it  was  for
the Home Office to offer a remedy when the appellant had been the victim  of
a fraudulent scheme.

(b)   Ms Everett told me that as the second appellant's mental health was  a
material factor in the appeal the Judge  should  have,  but  did  not,  make
findings  about  the  availability  of  care  and  treatment  in  Nepal  and
Bangladesh. She told me that the material error of law  is  that  the  Judge
has not properly assessed proportionality. She urged me to allow the  appeal
and set the decision aside.

8.    For the appellants, Ms Miszkiel opposed the appeal. She told  me  that
the decision does not contain errors of  law,  material  or  otherwise.  She
told me that the Judge  correctly  considers  article  8  ECHR  outside  the
rules, and that the Judge's findings are consistent with the  test  set  out
in Agyarko. Ms Miszkiel told me that  the  Judge  correctly  considered  the
history of the application and the procedural history  of  decision  making,
and  that  the  Judge's  decision  reflected  historic  injustice  that  the
respondent had contributed to. Counsel for the appellants  took  me  through
the medical evidence before both the First-Tier tribunal & this Tribunal  in
relation to the second appellant. She urged me to  dismiss  the  appeal  and
allow the decision to stand. She told  me  that  the  continuing  stress  of
these proceedings was having a detrimental effect on the second  appellant's
fragile mental health.

Analysis

9.    Neither of the appellants has ever suggested  that  they  can  succeed
under the Immigration Rules. It is common ground that this  appeal  concerns
article 8 ECHR outside the rules.

10.   The Judge had to determine the following separate questions:

    (i)    Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8

    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with

    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

11.   At [15] of the decision the Judge finds that family life  exists,  and
that the respondent's decision is an interference with family life. He  then
correctly identifies that the determinative  issue  is  proportionality  and
that he should take account of s.117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002. It would be reasonable to expect the ensuing paragraphs  of
the decision to contain the  proportionality  balancing  exercise.  If  only
[15] to [17] of the decision is read it  appears  that  the  proportionality
balancing exercise has not been carried out.

12.   The proportionality exercise is in fact carried out in  the  preceding
paragraphs  of  the  Judge's  decision.  At  [1]  the  Judge  sets  out  the
appellant's  immigration  history  and  the   litigation   surrounding   the
respondent's original decision of 6  January  2016.  The  appellant  pursued
judicial review proceedings which led to the  withdrawal  of  that  decision
and the substitution of the decision now under appeal.  The  decision  under
appeal finds that  the  appellants  meet  the  suitability  requirements  of
appendix FM, so that the allegation of dishonesty made in  January  2016  is
retracted.

13.   Between [2] and [10] the  Judge  makes  his  findings  of  fact  while
rehearsing the evidence. There are many stylistic criticisms  which  can  be
made of the Judge's decision, but the proportionality exercise can be  found
by carefully reading the decision and separating rehearsal of evidence  from
findings  of  fact.  The  decision  would  be  easier   to   read   if   the
proportionality exercise had been separately carried out after [15]  of  the
decision; instead the proportionality  exercise  is  intermingled  with  the
preceding paragraphs and is interspersed throughout the decision.

14.   The  Judge  finds  that  family  life  exists.  The  Judge  finds  the
respondent's decision interferes with family life. Because  of  the  history
of the application  and  the  circumstances  of  the  respondent's  reviewed
decision (dated 30 November 2017) the Judge finds that the particular  facts
and circumstances of this case outweigh the public interest  in  immigration
control.

15.   The opening phrase of the first sentence of [17] of  the  decision  is
important. There, the Judge draws the disparate strands of his  findings  of
fact together when he says

    "Placing all these factors into the balance ..."

16.   The Judge clearly gave weight to the history of the  applications,  to
the second appellant's history of adjustment disorder & depressive  illness,
and the effect that protracted consideration of an application made in  2015
has had on both appellants. The question  of  weight  that  he  gives  those
factors is a question for the Judge at first instance. In Green  (Article  8
- new rules) [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC) the Tribunal said that

    "Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for  the  fact-finding
    Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise to an error
    of law."

17.    The  proportionality  exercise  is  adequately  carried  out  Judge's
decision. The weight that the Judge gave  to  various  factors  is  for  the
Judge at first instance. The decision might not make easy  reading,  but  it
does not contain a material error of law.

18.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19.   A careful reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied
the correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all
of the evidence. There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding
exercise. The appellant  might  not  like  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge
arrived at, but that conclusion is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied
legal equation. The correct test in law has been applied. The decision  does
not contain a material error of law.

20.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.



DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 28 September 2018, stands.

Signed      Date 28 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

