
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00083/2016
      HU/00084/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2018                          |On 10 January 2018         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JASMIN [B]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                             First Appellant
                                    [F J]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                            Second Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Miah (counsel) Instructed by Lincoln's Chambers
solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal  but,
to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-
tier Tribunal. This is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel, promulgated  on  10  May  2017
which allowed the Appellants' appeals on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3. The first Appellant was born on [ ] 1987. The  second  appellant  is  her
daughter, who was born on  [  ]  2010.  Both  appellants  are  nationals  of
Bangladesh.

4. On 16 October 2015 both appellants applied for entry  clearance  to  join
the sponsor in the UK under appendix FM of the rules. On  30  November  2015
the respondent refused entry clearance.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cassel ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  16  November  2017  Judge
Pickup gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  misunderstood  the
      nature of the application and the requirements of the Rules, including
      under FM-SE as to required documentary evidence, which was one of  the
      reasons for refusal. It is  arguable  that  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellants met the Rules was mistaken and thus infected the conclusion
      that the decision was disproportionate.

The Hearing

6. For the respondent Ms Isherwood moved the grounds of appeal. She told  me
that the Judge erred in his consideration of article 8 ECHR,  which  is  the
only competent ground of appeal. She took me  to  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter and told me that the  appellants  did  not  produce  details  of  the
sponsor's earnings, and that the HMRC letters relied on in  the  appellants'
bundle provides inadequate evidence to address  the  financial  requirements
of appendix FM. She told me that the Judge failed to engage  with  the  core
issues in the case, & that the Judge's conclusion that the  appellants  meet
the rules cannot be sustained because of the requirements  of  appendix  FM-
SE. Ms Isherwood told me that  the  Judge's  article  8  assessment  was  so
flawed that the decision cannot stand. She asked  me  to  set  the  decision
aside.

7. (a) Mr Miah, counsel for the appellants, told me that the  decision  does
not contain material errors of law. He conceded that [8] of the decision  is
irrelevant, but said that does not undermine the  decision  because  at  [9]
the Judge identifies the correct legal test & the core  issues  -  and  then
proceeds to deal with the determinative matters in this appeal.

(b) Mr Miah told me that the Judge makes  clear  findings,  drawn  from  the
evidence, that the appellants meet the requirements of appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules. He told me that if the appellants  meet  the  immigration
rules, then, by analogy  their  appeals  must  succeed  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds. He told me that at [5] of the  decision  the  Judge  rehearses  the
evidence which he found reliable. He told  me  that  it  was  that  evidence
which enabled the Judge to find that the appellants  meet  the  requirements
of appendix FM. He took me to the HMRC letters produced in  the  appellants'
bundle and told me that they are determinative of the appeal.

(c) Mr  Miah  asked  me  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision
promulgated on 10 May 2017 to stand.

Analysis

8. The sponsor in this case is  the  husband  of  the  first  appellant  and
father of the second appellant. The respondent's decisions were made  on  30
November  2015.  The  respondent  refused  the  applications   because   the
respondent believes the sponsor does not  meet  the  financial  requirements
set out in E-ECP.3 of the rules. The  respondent  compared  the  information
available from an enquiry with HMRC against the  evidence  provided  by  the
appellants  to  support  their  applications,  and  preferred  the  evidence
obtained from HMRC.

9. In addition,  the  respondent  decided  that  the  appellants  failed  to
provide specified  evidence,  in  particular  bank  statements  showing  the
sponsor's cash salary, and so found that the requirements of appendix  FM  -
SE are not met.

10. At [8] of the decision the Judge sets out the statutory scheme  relevant
to family visitors. What is said at [8] of the decision has no relevance  at
all to these appeals. Neither of the appellants  submitted  applications  as
family visitors. Although that is an error,  it  is  not  a  material  error
because it is clear that the  Judge  understands  that  the  only  competent
appeal is on article 8 ECHR grounds.

11. At [5] of the decision the Judge rehearses the evidence which is  placed
before him. At [9] of the  decision  the  Judge  turns  to  the  immigration
rules. The Judge finds that the appellant  meets  the  financial  threshold.
When [5] and [9] are read together it is clear that the Judge relied on  the
sponsor's  oral  evidence  supported  by  the  documentary  evidence,  which
properly vouches the sponsor's income. The  findings  at  [9]  are  findings
which are well within the range of reasonable conclusions available  to  the
Judge.

12. What  the  Judge  does  not  engage  with  is  appendix  FM-SE.  In  the
respondent's decision the respondent  clearly  says  that  bank  statements,
which form part of the necessary specified evidence, were not produced.

13. Paragraph 76 of MM (Lebanon) [2017]  UKSC  10  says  that  the  tribunal
should attach considerable weight to judgments  made  by  the  Secretary  of
State in the exercise of her constitutional responsibility  for  immigration
policy.  However "not everything in  the  rules  need  be  treated  as  high
policy or peculiarly within the province of the Secretary of State,  nor  as
necessarily entitled to the same weight. The tribunal is entitled to  see  a
difference   in   principle   between   the   underlying   public   interest
considerations, as set by the  Secretary  of  State  with  the  approval  of
Parliament, and  the  working  out  of  that  policy  through  the  detailed
machinery of the rules and its application to individual cases.  The  former
naturally include issues such as the  seriousness  of  levels  of  offending
sufficient to require deportation in the public interest (Hesham  Ali,  para
46). Similar considerations would apply to rules  reflecting  the  Secretary
of State's assessment of levels of income required  to  avoid  a  burden  on
public resources, informed as it is  by  the  specialist  expertise  of  the
Migration Advisory Committee.  By  contrast  rules  as  to  the  quality  of
evidence necessary to satisfy that test in a particular  case  are,  as  the
committee acknowledged, matters of practicality rather than  principle;  and
as such matters on which the tribunal may  more  readily  draw  on  its  own
experience and expertise."

14. The Judge's findings  are  brief.  At  [9]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellants meet the financial requirements of  the  immigration  rules.  The
Judge does not address the evidential requirements  of  appendix  FM-SE.  In
the decision notice the respondent says that the appellant has not  produced
bank statements. In the grounds of appeal, the appellants argue that all  of
the  specified  evidence  required   accompanied   the   applications.   The
appellants' bundle contains a letter dated 2  October  2015  submitting  the
applications for both appellants. That letter details the documents sent  in
support of the application, which include the sponsor's bank statements  and
payslips.

15. The requirements of appendix FM-SE are an area of dispute which  is  not
resolved, but that is not a material  error  of  law  because  there  is  no
appeal under the immigration rules. The only competent ground of  appeal  is
on article 8 ECHR grounds. At [9] (accepting the evidence rehearsed at  [5])
the Judge finds that the appellants meet  the  substantive  requirements  of
appendix  FM.  It  is  that  finding  which  forms  the  platform  for   the
consideration of article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal.

16. The Judge's findings in relation to article 8 are contained at  [11]  of
the  decision.  The  findings  are  brief,  but  they  are   sufficient   to
demonstrate an adequate proportionality assessment. In  essence,  the  Judge
finds that because the appellants  meet  the  suitability,  eligibility  and
financial requirements of appendix FM, and because the  appellants  are  the
wife and child of the sponsor, then by analogy the respondent's decision  is
a disproportionate interference with the right to respect for family life.

17. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)   (at
paragraph  24)  it  was  said  that  "It  will  only  be  in  very   unusual
circumstances that a person other than a close  relative  will  be  able  to
show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope  of  Article
8(1). In practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where  the
relationship is that of husband and wife or other close life partners  or  a
parent and minor child...".  The  Tribunal  further  held  that  in  appeals
against refusal of entry clearance under Article 8, the  claimant's  ability
to satisfy the Immigration Rules is capable of being a weighty,  though  not
determinative, factor when deciding whether such  refusal  is  proportionate
to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control. At  paragraph  9  it
was said that where the ground of appeal is limited to human rights "  ...if
...the claimant has shown that refusing him entry ...  does  interfere  with
his ...family life then it will be necessary to assess the evidence  to  see
if the claimant meets the substance of the rules.  This  is  because...  the
ability  to  satisfy  the  rules  illuminates  the  proportionality  of  the
decision to refuse him entry clearance". At paragraph 19 the Upper  Tribunal
said "Subject to two sets of considerations we can see no justification  for
stopping a husband joining his wife when a Tribunal is satisfied that  their
circumstances satisfy the requirements of the Rules. The  first  relates  to
their candour....The second set of considerations relates to the  impact  of
refusal on the relationships that have to be promoted."

18. In Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11  The  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
Immigration Rules are compatible with ECHR, article 8,  as  this  provision
requires there to be a fair balance struck  between  competing  public  and
individual interests involved, applying a  proportionality  test,  and  the
policies adopted by the  Secretary  of  State  are  within  the  margin  of
appreciation. The respondent's own rules indicate that the  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the right to respect for family life.

19. On the facts as the Judge found them to be,  the  appellants  meet  the
requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  On  any  reasonable  and  proper
application of the Secretary of State's own policy, it cannot be said  that
the interests of immigration control require that entry clearance should be
refused.

20. The decision the Judge reached is well within the  range  of  reasonable
decisions available to the Judge. Although the reasons for the decision  are
brief, an adequate proportionality balancing exercise has been carried  out.


21.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

22. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision; when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.



CONCLUSION

23. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.



DECISION

24. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 10 May 2017 stands.




Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 8 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

