
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/00054/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 September 2018                    | On 07 November 2018                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                   Mr a k
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair, instructed by Scarsdale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thorne, promulgated on 10 July 2018, dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 15 December  2017
    refusing his human rights claim which in turn was made in  response  to
    the deportation order signed on  4  September  2017.   The  deportation
    order was signed on the basis that the Secretary of State was satisfied
    that the appellant is a foreign criminal,  the  appellant  having  been
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 23 June 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who entered the  United  Kingdom
    in 2005 with leave to enter as a spouse.   He  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 6 September 2010.

 3. Since then he has been convicted  of  a  number  of  offences  relating
    mainly to driving  fast,  disqualified  and/or  uninsured  as  well  as
    driving with excess alcohol.  As a result of these offences on  25  May
    2017 he was served with a notice of intention to  deport  on  upon  the
    basis that he was a persistent offender but on  23  June  2017  he  was
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment on two counts of offences relating
    to goods and for failing to  surrender  to  authority.   The  appellant
    maintains that his deportation would  be  disproportionate  as  he  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for over twelve years, he is married  to  a
    British citizen, and that owing to close ties that he and his wife have
    with her mother and other members of the family as  well  as  the  fact
    that after thirteen  years  of  trying  for  a  child  they  are  still
    undergoing IVF treatment.  There are particular difficulties  with  the
    appellant's mother-in-law as she  is  unable  to  speak  owing  to  ill
    health.  Further, the couple have significant financial problems  which
    make it difficult for the appellant's wife to travel to  visit  him  in
    Pakistan whilst maintaining relationships with her family here.

 4. The respondent,  while  accepting  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife, did not accept that it would  be
    unduly harsh for her to live in Pakistan given that it  is  likely  she
    had some experience with the culture and  traditions  of  Pakistan  her
    family being of Pakistani origin and as she  may  have  family  members
    living there.  It was not accepted either that it would be unduly harsh
    for her to remain in the United Kingdom even though the  appellant  was
    to be deported and given that she has family,  friends  and  employment
    here.

 5. The respondent considered also that the  appellant  had  not  fulfilled
    regards  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the   respondent
    concluding that he had not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
    for most of his life nor that there would be very significant obstacles
    to his integration into Pakistan.  The respondent noted also that there
    were not very compelling circumstances in  this  case  given  that  the
    appellant showed a blatant disregard towards the  United  Kingdom,  had
    been convicted for a serious criminal offence to which he was sentenced
    to two years' imprisonment and that IVF would be available in  Pakistan
    and that they would be able to continue fertility treatment there.

 6. Judge Thorne heard evidence from the appellant and his wife as well  as
    submissions from both parties.  The judge directed himself in light  of
    Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  and  Agyarko  and  Ikuga  v
    Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 11 that the appellant could not meet the
    requirements of paragraphs 399(a) or 399A of the Immigration Rules  and
    that:-

      i) it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife  to  live  in
         Pakistan because of compelling circumstances over and  above  those
         described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM [35];

     ii) it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain  in
         the United Kingdom without him [36];

    iii) in conducting the proportionately  balancing  exercise  the  scales
         were  heavily  weighed  in  favour  of  deportation  [39]  and  the
         circumstances in this  case  did  not  constitute  very  compelling
         circumstances.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in using  the  absence  of  evidence  to  justify  a  finding  that
         something is not the case. And that had  the  judge  made  positive
         findings on the evidence  he  could  have  concluded  the  view  to
         continuing  IVF  treatment  the  appellant's  mother-in-law   being
         seriously ill that deportation would be unduly harsh; and, that  it
         was unfair to make findings owing to a  lack  of  evidence  without
         giving an opportunity to address the speculative findings  on  that
         issue;

     ii) in failing  to  consider  material  evidence  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's mother-in-law's ill health including in particular that
         she had not spoken for some time making the maintenance of  contact
         by long distance communication impossible [17] and  in  failing  to
         consider their limited financial means before concluding  that  the
         appellant's wife would be able to travel backward and  forward  [18
         to 19] and in concluding that the appellant did not speak English;

    iii) in concluding in the absence of evidence that the appellant's  wife
         could come to the United Kingdom to undergo fertility treatment and
         they could not travel together.

 8. On 6 August 2018 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  P  J  Buchanan  granted
    permission noting that the double negative  conclusion  drawn  at  [33]
    gives rise to the perception that the judge considered maintaining  the
    relationship with  the  mother  by  long  distance  communication  that
    periodic visits would be  a  necessary  means  to  avoid  unduly  harsh
    results to live in Pakistan, yet the judge had noted  that  the  mother
    was unable to talk.

 9. It was for the appellant to show that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him and his wife to go to live in Pakistan; or, that it would be
    unduly harsh for him to be separated from  his  wife.   It  flows  from
    that, that it was for him to prove the factual elements upon  which  he
    relied in order to make good the assertion that either  scenario  would
    be unduly harsh.  In essence, the appellant's submissions are that  the
    judge went further than saying that there was insufficient evidence  to
    show the facts which were asserted but instead went on to make findings
    unsupported by the evidence.

10. In AA  (Uganda)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  criticised  for
    concluding that there was no evidence that a church did not  carry  out
    activities in a poor area and from that concluding that it had not been
    shown that the appellant in that case could not be supported.

11. The issue of IVF is somewhat complex.  As Miss Mair  submitted,  it  is
    not possible to discern any points of principle from either Agyarko  or
    the High Court's decision in R (Erimako) v SSHD  [2008]  EWHC  312.   I
    accept that the ability to undertake or undergo fertility treatment  is
    part of an individual's private life rather than at the family life end
    of the spectrum of family and private life.  It does, however,  require
    both parties to be present  for  some  time  in  one  place.   That  is
    relevant to both the issue of whether the  appellant's  wife  could  be
    expected to live in Pakistan, or whether  if  she  remained  here,  the
    effect on her would be unduly harsh.

12. On a proper construction of the decision it appears [32] that the judge
    meant that the appellant had not proven that the appellant's wife could
    not access IVF treatment in Pakistan, it is less clear why he concluded
    that there might be a possibility of her visiting  the  United  Kingdom
    regularly.  Further, there is no proper explanation for the  conclusion
    that long distance communication and periodic visits  would  assist  in
    keeping communication with the appellant's mother-in-law  who,  it  was
    not asserted, is no longer able to speak.

13. The judge does not properly explain why [34] he believed  that  it  had
    been shown that sufficient money would have been raised from selling  a
    property in the United Kingdom and paying off debts, given the  limited
    equity in the property.  There is no proper  consideration  as  to  the
    evidence of the level of indebtedness and there are other matters which
    at [34] raise some doubts in that it is unclear that it was put to  the
    appellant or his wife.

14.  It does not, however, necessarily flow from this that any error in the
    fact-finding of this issue was material given the conclusion [36]  that
    it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without him. It was for  the  appellant  to  prove  that
    also.

15. There is no challenge to the judge's finding that the appellant's  wife
    had managed to live without him for numerous periods whilst he had been
    in prison or that her family in the United Kingdom can support her.

16. Whilst Miss Mair submitted that the judge erred in concluding  that  if
    the wife chose to stay in the United Kingdom  she  could  maintain  her
    relationship, it was for the appellant to prove that this could not  be
    done.

17. Properly construed the conclusion  at  [36]  is  nothing  more  than  a
    finding that on the evidence as presented the case had simply not  been
    made out.  Whilst the reasoning could have been more elegantly set out,
    the appellant has not shown  that  the  judge  improperly  went  beyond
    noting that there was insufficient evidence to support the  appellant's
    assertions about the circumstances which would be faced and  which,  he
    says, amount to undue harshness.

18. In the circumstances, I consider that the decision did not involve  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold it.


Notice of Decision

(i)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 26 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

