
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 April 2017                      |On 15 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 Joe Yeboah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of Counsel instructed by Bestway
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  12  September  1972.   He
    states he entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in 2001.  He brought
    himself to the attention of the authorities on 17 February 2012 when he
    applied for leave to remain based on his marriage by proxy in Ghana  to
    Diane Akuoko.  She is a British citizen  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and was born on 1 June 1973.  She is a Band 7 paediatric
    nurse at a London teaching hospital.

 2. The Appellant made two applications for leave to remain both  of  which
    were refused with no in country right of  appeal.   Following  judicial
    review proceedings, the Appellant on 15 September  2015  made  a  third
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 3. On 18 December  2015  the  Respondent  refused  the  application.   She
    accepted the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  been  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship but did not accept it had continued to  subsist
    after July 2015.   She  considered  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules   and,   in
    particular, paragraph E-LTRP.1.7 and that Section EX did not apply.

 4. Further, the Respondent considered the Appellant had  family  in  Ghana
    and both he and his wife could re-locate there and she would be able to
    work  in  her  profession  in  Ghana.   She  concluded  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being pursued  in  Ghana.   The
    Appellant had medical issues but the Respondent  considered  none  were
    life threatening and that treatments were available in Ghana.

 5. On 7 January 2016 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  and
    in particular by the Immigration Act 2014.   The  detailed  grounds  of
    appeal extend to some thirteen pages of typescript.   They  comprise  a
    short immigration history for the Appellant which is in any event clear
    from the Respondent's decision and the rest of the  grounds  amount  to
    lengthy statements of law and the rare occasional general reference  to
    the Appellant's circumstances.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. By a decision promulgated on 27 October 2016 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal D A Thomas dismissed the appeal.  She found all the  witnesses
    credible and that the Appellant and his wife  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and intended to live  together  permanently  as
    husband and wife.  At para.19 she concluded the Appellant met  all  the
    eligibility requirements of paragraph E-LTRP of Appendix FM and went on
    to state that Section EX.1 was not applicable.  The Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.2  because  he  had  been
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom.  She went on to conclude that it  was
    "a clear option for the Appellant  to  return  to  Ghana  and  make  an
    application for entry clearance" and noted that given her findings "any
    separation to  the  parties  caused  by  a  return  to  make  a  proper
    application will be temporary".  She went on to dismiss the appeal.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  On 27 February  2017  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Gibb first  extended  time  for  making  the
    application for permission to appeal and  then  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He stated:

         "The grounds are lengthy and poorly drafted,  so  much  so  that  I
         cannot summarise them.  The only point of any value  is  that  they
         drew attention to [17-19] of the determination.   ...  Despite  the
         poor grounds a reading of [17-19] does disclose an  arguable  error
         on a point of law in the Judge's reasoning.  Having  made  findings
         that the Appellant met the  general  and  eligibility  requirements
         (contrary to the refusal) the Judge should have turned to  consider
         EX1.  Instead the Judge directed herself  to  Sabir,  and  gave  no
         consideration to EX1.  Since E-LTRP.2.2.(b) uses the words  'unless
         paragraph EX.1 applies' this was an arguable legal error."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Appellant and his wife attended the  hearing  together  with  their
    church pastor and another member of the church.

 9. The representatives agreed that initial submissions should be  made  by
    Mr Nath for the Respondent.  He submitted briefly that he had  concerns
    about paragraph 19 of the decision of Judge Thomas  and  how  it  dealt
    with the issue of Section EX.1 of Appendix FM.

10. In response Mr Biggs for the Appellant referred to his  Note  which  in
    essence (as Mr Biggs agreed) at greater length and  detail  re-iterates
    the ground upon which Judge Gibb granted permission to  appeal.  As  Mr
    Biggs neatly put it that the grant of permission "hits the nail on  the
    head".  Having found the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph E-
    LTRP the Judge was duty bound to consider Section EX.1.

11. Mr Biggs continued that having made favourable findings  of  fact,  the
    Judge  had  not  conducted  a  full  analysis   of   what   constituted
    insurmountable obstacles and had only addressed  the  circumstances  in
    the event of temporary (not long term) separation between the Appellant
    and his wife if he were to return to Ghana  to  seek  entry  clearance.
    She had made a brief reference to  the  possibility  of  the  wife  re-
    locating to Ghana but had not conducted a proper and full  analysis  or
    assessment of the position of the  Appellant  and  his  wife  in  those
    circumstances.

12. Mr Biggs concluded that these matters amounted to  material  errors  of
    law and the decision should be set aside.

13. Both parties stated they were  not  in  a  position  to  proceed  to  a
    substantive re-hearing in the event that I found the  Judge's  decision
    should be set aside.  Additionally, Mr Biggs referred to  the  need  to
    obtain up-to-date evidence and that in the event  of  a  re-hearing  he
    expected extensive oral testimony would be given.  Mr Biggs urged  that
    the Judge's findings of fact  be  preserved  but  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to which Mr Nath for the Respondent
    had in the event I  found  there  was  a  material  error  of  law,  no
    objection.

Consideration

14. I agree with the  sentiment  Mr  Biggs  expressed  that  the  grant  of
    permission identifies a material error of law and  on  that  basis  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside in  its  entirety
    except for preservation of the finding that the Appellant and his  wife
    are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.   Having  regard  to  the
    submissions about a re-hearing already detailed, and  Section  12(2)(b)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and paragraph 7.2  of
    the Practice Statement of 10 February 2010 (as amended) the  appeal  is
    remitted for hearing afresh (save as already mentioned) to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

15. The Respondent's reasons for decision states the application leading to
    the decision under appeal was made on 15 September 2015 and accordingly
    the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 will  apply.   Nevertheless,
    it may be appropriate for the Appellant  to  explain  at  any  remitted
    hearing the extent to which he considers he meets the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules even if grounds for appeal are limited  to  human
    rights issues because the extent of  compliance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules may have a bearing in any proportionality assessment.  With  this
    in mind, the provisions of paragraph 284 of the Immigration  Rules  may
    have some relevance.

16. In passing, I comment that the medical evidence for the  Appellant  who
    is said to have a number of conditions was sparse and the Appellant may
    be advised to  obtain  leave  to  submit  documentary  evidence  giving
    details of all his medical problems.  The  parties  may  also  wish  to
    address the tension between the provisions of Section EX of Appendix FM
    and Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

Anonymity

17. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    issues raised, I find no such order is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and save for the finding of the genuine and  subsisting  nature  of
    the relationship between the Appellant and his partner is set aside and
    the appeal is remitted for re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity order is made.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 25.  iv.
2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



