
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00312/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2020                    |On 19 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    M A E
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  27  April  1945.  She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal,
    dated 3 March 2020, dismissing her appeal against the refusal of  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    the ground it was  arguable  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider
    paragraph E.X. 2 of Appendix FM.

3.   It was agreed by the parties that there was an error  of  law  and  the
    decision should be set aside under Rule 43 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent submitted  the  judge  did  not
    consider insurmountable obstacles on a cumulative basis and the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The  Appellant  did  not
    make further submissions given the concession  by  the  Respondent  and
    agreed the matter should be remitted.

5.   I find that the judge erred in law and I set aside the  decision  dated
    3 March 2020. None of the judge's findings are preserved. The appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.



Notice of decision

Appeal allowed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 13 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the Appellant's appeal remains outstanding.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 13 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
