
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
HU/00858/2017

                                            HU/00869/2017

                                            HU/00872/2017

                                            HU/00877/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 September 2018                 |     On 11 October 2018              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                  marie [l]
                                  jean [l]
                                    [m l]
                                    [e l]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Metzer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants' appeals against decisions to refuse their human  rights
    claims were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears ("the  judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 27th March 2018.   At  the  heart  of  the
    judge's decision lay a finding that it would  not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the third appellant, who had by then spent fourteen years in the
    United Kingdom, to leave the United Kingdom and  return  to  Mauritius,
    the country of her nationality.  The judge found that her parents,  the
    first and second appellants, and the  third  appellant's  sibling,  the
    fourth appellant, had not shown that  refusal  of  their  human  rights
    claims amounted to a disproportionate response.  The  family  could  be
    returned to Mauritius as an entire unit.

2.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge erred in assessing the  third  appellant's
    position, failing to have regard to the need  for  powerful  or  strong
    reasons supporting a finding that it would be reasonable to expect  her
    to leave the United Kingdom.   Similarly,  the  judge  failed  to  give
    proper weight to the length of the third appellant's residence  in  the
    United Kingdom and failed to properly assess the strength of  her  best
    interests in remaining here.  Finally, there was no  proper  regard  to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  and,  overall,  a  failure  to  apply
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  1  WLR
    5093.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 17th July 2018.  There was no  Rule
    24 response from the Secretary of State.  In readiness for the hearing,
    the appellants' solicitors provided a bundle and Mr Metzer handed up  a
    skeleton argument and a bundle of authorities.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Metzer said that the third appellant was a qualifying child, now  15
    years of age. The decision revealed a failure to take into account  the
    need for powerful or strong reasons to support a finding that it  would
    be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.  The need  for
    such reasons appeared in the judgment in MA (Pakistan), particularly at
    paragraph 49 and also in Home  Office  guidance  on  family  migration,
    particularly at page 75 of that guidance.  At paragraphs 32  to  36  of
    the decision, the judge reached a conclusion that the best interests of
    the third appellant required that  she  should  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He then went on  to  find  that  those  best  interests  were
    outweighed but nowhere were strong or powerful reasons identified.

5.   The length of the third appellant's residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    was not given proper weight.  Again, guidance given  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    showed that this was a substantial factor, as did Home Office guidance.
     As at the date of the hearing, the third appellant had spent  fourteen
    and a half years in the United Kingdom.  This should  have  been  given
    due weight.  What  appeared  in  Home  Office  guidance  was  itself  a
    relevant factor, as explained in SF and Others [2017] UKUT 00120.

6.   There was a similar  failure  to  assess  the  strength  of  the  third
    appellant's best interests.  This was a clear requirement in the  light
    of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, at paragraphs 34 to 37 of  the
    judgment.  The judge was required to evaluate the strength of her  best
    interests, in order to make a proper assessment of whether  those  best
    interests were outweighed.  At paragraphs 34 and 35  of  the  decision,
    the judge concluded that the  third  appellant's  best  interests  were
    indeed outweighed but without first assessing the strength of her  ties
    to the United Kingdom.

7.   Finally, so far as the first and second appellants were concerned,  the
    decision revealed no proper regard to section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.
    If it were properly found that it would not be reasonable to expect the
    third appellant to leave, her parents might  succeed  in  showing  that
    their removal would be disproportionate.  The judge would  be  required
    to take into account the wider public interest  in  this  part  of  the
    assessment.  If the judge erred in relation to the third appellant, the
    error was material in relation to  the  other  appellants.   The  third
    appellant's parents and her sibling, now 6 years  old,  ought  to  have
    been granted leave.

8.   Mr Avery said that of importance was  a  prior  decision  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in May 2015, when an earlier appeal was  dismissed.
    The judge summarised the earlier findings and properly took  them  into
    account as a starting point.  The judge based  his  assessment  on  the
    previous  judge's  findings.   There  appeared  to  be  no  fundamental
    difference in the family circumstances between the dates of  the  first
    and second decisions.  In conducting the balancing exercise, the  judge
    took into account the best interests of the  third  appellant  and  the
    public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control.   Overall,
    the decision was adequate.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The judge's operative reasoning appears at paragraphs 34 and 35 of  the
    decision.  As Mr Metzer submitted, those paragraphs do not contain (nor
    do other paragraphs  in  the  decision)  identification  of  strong  or
    powerful  reasons  supporting  a  conclusion  that  it  would  not   be
    unreasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.
     The need for such reasons has been emphasised by the Court  of  Appeal
    in MA (Pakistan) and is also a salient feature of relevant Home  Office
    guidance.  With great respect to the  judge,  the  necessary  balancing
    exercise cannot be  concluded  in  favour  of  the  respondent  without
    identifying such reasons.  This is so in relation  to  the  immigration
    rules and the  public  interest  considerations  contained  in  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

10.  Also of importance, as Mr Avery submitted, is the  judge's  summary  of
    the earlier appeal in 2015.  The judge  recorded  the  earlier  judge's
    assessment  of  the  immigration  history  of  the  first  and   second
    appellants.  The earlier decision contained a finding  that  there  has
    been no deceit on their part and that their history can be described as
    positive.  That finding, amounting to a starting point, was a  material
    factor in the balancing exercise which the judge properly identified as
    the key task at paragraph 35 of the decision.

11.  The grounds of appeal are made out and the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside as containing a material error of law.



Re-Making the Decision

12.  Mr Metzer and Mr Avery were agreed that re-making  the  decision  would
    not require further  fact-finding  in  light  of  the  judge's  careful
    summary of the evidence and the findings  he  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I decided to proceed with  re-making  the  decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

13.  I asked Mr Avery what the Secretary of State considered  to  be  strong
    and powerful reasons supporting a  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.
     His pragmatic response was that there was nothing he wished to add  to
    the case advanced by the Secretary of State to date.

14.  Taking into account the findings of fact made by  the  judge  in  2015,
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the  present  appeal,  the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants  is  a  material
    factor in assessing the wider public interest under section 117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.   Overall,  although  aspects  of  that  history  may  be
    regarded as adverse, the summary made by the judge in 2015, noted above
    in paragraph 10, seems entirely appropriate.  Since then, the first and
    second appellants have made further applications for leave.

15.  The extent of the third appellant's ties to the United Kingdom and  the
    length of time she has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom,  now  almost
    fifteen years, must be given due weight.  I conclude, as did the judge,
    that her best interests are to remain in the United  Kingdom.   I  also
    conclude that the evidence does not disclose strong or powerful reasons
    showing that it would not be unreasonable to expect her to leave.   The
    immigration history of her parents falls far short in this respect.

16.  It cannot sensibly be argued that the fourth  appellant,  now  6  years
    old, should be treated differently from her sibling and her parents.

17.  Overall, applying the guidance given in MA (Pakistan), and  giving  due
    weight as a material factor to the Home Office guidance relied upon  by
    the  appellants,  the  scales  tip  clearly  in  favour  of  the  third
    appellant, for the purposes of the rules,  and  the  first  and  second
    appellants, for the purposes  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.
    Taking into account the fourth appellant and her best interests,  which
    are to remain with her other  family  members,  refusal  of  the  human
    rights claims made by the family members and any removal in consequence
    amounts to a disproportionate response.  The appeals are allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
follows: the appeals are allowed.

Signed                                  Date 08 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity in these proceedings and I  make
no direction or order on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 08 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are allowed; I make a whole fee award  in  respect  of  any  fee
that has been paid or is payable.


Signed                                  Date 08 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell


