
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/00886/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 July 2017                          | On 04 August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                         mrs Vasintha Devi Govender
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mold, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background


1.   The appellant is a South African citizen who was born on 25  May  1949.
    Her daughter is Esayvanie Goury, born on 15  April  1971,  who  is  the
    sponsor.  She came to the UK in  1999  to  work  as  a  nurse  and  was
    subsequently granted British citizenship.

2.   On 2 June 2015, the appellant applied for entry clearance on the  basis
    that she was a dependent relative of the sponsor. Her  application  was
    considered by the Entry Clearance Officer under Appendix  FM  paragraph
    EC-DR 1.1 of the Immigration Rules. The ECO decided that the  appellant
    did not satisfy the criteria of the Rules.  Specifically,  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant who had previously applied to settle in the
    UK satisfied the criteria  because  there  was  no  evidence  that  she
    required personal care in the short term or in the  long  term,  or  in
    order to  perform  everyday  tasks.   There  was  no  adequate  medical
    evidence to support her case  and  on  that  basis  the  decision  went
    against her on 2 June 2015.

The First-tier Tribunal appeal

3.   The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Her  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  N  M  Paul  (the  Immigration
    Judge) on 28 March  2017  sitting  at  Taylor  House.  The  Immigration
    Judge's decision was promulgated on  12  April  2017.  The  Immigration
    Judge, having heard evidence from the appellant, decided to dismiss the
    appeal and the appellant now appeals that  dismissal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal specifically on human rights  grounds  as
    it seemed to be conceded before him that the appellant did not  satisfy
    the criteria for the Immigration Rules, although the criteria  for  the
    Immigration Rules were relevant.  The appellant appealed  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

4.   The appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The grounds of appeal were considered by Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  Robertson  (Judge  Robertson),  who  gave
    permission to appeal on 31st of May 2017.

5.   The first ground of appeal was on the basis  that  the  NHS  costs  had
    been mistakenly referred to by the Immigration Judge as "public funds".
    This was incorrect. They were not "public funds" for  the  purposes  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly,  it  was  contended   that   the
    appellant's future dependence upon the NHS should not have  weighed  in
    the balance against the appellant when Article 8 was considered.

6.   The second ground related to  the  appellant's  ability  to  speak  the
    English language. Immigration Judge Robertson, considered there  to  be
    less merit on this point. However, he allowed the  appellant  to  argue
    that the Immigration Judge had erred in finding  that  the  appellant's
    first language was Tamil, in which she was a fluent speaker,  and  that
    this was a relevant factor to the ability of the appellant to integrate
    for the purposes both of Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and for the purposes  of  Article  8
    more generally.  It was submitted that the Immigration Judge had  erred
    in finding that the appellant's first language was  Tamil,  given  that
    the appellant had given evidence that she had grown up speaking English
    and Afrikaans in South Africa, where  of  course  those  languages  are
    widely spoken.  It  was  therefore  submitted  that  it  was  factually
    incorrect that the appellant did not speak  adequate  English  and  her
    knowledge of Tamil was irrelevant.

7.   Judge Robertson decided that there  was  some  arguable  merit  in  the
    grounds.  He  decided  that  it  was  at  least   arguable   that   the
    proportionality assessment was flawed. If the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    going to consider the possible burden of the appellant on public  funds
    it should also have to consider the surcharge by  which  the  appellant
    would have to pay back into the system. However,  on  the  other  hand,
    Judge Robertson did not consider there was as much merit in the  second
    ground, which argued that the Immigration Judge had erred  in  assuming
    that  the  appellant's  first  language  was  Tamil.   Judge   Robinson
    specifically granted permission on the  first  ground,  the  NHS/public
    funds ground, but he did not  refuse  it  on  the  second  ground.   It
    follows that both grounds may be argued.


8.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I heard  submissions  by  both
    representatives.  Mr Mold, who appeared as Counsel for  the  appellant,
    suggested there was no  rational  basis  for  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings in relation to the language aspect.  He said  that  her  first
    language might have been Tamil, but of course the fact that  she  spoke
    Afrikaans and English were the relevant points as  far  as  integration
    was  concerned.  As  far  as  the  appellant's  degree   of   financial
    independence was concerned, he referred me to a recent Court of  Appeal
    decision in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 in which the Court  of  Appeal
    had  stressed  that  in  these  cases   the   expression   "financially
    independent" was a phrase in ordinary English usage,  and  it  did  not
    require any technical definition, although the Court of Appeal went  on
    to find that in fact the appellant was not financially  independent  in
    that case. The court found  that  the  appellant's  lack  of  financial
    independence was a relevant matter in the  balancing  exercise.   Being
    financially independent of others, being able to support oneself  is  a
    matter which tends to minimise the risk as an immigrant might  need  to
    have resort to public funds. The case discusses that issue  in  greater
    depth.  In this case it was suggested that the receipt of NHS treatment
    was not public funds and did not  impact  on  the  issue  of  financial
    independence, and even if it were relevant that she was  receiving  NHS
    treatment, there was in fact a requirement to pay money into the NHS by
    way of a bond as a condition of entry clearance.  The Immigration Judge
    had been wrong to refer to the financial aspect in this way because the
    appellant would almost certainly be given permission to  enter  the  UK
    conditional upon having no resort to public funds in any event.

9.   Mr Avery on the other hand said that Section  117B  simply  set  out  a
    number of considerations which needed to be considered when weighing up
    an Article 8 claim.  It did not in any way state that any one of  those
    was determinative, but they were factors that courts and Tribunals were
    entitled to consider.  The fact that the appellant would be  likely  to
    make demands on the National  Health  Service  was  not  an  irrelevant
    consideration.  He referred me to a number of passages in the decision,
    including paragraph 28, which stated that  the  precise  state  of  her
    medical health was not in any event of such  grave  character  that  it
    meant that she was dependent on others, and there was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant could not properly take care of herself.  Mr
    Avery recognised that the appellant may have difficulties from time  to
    time with  activities  like  shopping,  but  there  was  no  compelling
    evidence before the Immigration judge to show that the appellant  could
    not continue to live an independent life in South Africa. Mr Mold tried
    to urge on me that there was  a  difference  between  independence  and
    leading a  fulfilled  and  independent  life.  I  accept  that  such  a
    distinction exists but, I drew his attention to the clear  findings  of
    fact by the Immigration Judge and the fact  that  those  findings  were
    against his client on this point.

Discussion

10.  It is for the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  if  so  to
    decide whether to set aside the decision  in  whole  or  in  part  (see
    section 12 of the Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  solely  to  determine  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. In particular,  it  appears
    to have been conceded before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  any
    event,  following  the  commencement  of  the  Immigration  Act   2014,
    appellant's appeal rights were limited to human rights grounds  in  any
    event.

12.  I have carefully read the decision of the Immigration Judge.  It  seems
    to be a well-balanced and carefully appraised decision which took fully
    into account the evidence the Immigration Judge had heard.  There  were
    aspects of the evidence that the  judge  could  have  emphasised  to  a
    greater degree. I  accept,  and  I  believe  it  was  conceded  by  the
    respondent, that "public funds" did not  include  the  receipt  of  NHS
    treatment. It may be that the Immigration Judge failed to refer to  the
    Migrant Health Surcharge introduced by the last Coalition Government in
    2015. However, I can see  no  reference  to  that  being  made  in  the
    submissions on the appellant's behalf before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and Section 117B of the 2002 Act gave the First-tier  Tribunal  a  wide
    discretion to consider a number of public  interest  considerations  in
    all cases on which article 8 is relied. Subsection (3) provides that it
    is in the interests of the economic well-being of the U  K  that  those
    who seek to enter or remain here are financially independent and not  a
    burden  on  taxpayers.  The  burden  on  taxpayers  would  include  the
    appellant's reliance on the National  Health  Service.  Therefore,  the
    extent of the extent of the appellant's reliance on the N H S, a burden
    on taxpayers, was a relevant matter to which the Immigration Judge  was
    entitled to attach weight. Clearly, the Immigration Judge attached some
    weight to this. The question would therefore  be  whether  he  attached
    excessive weight to this fact or whether  he  allowed  it  to  tip  the
    scales too much in favour of the respondent.

13.  The Immigration Judge went on to make a finding on the question of  the
    appellant's ability to speak the Tamil language. The appellant grew  up
    in South Africa.  The fact that their first language is Tamil does  not
    seem relevant given the appellant's ability to speak English.  However,
    I do not think it was the main reason for the respondent's decision  to
    uphold the respondent's decision to refuse leave to  enter  the  UK  in
    this case. Nor does  it  seem  to  have  featured  prominently  at  the
    hearing. Insofar as the Immigration Judge attached  significant  weight
    to the appellant's ability to speak English he would have been wrong to
    do so. But, it seems to have been very much a secondary reason for  his
    decision. Overall, the appellant's ability speak  the  English-language
    did not affect the outcome and therefore it was not a material error of
    law.

14.  The main reason for the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  was  that  the
    appellant had failed  to  satisfy  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance  in  this  case  was  a
    disproportionate one in the light of his findings in  relation  to  the
    appellant's state of health. It was a key importance that the appellant
    was not in such state as she was unable to take care  of  herself  (see
    paragraph 28). These were findings the Immigration Judge  was  entitled
    to come to on the evidence presented to him.

Conclusion

15.  The Immigration Judge was considering an appeal against  a  refusal  on
    human rights grounds. He carried out a balancing exercise and reached a
    conclusion that was open to him on the evidence. He made  no  error  of
    law that was material to the outcome.

Decision

16.  The appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

