
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00691/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd November 2017                     |On 06th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        RT HON LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RAJA MUHAMMAD RAFI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar (instructed by Law Lane Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in relation to a Decision of Judge Lucas in the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 16th January 2017.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity we shall continue  to  refer  Mr
    Rafi as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the  Respondent  in
    this judgment.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He came to the UK in 2006  as
    a work permit holder with leave until January  2010.   He  applied  for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain in 2011  which  was  refused.   Following  a
    finding on appeal that the decision was not in accordance with the  law
    the Secretary of State reconsidered  the  application  and  refused  it
    again.  On appeal from that decision Judge Gurung-Thapa  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Rules but allowed it on Article 8 grounds on the basis
    of his private life.  As a result he was granted 2 years  discretionary
    leave to remain.

 4. The Appellant then applied for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  on  16th
    September 2015 on the basis of 10  years  lawful  residence  which  was
    refused on 22nd December 2015.  It was refused on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had not been in the UK for 20 years.

 5. It was his appeal against that decision which came before Judge Lucas.

 6. Judge Lucas set out the basis of the Appellant's claim and  submissions
    between paragraphs 3 and 13 of the Decision and Reasons.  His  findings
    then commence at paragraph  14  and  conclude  at  paragraph  21.   The
    findings are very brief.  Judge Lucas  noted  his  previous  successful
    appeal on the basis of his private life.  He also  notes  that  at  the
    date of decision he had not been resident  for  10  years.   The  Judge
    noted that he had no adverse immigration history and allowed the appeal
    on the basis that he was successful in 2013 and his  private  life  had
    strengthened since then.

 7. However, the Judge does not identify the nature of the private life and
    why interference is disproportionate.  He does not address whether that
    private life can be established in Pakistan.  He does not carry out any
    balancing exercise  between  the  Appellant's  rights  and  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration  control  and  he  does  not
    address s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  at
    all.

 8. The law in  relation  to  private  life  has  changed  since  the  2013
    decision.

 9. The Secretary of State said that the Appellant could not meet paragraph
    276ADE; that part of the Rules that deals with private life.  The Judge
    makes no mention of this in his findings and there is no  consideration
    of whether there would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's
    integration into Pakistan.

10. Mr Gajjar argued that the error of law was not material given that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for 10 years.  However  that  ignores  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE.

11.  The Decision and Reasons is so  lacking  in  analysis  and  reasons  it
    cannot stand.  We set it aside in its entirety and direct  that  it  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.






Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  to  the
extent that the Decision and Reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
aside and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  for
a full rehearing.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 2nd November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



























