
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00220/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 March 2018                        |On 2 May 2018                       |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                             Nitin Vijay Jangda
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, instructed by Milestone Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley  promulgated  17.3.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  10.12.15,  to
    refuse his application made on 23.9.15 for indefinite leave  to  remain
    (ILR) on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful  residence,  pursuant
    to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 2. It is common ground  that  because  the  appellant  did  not  have  the
    necessary English language qualification, he was not entitled  to  ILR,
    but pursuant to paragraph 276A2, he would, if he could prove 10  years'
    continuous lawful residence, be entitled to an extension of stay for  a
    period not exceeding two years.

 3. The complicated immigration history is set out in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and need not be rehearsed here. However, whether or
    not the appellant could demonstrate 10 years' lawful residence depended
    on the resolution of two matters which were said to interrupt that  10-
    year period. The first of those, relating to a break in 2006, described
    at [18] of the decision  was  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative at the hearing, which the judge accepted  and  found  in
    favour of the appellant at [26] of the decision. It is not necessary to
    address or detail that issue further.

 4. The second, and sole remaining issue at the First-tier Tribunal related
    to an alleged break between 2009 and 2010. It is not  necessary  to  go
    into all the detail of the extension of leave  by  s3C,  etc.,  but  in
    summary an application made in August 2009 was rejected in October 2010
    because payment for  the  application  was  in  some  way  ineffective,
    whether declined or refused. The upshot is that if the failure of  that
    payment was the fault of  the  Secretary  of  State,  rather  than  the
    appellant, the appellant was entitled to continuation of his leave  and
    thereby would be  able  to  demonstrate  the  full  10-year  period  of
    continuous lawful residence relied on.

 5. Mr Nasim, who represented the appellant at the appeal, submitted and Mr
    McVeety could not prove otherwise that the Secretary of State  produced
    no evidence to the First-tier Tribunal as to why the payment of the fee
    was not made or taken. On the other hand, the  appellant  had  produced
    evidence to demonstrate that his aunt, from whose account  the  payment
    was to be made, had funds in the account and an arranged  overdraft  at
    the date of the application, and  thus  there  is  no  reason  why  the
    payment was not taken. The judge accepted this evidence.

 6. Resolution of the issue before the First-tier Tribunal  turned  on  the
    burden of proof.  Mr  Nasim  submitted  that  the  burden  was  on  the
    Secretary of State to satisfy the Tribunal  that  the  failure  of  the
    payment of the fee was not her  fault.  Reliance  was  made  on  Basnet
    [2012] UKUT 113, to the effect that it is for the Secretary of State to
    establish that the appellant has no right  to  bring  the  appeal.  The
    judge also took into account the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Mitchell (Basnet revisited) [2015] UKUT 00562  (IAC),  which  clarified
    that there may be a number of reasons why a payment might  be  declined
    and the Secretary of State does not have access to  those  reasons,  so
    that a more nuanced approach to the burden of proof was required.

 7. Judge O'Malley  considered  at  [51]  that  whilst  the  appellant  had
    provided information to show there were funds  in  one  account,  there
    were a number of deficiencies in the evidence and in particular "a lack
    of clarification," in respect of  the  payment,  including  as  to  the
    completion of the cheque. The  judge  in  consequence  found  that  the
    appellant failed to establish that he properly provided a fee  for  the
    August 2009 application, so that the decision to refuse the application
    for non-payment was properly made. The effect was that it  brought  the
    appellant's 3C leave to  and  end  and,  as  the  next  application  in
    November 2009  was  made  more  than  28  days  later,  his  period  of
    continuous lawful leave was broken.

 8. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davies  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    2.10.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission on 19.12.17.

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Jordan was unclear whether  the
    judge's approach, dwelling on evidence as to  whether  the  cheque  was
    validly made out, etc., was  legitimate  or  whether  it  reversed  the
    burden of proof "in a manner which is not permitted."

10. Thus it was the matter came before me on 7.3.18 as  an  appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

11. For the reasons summarised below, I found an error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge O'Malley to be set aside.

12. Since the promulgation of the decision the issue of the correct  burden
    of proof in demonstrating validity  of  application  has  been  further
    clarified in the very recent decision of the Upper  Tribunal  panel  in
    Ahmed & Ors (valid application - burden of proof) [2018] UKUT 53 (IAC).

13. The Upper Tribunal concluded that as there exists a  further  procedure
    undertaken by the Secretary of State in order  to  process  payment  in
    relation to which applicants are not privy and over which they have  no
    control, it remains appropriate for the Secretary of State to bear  the
    burden of proof. "Whether the Secretary of State ultimately  discharges
    the legal burden of proof will depend on  the  nature  and  quality  of
    evidence she is able to provide having regard to the timing of the  any
    request for payment details and the reasons  for  any  delay,  balanced
    against any rebuttal evidence produced by an appellant.

14. In essence, the Secretary of State has an initial burden  of  proof  to
    raise sufficient evidence to support her  invalidity  allegation.  This
    may depend on whether any request  was  made  to  provide  the  payment
    details within 18 months of receipt by the payment  processing  centre.
    At [49] the Upper Tribunal noted that "It will be rare in  a  statutory
    appeal for the respondent's assertion that an application is invalid to
    be entirely unsupported by other evidence." However, as Mr Nasim points
    out and Mr McVeety could not contradict,  absolutely  no  evidence  was
    advanced by the Secretary of State at the First-tier Tribunal. The only
    evidence on the matter was the 'rebuttal' evidence adduced on behalf of
    the appellant, as described above.

15. It follows that in this case the legal burden remained on the Secretary
    of State throughout and that  she  did  not  discharge  the  evidential
    burden, requiring evidence from the appellant.  The  rejection  of  the
    application without consideration of its merits rested  solely  on  the
    bare assertion that payment was not made so that  the  application  was
    rejected as invalid. In Ahmed  the  process  of  attempting  to  obtain
    payment after the submission of  the  application  form  was  a  matter
    solely within the knowledge of  the  respondent  and  thus  the  burden
    remained on her. The fact that the challenge to the invalidity decision
    was only raised during a subsequent appeal against  a  later  decision,
    "while ultimately relevant when assessing whether  the  respondent  has
    discharged the burden of proof, has no bearing in determining where the
    burden of proof laid, [52]."

16. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    reversed the burden of proof, when the Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    raise any evidence at  all  on  the  issue,  let  alone  sufficient  to
    discharge the initial burden of proof. As stated, the only evidence  at
    all on the issue came from  the  appellant  and  was  entirely  in  his
    favour.

17. Of course, the clarification in Ahmed was not available to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and thus could not have assisted Judge O'Malley. However,
    it remains the case that in the light of Ahmed,  the  decision  was  in
    error of law, as ultimately accepted by Mr  McVeety,  in  the  way  the
    judge put the burden on the appellant to demonstrate that  payment  was
    proffered and that failure to take the payment was  the  fault  of  the
    Secretary of State. In the circumstances, the decision cannot stand and
    must be set aside.

18. Following implementation of the Immigration Act 2014, the only right of
    appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  is  on  human
    rights grounds. However, the extent to which the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the  Rules  is  a  weighty  factor  in  any  article  8
    assessment outside the Rules. For the reasons set  out  above,  I  have
    found that the Secretary of State failed to demonstrate that his August
    2009 application was invalid, and thus in consequence the appellant met
    the 10-year continuous lawful residence requirements of the  Rules,  so
    that he should have been granted an extension of  leave  in  accordance
    with the Rules. That is a weighty consideration highly relevant to  the
    article 8 human rights assessment.

19. It is not necessary to take any further evidence or submissions on  the
    matter. Mr McVeety accepted that if the rejection of  the  August  2009
    application was in error, the 10-year period would be met.

20. In the circumstances, applying the Razgar stepped approach of which the
    crucial  element  is  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision to refuse his application for further leave
    was disproportionate to his article 8 rights of respect for private and
    family life. Mr McVeety did not pursue any argument to the contrary.

Conclusion & Decision

21. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                      Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a whole fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been allowed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                      Dated
