
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00336/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 19 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - Sheffield
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                Md. Assad Ali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hassan of Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Original Appellant) is a Bangladeshi born 1999.  On
    28 August 2017 he made an application as a child for entry clearance to
    join his parents in the United Kingdom. He is sponsored by his mother.



The ECO's decision

 2. On 19 December 2017, the Appellant (the ECO) refused the application by
    reference to the Eligibility Financial Requirement of  Appendix  FM  to
    the Immigration Rules finding that the Original Appellant had not shown
    the sponsor had sufficient income and further by way  of  reference  to
    Appendix FM-SE because the Original  Appellant  had  not  produced  the
    requisite documentation to confirm the sponsor's income. I shall  refer
    to this in brief as the First Limb.  The  ECO  expressly  conceded  the
    Original Appellant satisfied the Eligibility Relationship  Requirements
    of paragraph E-ECC.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. Paragraph
    E-ECC.1.6 requires that one of the Original Appellant's parents  be  in
    the United Kingdom with limited leave to enter or remain or  have  been
    granted entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM. I  shall  refer
    to this as the Second Limb. On 20  October  2018  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager (the ECM) upheld the decision on the grounds of the First Limb.
    I note in passing the ECM stated "I do not have access to any documents
    submitted with the application form and whilst it  is  claimed  in  the
    grounds of appeal that  the  appellant  can  be  maintained  adequately
    without recourse to public funds, this is  not  particularised  in  any
    way."

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Applicant appealed and by a decision  promulgated  on  13  December
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Freer allowed the appeal.

 4. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the basis the Judge had erred in
    law because the Judge had made a mistake as to a material  fact  namely
    that the Original Appellant's parents and in particular his mother  who
    is his sponsor, was not settled in the United Kingdom and the  Original
    Appellant's father had limited leave based on the residential status of
    his wife, the sponsor. The  grounds  acknowledge  that  the  Presenting
    Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing was unaware of this and  the
    grounds refer to a letter of 25 October  2018  sent  by  UK  Visas  and
    Immigration  to  the  Original  Appellant's  solicitors   refusing   an
    application by the sponsor for a Certificate of Entitlement to a  Right
    of Abode which had not been produced to the Judge. The grounds asserted
    this mis-conception infected the entire decision of the Judge.

 5. On 1 May2019 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew extended time  and
    granted permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

6.   The sponsor attended the hearing. Mr Hassan  informed  me  she  had  no
    English at all and so would be unable to follow the hearing.

7.    The  parties  agreed  that  the  relevant  test  for  maintenance  and
    accommodation was  that  described  in  KA  (Adequacy  of  Maintenance)
    (Pakistan) [2006] UKAIT 00065. There was no challenge  to  the  Judge's
    finding that the Original Appellant succeeded under the First Limb.  Ms
    Isherwood for the ECIO produced the letter of 7 January  2014  from  UK
    These as and Immigration to the solicitors  for  the  sponsor  and  the
    Original Appellant confirming issue to the sponsor of a Certificate  of
    Entitlement to the Right  of  Abode  and  a  subsequent  letter  of  29
    September 2017 refusing her later application for  another  Certificate
    of Entitlement and a letter of 5  July  2018  rejecting  the  sponsor's
    request for reconsideration of the refusal of British citizenship.

8.   Mr Hassan referred to the  decision  of  the  ECO.  It  identified  two
    eligibility requirements. Even if the sponsor's passport which had been
    endorsed with a Certificate of a Right of Abode had  now  expired,  her
    status as a British citizen by descent remained. He produced  a  letter
    of 3 May 2019 from the  Passport  Office  dealing  with  the  sponsor's
    failed application. Copies were made for the ECO and the Tribunal.

Submissions for the ECO

9.   Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds for appeal. The issue  was  that  to
    succeed the Original Appellant's parents  had  to  have  the  requisite
    residential status and the sponsor's  Certificate  of  Entitlement  had
    expired with the expiry of her passport in 2016. There was no automatic
    extension  and  the  sponsor  had  not  successfully  made  a   further
    application. Mr Hassan had not cited  any  authority  for  his  earlier
    submission that notwithstanding  expiry  of  the  2014  Certificate  of
    Entitlement the sponsor's status was automatically continued.

10.  She referred to paragraphs 13 and 18 of  the  Judge's  decision.  These
    state:

         "13. Either both parents are present and settled or the  father  is
         present but not yet settled. It appears he is allowed to work here.
         There is one reference to him having "limited leave" but I was  not
         offered proof or disproof of that statement.

         18.  The status of the father was not challenged by either the ECO,
         the ECM or the HOPO. It is possible that the father is not settled,
         like the mother. It would have been helpful for  the  ECM  to  make
         clear findings on these points as the  ECM  had  accepted  the  297
         point applied and it is a complex Rule."

    She submitted that the Judge had expressly accepted he had no proof  to
    support his findings, the Original Appellant's application form  stated
    the sponsor is a British citizen but in  her  statement  she  describes
    herself as a Bangladeshi citizen. The letter of 3 May 2019 produced  at
    the hearing only made matters worse for the Original Appellant.

Submissions for the Original Appellant

11.  Mr  Hassan  relied  on  his  earlier  submission  that  expiry  of  the
    Certificate of Entitlement  did  not  adversely  affect  the  sponsor's
    status as a British Citizen by descent.

12.  The Judge had before him an appeal on human rights grounds by  a  child
    who is the child of a settled person, that is a person upon whom  there
    are no immigration restrictions or who  has  a  right  of  abode  as  a
    British citizen. By issuing a Certificate of Entitlement of  the  Right
    of Abode in 2014 the Secretary of State had accepted that  the  sponsor
    was a British citizen by descent. She had produced  all  the  requisite
    documents in 2014 on the basis of which a  Certificate  of  Entitlement
    had been issued. He  referred  to  s.2  British  Nationality  Act  1981
    dealing with acquisition of British citizenship by descent. He referred
    to paragraphs 17ff of the judgment in R (Md Sanu Miah)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWHC  2925  (Admin)  and  page  4  of  the  Home  Office  guidance   on
    Nationality: right of abode of 23 May 2018 that the right of abode is a
    statutory right which a person either has or does not have  subject  to
    possible exercise of the power of deprivation of the right of abode  in
    s.2A Immigration Act 1971.

13.  He submitted that the third paragraph of the letter of 7  January  2014
    from UK Visas  and  Immigration  was  incorrect  in  stating  that  the
    Certificate of Entitlement is valid for the duration of the validity of
    the passport to which it is attached. The  position  was  that  in  the
    letter of 3 May 2019 the Secretary of State now  sought  to  reject  or
    find insufficient documents  which  had  previously  been  accepted  as
    sufficient to grant a Certificate of Entitlement. Once status had  been
    granted it continued until revocation. The  sponsor's  status  had  not
    been revoked. The letters from the Passport Office of 3  May  2019  and
    from UK Visas and Immigration of 29 September 2017 did not  revoke  the
    sponsor's residential status. There was  no  allegation  of  fraud  and
    neither letter purported to remove her status as a British  citizen  by
    descent.

14.  He continued that the Judge  had  made  no  finding  on  the  sponsor's
    residential status because he had not needed to in  the  light  of  the
    concession contained in the original decision of the ECO  and  the  ECM
    had not sought to withdraw that concession. The  Second  Limb  had  not
    been an issue before the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  The only other issue was that of finance - the First Limb - in  respect
    of which the Judge's findings had not been challenged  in  the  grounds
    for appeal.

Response for the ECO

16.  Ms Isherwood noted that the sponsor's passport on which  a  Certificate
    of Entitlement had been  endorsed  had  expired  in  2016  and  that  a
    Certificate of Entitlement ceases to have effect on the expiry  of  the
    passport to which it is affixed.  There  was  now  an  issue  over  the
    sponsor's status because of the discrepancies  in  her  date  of  birth
    given in various documents. This issue had still to be resolved and  in
    the meantime the Original Appellant had supplied no further information
    about  his  father's  residential  status.  The  sponsor  relied  on  a
    statutory right and the burden of proof was on the sponsor or  in  this
    appeal the Original Appellant and  it  had  not  been  discharged.  The
    concession had been incorrectly made.

Consideration

17.  At the date of the hearing before  the  Judge,  the  sponsor  had  been
    granted a Certificate of Entitlement and  the  passport  to  which  the
    Certificate had been fixed had expired in 2016 before the date  of  the
    Original Appellant's application. It appears  from  the  letter  of  29
    September 2017 from UK Visas and Immigration to the  sponsor  that  she
    had made a further application for another Certificate  of  Entitlement
    which  had  been  refused  for  lack  of  submission  of  the  relevant
    documents. It appears from the letter of 5 July 2018 from UK Visas  and
    Immigration  to  the  solicitors  for  the  sponsor  and  the  Original
    Appellant that the sponsor had applied for British citizenship and been
    refused initially and a request for reconsideration had been made which
    in turn had been refused by a letter of 25 October 2018.

18.  There is some merit in the submission  that  the  Original  Appellant's
    solicitors should have made these letters available to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the hearing on 7 December 2018. On the other hand, the ECO
    had  already  conceded  the  issue  of  the  status  of  the   Original
    Appellant's parents under  paragraph  E-ECC.1.6  of  Appendix  FM.  The
    letters were disclosed at the Upper Tribunal hearing on 6 June  by  the
    ECO, not by the solicitors for the Original Appellant who  in  response
    to disclosure by the ECO produced the Passport Office's letter of 3 May
    2019, declining on the evidence before it to issue a  British  passport
    to the sponsor. As Ms Isherwood submitted this refusal assisted neither
    the Original Appellant nor the sponsor.

19.  There is no evidence in the Upper Tribunal's file that at any time  the
    ECO has sought to withdraw the concession or decision under  appeal  by
    way of reference to the uncertain status of  the  Original  Appellant's
    parents or either of them. The  ECO's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal was some 13 weeks out of  time  which  delay  was  explained  by
    noting that it was not until 4 April 2019 that the  Specialist  Appeals
    Team had been approached by the ECO  with  concern  about  the  Judge's
    decision. Time was extended by Judge Andrew in her grant of  permission
    to appeal.

20.  Regulation 6 of the Immigration (Certificate of  Entitlement  to  Right
    of Abode in the  United  Kingdom)  Regulations  2006  provides  that  a
    certificate of entitlement will only be issued  where  the  appropriate
    authority is satisfied the applicant has a right of abode. Regulation 8
    provides that the certificate will cease to have effect  on  expiry  of
    the passport to which the certificate is affixed.

21.  The sponsor's Certificate of Entitlement expired before  she  took  any
    action to obtain a document confirming her British citizenship. She now
    has no Certificate of Entitlement to  show  that  she  is  entitled  to
    British  citizenship  by  descent.  The  letters  from  UK  Visas   and
    Immigration and the Passport Office  show  that  the  authorities  have
    taken the point that they are no longer satisfied the sponsor has shown
    she has a right of abode. Accordingly, she has not shown  that  she  is
    entitled to British citizenship by descent. The argument that she is  a
    British citizen by descent relies either on the expired Certificate  of
    a Right of Entitlement or on requirements which the  sponsor  has  been
    unable to evidence she meets them as indicated in  the  letters  of  29
    September 2017 and 25 October 2018 from UK Visas and Immigration and of
    3 May 2019 from the Passport Office.

22.  At the  hearing  before  the  Judge  the  ECO  had  not  withdrawn  the
    concession that the Original Appellant met the Eligibility Relationship
    Requirement of paragraph E-ECC.1 of Appendix FM and the letters  of  29
    September 2017, 5 July 2018 and 25 October 2018 did not  seek  to  cast
    doubt on the Certificate  of  Entitlement  which  had  previously  been
    issued and which had expired but they  did  show  that  a  then  recent
    application for another Certificate of Entitlement  had  been  refused.
    Both the sponsor and the solicitors for her and the Original  Appellant
    were aware of this and continued to rely on the ECO's  concession  made
    in the decision of 14 November 2017. The letter of  29  September  2017
    was crucial because the sponsor's previous Certificate  of  Entitlement
    had expired and so ceased to be  of  effect  and  her  application  for
    another Certificate of Entitlement had been refused and  there  was  no
    evidence before the Judge or the Upper Tribunal that  the  sponsor  had
    sought to appeal that decision, as advised in the decision letter of 29
    September 2017

23.  The information in the letters of 29  September  2017  and  25  October
    2018 should have been made available to the Judge and would have had  a
    material effect on his findings, if it had not previously prompted  the
    ECO to seek to withdraw the concession or indeed, the  whole  decision.
    There was no explanation why the information had  not  previously  been
    disclosed to the Judge or indeed to the Upper Tribunal (until the start
    of the hearing) by either the ECO or the Original Appellant.  It  is  a
    matter which goes to the fairness of the hearing before the Judge.  The
    Judge was concerned about the ECO's approach to the residential  status
    of the Original Appellant's  father  but  the  relevance  of  this  was
    limited because the sponsor is his mother and it was upon the basis  of
    her status that the application had been made and in  respect  of  whom
    the ECO had made the original concession in the decision letter.

24.   For  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision under appeal was through  no  fault  of
    his own inadequate and his decision is set aside.

25.  Having regard to the fact that this appeal is from a decision  made  in
    respect of an applicant who has now  obtained  his  majority  and  that
    fresh evidence  may  be  required  with  a  view  to  establishing  the
    residential  status  of  the  sponsor  and  her  husband,  I  find   it
    appropriate that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

26.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside in its entirety. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 12.  vi.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

