








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00691/2016



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th December 2018                         |On 17th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                            Mr Raja Muhammad Rafi

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mardner Counsel instructed by Law Lane Solicitors


For the Respondent :   Ms Isherwood  Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Allen promulgated on the 13th  April  2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 30th October 2018. Thus the case appeared before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

    1 It is arguable the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to place adequate
    weight on the fact that the appellant has been lawfully in the  UK  for
    more than 10 years. Although considered under  paragraph  276  ADE  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge does not appear to have considered  paragraph
    276B and has placed little weight on the private life establish  during
    this time in the UK without giving detailed reasons.

Immigration history

 5. The appellant, date of birth 7 March 1970, entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 28 October 2006 on a work permit visa which gave him leave  until  1
    January 2010. There are references in the papers to the fact  that  the
    appellant entered the UK on the 28th October 2007. Whatever the date of
    entry the appellant's leave expired and he did not  have  leave  for  a
    period of time after 1 January 2010.

 6. On 12 September 2011 the appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a work permit  holder.  That  application  was  refused.  The
    appellant appealed against that decision and, whilst his  appeal  under
    the rules was dismissed, his appeal was successful on  the  grounds  of
    family and private life rights. The appeal appears to have  been  heard
    in or about May 2013. As a result of his appeal  being  successful  the
    appellant was granted discretionary leave from 4 May 2013 to 8  October
    2015.

 7. Therefore the appellant did not have leave from 1 January 2010 until  4
    May 2013. For that period of time the appellant was not lawfully in the
    country.

 8. The appellant, as his leave to the 8th October  2015  was  nearing  its
    end, made an in-time application for leave on the grounds of Article  8
    of the ECHR, family and private life. That was refused on the  22nd  of
    December 2015. In refusing  the  application  it  was  noted  that  the
    appellant did not have any family in the United Kingdom.  Consideration
    was therefore being given to his private life.  Specific  consideration
    was given in the letter of refusal to paragraph  276  ADE  and  it  was
    found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Further consideration was given as to whether or not
    there were any factors warranting consideration of  article  8  private
    life outside the rules and it was determined that there were no factors
    warranting such consideration.

 9. The appellant appealed against the decision and the  appeal  was  first
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas. However by  decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal promulgated on 6 November 2017  the  decision  of  Judge
    Lucas was set aside and the matter was remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh.

10.  The matter was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Allen  on  13  March
    2018. By decision promulgated on 13 April 2018 the judge dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

11. The appellant has appealed  against  that  decision.  Thus  the  matter
    appears before me to determine whether there was any material error  of
    law in the decision of Judge Allen.

    Consideration

12. In the leave granted there is a suggestion that as  the  appellant  has
    lawfully  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than   10   years,
    consideration needs to be given to paragraph 276 B of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. As pointed out above whilst the appellant may have entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006 or 2007, he was not lawfully in the United Kingdom  for
    the period 1 January 2010 until the beginning of  May  2013.  Paragraph
    276B (i)(a) requires that an individual has to have at least  10  years
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  Whichever  starting
    point one takes the appellant does not have 10 years continuous  lawful
    residence and therefore does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B(i)(a).

14. Otherwise with  regard  to  paragraph  276  ADE  at  the  date  of  the
    application the appellant would have  been  44/45  years  of  age.  The
    appellant therefore did not meet the majority of the requirements  with
    regard to age in respect of paragraph 276 ADE and otherwise no evidence
    had been submitted that there were very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into life in Pakistan.

15. The judge has noted that despite what the appellant had said previously
    he did in point of fact have family  in  Pakistan  namely  a  wife  and
    children. His parents, four brothers  and  two  sisters  were  also  in
    Pakistan. The appellant  was  regularly  in  contact  with  his  family
    members. The appellant did not have any family in the United Kingdom or
    any relationship of such significance as to  engage  article  8  family
    life.

16. The appellant wished to continue to work in the United  Kingdom  as  he
    earned more than he did in Pakistan and he could therefore  assist  and
    help his family if he remained working in the United Kingdom.

17. The judge in the decision has  gone  on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    private life in the United Kingdom. In that regard the judge considered
    paragraph 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

18. The judge had noted in the evidence that the appellant had stated  that
    his English was sufficient for him to deal with the customers that came
    to the butchers shop at which he worked. However he preferred to use an
    interpreter in the hearing. The appellant had made reference  to  being
    involved in the local mosque  and  attending  regularly.  However  when
    questioned about what he did at the local  mosque  the  appellant  made
    reference to attending community events  such  as  weddings  and  Asian
    groups. There was no  evidence  of  a  wider  integration  into  United
    Kingdom life. It was noted that the appellant had never taken the  test
    of the Life in the UK although he had taken ESOL English test.

    Submissions

19. The appellant's representative sought to argue  that  in  paragraph  32
    where the judge had stated that the removal of the appellant  would  be
    'inevitably  disruptive'  the  judge  in  carrying  out  the  balancing
    exercise with regard to proportionality had failed to take  account  of
    the fact that such interference would be so significant as to  outweigh
    any public interest  in  removing  the  appellant.  The  representative
    sought to argue that the judge had failed to carry  out  the  balancing
    exercise properly. Reliance was placed upon section 117 B  because  the
    appellant had always maintained himself and was not dependent on public
    funds; he was a  man  of  good  character;  he  had  made  attempts  to
    integrate; and the  interference  in  his  private  life  would  be  so
    significant as to outweigh the public interest.

20. It was submitted that given the age of the appellant and the length  of
    time that he had been in the United Kingdom it was unjustifiably  harsh
    to deprive him of the employment that  he  had  maintained  throughout.
    Whilst it was acknowledged that all his family were  in  Pakistan,  the
    appellant had been working in the United Kingdom and had  been  allowed
    to stay here. He had contributed  to  the  UK  through  his  work.  The
    consequence of returning  a  man  of  his  age  to  Pakistan  would  be
    significant not only on himself but on his  family.  It  was  submitted
    that the appellant would find it difficult to find employment.

21. It was argued that depriving him of the opportunity  of  providing  for
    his family was unjustifiable in the circumstances and that  accordingly
    the judge  had  failed  to  carry  out  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise correctly.

22. On behalf of the respondent was  argued  that  taking  account  of  the
    provisions of section 117B there was no error of law. The appellant had
    had no legitimate expectation that he would be able to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and be able to continue in employment.

23. It was pointed out that the appellant had accepted that there had  been
    a break in his legal status. He had not had legal status until  it  was
    granted in May 2013. Whilst it was accepted that the appellant had been
    in the United Kingdom for a significant period of time, the  judge  has
    properly considered all the factors and was entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusions set out in the decision.

24. Reliance was placed upon the case of Rhuppiah 2018 UKSC 58 and the fact
    that  the  appellant's  status  had  throughout  been  precarious.   In
    accordance with section 117B the respondent's representative  submitted
    that little weight should be given to a private  life  developed  at  a
    time when the appellant was in the United Kingdom and  his  status  was
    precarious.

    Consideration

25. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  a  work
    permit. Whilst it  had  to  be  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had
    continued working in the United Kingdom there was a break in his lawful
    status in the United Kingdom for the period January 2010 through to May
    2013, when he was granted discretionary leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant therefore could not rely on paragraph 276B.

26. It was not asserted that the appellant otherwise met  the  requirements
    of the rules. Reliance was being placed on the appellant's private life
    outside the rules.

27. The judge has carefully considered all the elements of the  appellant's
    private life. The judge considered the appellant's work; the length  of
    time that the  appellant  had  been  in  the  UK;  his  attendance  and
    connections with the mosque.

28. The judge had properly considered all of the factors  advanced  on  the
    appellant's behalf. In paragraph 32 the judge sums  up  those  factors.
    The factors in the main related to the appellant's circumstances in the
    UK. The  judge  considered  such  and  considered  whether  there  were
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Pakistan  and
    conclude that there were no such obstacles.

29. Thereafter the judge was entitled having taken  account  of  all  those
    factors to come to the conclusion that whilst returning  the  appellant
    to Pakistan would inevitably  cause  some  disruption,  given  all  the
    circumstances that was outweighed by the factors  considered  including
    the public interest in the pursuit of  effective  immigration  control.
    The appellant had no expectation that he would be allowed to remain  in
    the UK indefinitely.

30. The appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
    The judge has properly considered all the factors  and  made  a  proper
    assessment  of  proportionality  and  was  entitled  to  come  to   the
    conclusions set out. Accordingly there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

31. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 10th December



