
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00578/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing via Teams  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 17th June 2021                |On the 29th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                TEKRAJ LIMBU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Introduction

      1. I now remake the decision concerning the appellant's appeal against
         the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him  entry  clearance   to
         accompany his father and stepmother to the United  Kingdom  ('UK'),
         dated  30  November  2018.   This  follows  my  earlier   decision,
         promulgated on 15 March 2021, that the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 29 October 2019,  dismissing  his  appeal,
         should be set aside and remade by the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

Background

      2. The appellant, a citizen of Nepal, was born in  Nepal  in  February
         1983 and is currently 38 years old.   He  continues  to  reside  in
         Nepal on his own.

      3. The appellant's father ('the sponsor') is also a citizen of  Nepal,
         who enlisted in the Gurkha Brigade of the British Army in 1969  and
         was discharged in 1985 (when the  appellant  was  under  18).   His
         application for entry clearance was made jointly with his wife (the
         appellant's  stepmother)  and   the   appellant.    The   sponsor's
         application was successful and he entered the UK with his  wife  on
         26 December 2018.  The appellant's application was unsuccessful and
         he has pursued an appeal against that decision.

Issues in dispute

      4. At the beginning of the hearing the representatives agreed that the
         legal framework applicable to the appeal is accurately set  out  in
         Mr Ahmed's helpful skeleton argument.  Given this agreement,  there
         is no need  to  repeat  the  detailed  framework  here.   Generally
         speaking, the disputed issues to be determined in  entry  clearance
         cases for the adult children of former  Gurkha  soldiers  are  two-
         fold:

          i) Is there family life between the appellant and the sponsor for
             the purposes of Article 8(1), ECHR?

         ii)  Would  refusing  of  entry  to  the  appellant  lead   to   a
             disproportionate breach under Article 8(2)?

      5. In determining the first issue in this case, I bear in mind all the
         relevant Strasbourg principles, including the following:

          i) Family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent unless  something  more  exists  than  normal
             emotional ties of love and affection.

         ii)  Voluntary  separation  does  not  end  family  life:  Sen   v
             Netherlands (2003) EHRR  7, cited in Ghising [2012]  UKUT  160
             (IAT);

        iii) The attainment of the age of  majority  does  not  end  family
             life: Etti Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 per Pill LJ;

         iv)  The  Strasbourg  Court  treats  as  presumptive  or  strongly
             indicative of family life two factors: continued  presence  in
             the family home and the fact that a dependent  child  has  not
             established a family of their own: AA  v  The  United  Kingdom
             [2012] Imm AR I at [49];

          v) Dependency  is  crucial  and  should  be  read  as  'real'  or
             'committed' or 'effective' support: Rai  v  ECO  Delhi  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 320 per Lindblom LJ at [36]-[37];

         vi) Care must be taken not to interpret the judgments in  Kugathas
             v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  31  too  restrictively.  There  is  no
             requirement for evidence of exceptional dependency;

        vii) The question of whether an individual enjoys  family  life  is
             one of fact and depends on a careful consideration of all  the
             relevant facts of a particular case. The issue is highly  fact
             sensitive and can result in different outcomes in cases  which
             have superficially similar features.

      6. As to the second issue, Ms Cunha accepted that if there was  family
         life for the purposes of Article 8(1), then the  interference  with
         it was disproportionate and the appeal would have  to  be  allowed.
         This follows the widely accepted proposition that in cases such  as
         this one,  if  there  is  Article  8(1)  family  life,  unless  the
         respondent relies on  something more than the ordinary interests of
         immigration control, such  as  criminality  or  a  bad  immigration
         history, then the weight to be given  to  the   historic  injustice
         will normally require a decision in the  appellant's  favour.    As
         the President of the UTIAC,  Lane  J,  stated  in Patel  (historic
         injustice; NIAA Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 351(IAC):

             "The effects of historic injustice on the immigration position
             of  the  individual  are   likely   to   be   profound,   even
             determinative of  success,  provided  that  there  is  nothing
             materially adverse in their immigration history."

      7. This case therefore turns entirely upon  whether  there  is  family
         life for the purposes of Article 8(1).

Evidence

      8. The appellant and the sponsor both  relied  upon  detailed  witness
         statements describing the nature and degree of their mutual support
         for each other and  in  particular  of  the  appellant's  life-long
         financial and emotional dependence  upon  the  sponsor.   Ms  Cunha
         entirely  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  been   and   remains
         financially dependent upon the sponsor and  much  of  the  evidence
         relevant to emotional dependence, in particular: the appellant  has
         always resided in the family home and continues to do  so;  he  has
         never  formed  an  independent  family  unit;  complete   financial
         dependence; the  appellant  and  sponsor  continue  to  communicate
         regularly.

      9. At the hearing before me, the sponsor confirmed the  truth  of  his
         two statements and was briefly  cross-examined  by  Ms  Cunha.   He
         explained inter alia, that: there were some relatives in Nepal  but
         they resided in remote areas and contact was therefore  infrequent;
         the appellant did  not  marry  because  he  was  unable  to  become
         financially independent; the appellant has friends but he  did  not
         know their names; he gave his phone to  a  computer  shop  to  take
         screenshots of the 'viber' contact with the appellant; he  spoke  a
         little English but the appellant spoke it well.

     10. An  issue  arose  during  the  course  of  the  sponsor's  evidence
         regarding the repetition of "last seen 49 minutes ago" in  some  of
         the 'viber' messages.  After a short break Mr Ahmed  and  Ms  Cunha
         were able to confirm the following:  there  was  no  allegation  of
         fraud or dishonesty on the part of the respondent;  the  respondent
         accepted that the messages were genuinely taken from the  sponsor's
         mobile  phone  and  there  continued  to  be  contact;  albeit  the
         respondent had concerns as to the frequency of this  contact  given
         the confusion caused by the references to  "last  seen  49  minutes
         ago".

Submissions

     11. Ms Cunha accepted that some evidence supported emotional dependency
         such as  the  financial  dependency,  where  the  appellant  always
         resided and  the  fact  they  continued  to  be  in  contact.   She
         submitted that when the evidence was viewed as a whole,  there  was
         insufficient evidence to establish real or  committed  family  life
         for the purposes of Article 8(1).

     12. Mr Ahmed  relied  upon  his  comprehensive  skeleton  argument  and
         invited me  to  find  the  evidence  of  emotional  dependency  and
         committed family life  to  be  clear  from  the  credible  evidence
         available.

     13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision, which I now  give
         with reasons.

Assessment

     14. The clear evidence from both the sponsor  and  the  appellant  both
         before the FTT and me supports their claim that notwithstanding the
         appellant's relatively advanced age, they have had at all  material
         times enjoyed family life for the purposes of Article 8(1).

     15. I heard evidence from the  sponsor  and  accept  that  he  provided
         entirely straightforward and honest evidence.   Ms  Cunha  did  not
         submit otherwise.  The sponsor candidly accepted that  he  did  not
         know the name of his son's friends but that they continued to speak
         almost daily.  Whilst that might seem contradictory, I accept  that
         as a  relatively  elderly  person  (the  sponsor  is  69  but  life
         expectancy in Nepal is now 71), the sponsor has focussed  on  other
         more immediate matters relevant to this appellant.

     16. I  entirely  accept  the  evidence  from  the  sponsor,  which  was
         supported  by  the  witness  statements  of   the   appellant   and
         documentary evidence.  Whilst  there  was  a  degree  of  confusion
         arising from the 'viber' messaging and the references to "last seen
         49 minutes ago", when this is considered  alongside  the  remaining
         evidence, I am satisfied that the evidence as a whole  demonstrates
         genuine, continued, regular  and  meaningful  contact  between  the
         appellant and sponsor.   In  this  regard  I  note  that  there  is
         evidence that this type of communication has taken place since  the
         sponsor came to the UK in December 2018.

     17. Having considered all  of  the  evidence  I  accept  the  following
         matters:

          a. For the entirety of his life the appellant has been completely
             financially dependent upon the sponsor because he has not able
             to find employment in Nepal;

          b. The appellant was adversely  affected  by  the  death  of  his
             mother (the sponsor's first wife) when he was 21, and this has
             significantly contributed to the particular closeness  between
             father and son;

          c. At all material times and up until the sponsor came to the  UK
             in 2018, father and son lived together as  part  of  the  same
             household;

          d. Since then there has been regular substantial contact  between
             them;

          e. The sponsor has effectively illustrated the unusual degree  of
             dependence on the part of the  appellant  upon  him,  which  I
             accept,   by   contrasting   this   relationship   with    his
             relationships with his other three children, who have all been
             able to achieve independence upon becoming adults;

          f. The  family  were separated  by  circumstance and for  reasons
             relating  to   the   history   of   the   respondent's  Gurkha
             policies and the  family's  limited financial resources;  this
             historic injustice has meant that it is inaccurate to describe
             the sponsor's migration and the  physical  separation  of  the
             family unit as having been undertaken by choice - see  Rai  at
             [38];

          g. The  appellant's  circumstances  remain  unchanged  since  the
             sponsor was in Nepal living with him as part of a family unit.
             The appellant remains unmarried,  out  of  work  and  entirely
             financially dependent upon the sponsor).  If  anything,  their
             emotional dependence upon each other has  increased:  life  in
             Nepal has become miserable and insecure due  to  the  Covid-19
             pandemic and the sponsor has become older and frailer.   These
             circumstances have led to  an  increase  in  mutual  emotional
             dependency, which can now be described as significant;

          h. This emotional dependency has intensified in a manner that  is
             consistent with the appellant's background and culture.  He is
             expected and wishes to look after his parents as they age.

     18. I am satisfied that it is more likely than not that there has  been
         real,
         effective and committed  support  between  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor at all material times and this continues now.  It therefore
         follows that there is family life for the purposes of Article 8(1).

     19. I accept the submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
         decision is disproportionate.  Ms Cunha accepted that there are  no
         countervailing considerations that could assist the respondent, and
         in the circumstances if I found that  Article  8(1)  was  met,  the
         balancing exercise fell to be decided in  the  appellant's  favour.
         Forcing the sponsor to choose between the  appellant's  company  in
         Nepal or the settlement he should have enjoyed long  ago  would  be
         unduly harsh.  It is clear from the evidence that but for  historic
         injustice the sponsor would have settled in the UK at a  time  when
         the appellant would have been able to accompany him.

     20. I note that it is in the public interest that immigrants to the  UK
         speak English and are financially independent (see sections 117B(1)
         - (3) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).   I
         accept the sponsor's evidence that the appellant can speak  English
         and wishes to obtain employment as a security guard. The former  is
         a neutral factor and the latter is not assured  given  his  lengthy
         period of unemployment.  I must weigh this against  the  appellant,
         in the Article 8  proportionality  assessment, together  with  the
         public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective   immigration
         controls.  However because of the historic  injustice,  the  weight
         attached to the public interest is reduced, and outweighed  by  the
         strength of the family life between the appellant and the sponsor.

Decision

     21. I allow the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                            Dated: 17 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
