
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/00490/2019

                                                HU/00507/2019

                                                HU/00498/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2019                          | On 8 August 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mr G S
                                   mrs H K
                                  MISS A K
          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE IN RESPECT OF THIRD RESPONDENT)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Tramboo, Counsel, instructed by Shireen Tramboo
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. This case concerns the issue of whether in order to  be  accepted  in  an
appeal as stateless a person must show they have taken reasonable  steps  to
show they have sought to  acquire  a  nationality  to  which  they  have  an
entitlement dependent upon making an application.


2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD)  has  permission
to challenge the decision of Judge Havard of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
sent on 3 April 2019 allowing on human rights  grounds  the  appeal  of  the
claimants, the first  and  second  being  citizens  of  India,  against  the
decision of the SSHD made on 18 December  2018  refusing  leave  to  remain.
Although finding that the first and second claimants lacked credibility  and
had not shown there would be very significant obstacles to their  return  to
India, the judge allowed the appeal of all three because  he  was  satisfied
the third claimant, Miss A K, born in the UK in July  2016,  was  stateless.
In their application for leave to remain of 3 July 2018  the  claimants  had
not raised the statelessness issue and correspondingly  the  SSHD's  refusal
decision made no mention of it.  It  was  first  raised  in  the  claimants'
grounds of appeal against the SSHD's decision.  The judge (before  whom  the
claimants were appellants) reasoned at paragraphs 155-162:

         "155.    I am satisfied that, had it not been for the birth of  the
             Third Appellant on [...] July 2016, there are  no  exceptional
             circumstances which would mean that it would be  proportionate
             to allow the  appeals  of  the  First  and  Second  Appellants
             outside of the Immigration Rules and I  would  have  dismissed
             their appeals.  I repeat, in particular, paragraphs 122 to 125
             above.


         156. However, in the absence of any evidence  to  the  contrary,  I
             must  approach  this  matter  on  the  basis  that  the  Third
             Appellant, whom I have found to be  stateless,  would  not  be
             permitted entry into India.  This means  that  if  I  were  to
             dismiss the appeals of the First and Second Appellants, it may
             lead to circumstances  in  which,  without  any  other  family
             support in the UK, the Third  Appellant,  who  will  be  three
             years old in July 2019, would be taken into the  care  of  the
             local authority.


         157. Ms Arnesen submitted that there must be someone in a  position
             to care for the Third Appellant whilst the  First  and  Second
             Appellant return to India in order to regularise the position.
              However, without any evidence to support such  a  submission,
             this is far too speculative when considering  the  welfare  of
             the child.


         158. Whilst I have  already  commented  on  my  assessment  of  the
             conduct of the First and Second Appellants, it is clearly  not
             in the best interests of the Third Appellant to  be  separated
             from her parents.  Despite the decisions they made with regard
             to their elder daughter, there is no evidence to suggest there
             are concerns with regard to their parenting of  their  younger
             daughter.


         159. In considering the question of proportionality in a democratic
             society when assessing the legitimate aim to  be  achieved,  I
             have considered the public interest considerations  which  are
             set out in  the  Immigration  Act  2014  and,  in  particular,
             Sections 117A and B of the Act as set out above.


         160. I am satisfied on the facts that the proposed removal  of  the
             First and Second Appellants would amount to an interference in
             the family life  of  the  Third  Appellant  which  would  have
             consequences of such gravity as to  engage  the  operation  of
             Article 8 and would be in breach of Section  55  of  the  2009
             Act.


         161. In my judgement, when considering all the circumstances in the
             round, in assessing proportionality, I find that, in  carrying
             out  a  balancing  exercise,  the  public  interest   in   the
             maintenance of effective immigration control is outweighed  by
             the Appellants' rights to a family  life  and  this  is  based
             primarily on the assessment of what is in the  best  interests
             of the Third Appellant.


         162. For these  reasons,  I  find  that,  taken  as  whole,  it  is
             disproportionate to remove  the  Appellants  from  the  United
             Kingdom.  To refuse this appeal would cause the United Kingdom
             to be in breach of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1986  and
             the Appellants succeed in their appeal under Article 8 ECHR."

3. The SSHD's  grounds  are  confined  to  the  contention  that  the  judge
misdirected himself in law in respect of his  finding  regarding  the  third
appellant's statelessness.  Having found  (i)  that  the  first  and  second
claimants had not taken reasonable steps to try and register  the  birth  of
their daughter with the Indian High Commission and  (ii)  that  indeed  they
acted in bad faith, the grounds assert that the judge should not  have  made
a finding that the third claimant was stateless.   The  judge's  finding  of
statelessness was said to be contrary to the  'Bradshaw  principle  and  the
guidance given by Kitchin LJ in AS (Guinea) [2018] EWCA Civ 2234 at [57]:

         "57. These authorities reveal a consistent line  of  reasoning.   A
             person claiming to  be  stateless  must  take  all  reasonably
             practicable steps to gather together and submit all  documents
             and other materials which evidence his  or  her  identity  and
             residence in the state or states in issue, and which otherwise
             bear upon his or her nationality.  The applicant ought also to
             apply for nationality of the state or states with which he  or
             she has the closest connection.  Generally,  these  are  steps
             that can be taken without any risk.  If, in the words of Elias
             LJ, the  applicant  comes  up  against  a  brick  wall,  then,
             depending on the reasons given, the  adjudicator  will  decide
             whether the applicant has established statelessness, and  will
             do so on the balance of probabilities.  Of course,  from  time
             to time, there may be cases where it would not  be  reasonable
             to expect the applicant to take  this  course,  and  in  those
             cases the Secretary of State  will  assist  the  applicant  by
             making enquiries on his or her behalf but again  there  is  no
             reason why the issue of statelessness cannot be decided on the
             balance of probabilities.  By contrast, in refugee  cases,  it
             is necessary to make an assessment of what may happen  in  the
             future in another country, and whether the applicant  faces  a
             real risk of persecution there.  This is a very different kind
             of assessment and it is one which, by  its  nature,  justifies
             the adoption of a different and lower standard  of  proof.   I
             recognise that, as the appellant and UNHCR  contend  in  their
             sixth submission, many of the cases to which I  have  referred
             were decided before the promulgation by UNHCR of the  guidance
             in 2012 and the Handbook  in  2014  but  in  my  judgment  the
             reasoning   in   these   decisions    remains    robust    and
             authoritative."

4. In AS(Guinea) Kitchin LJ at [48] summarised the case of R v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department Ex parte Valentina Bradshaw [1994] Imm Ar 359
(hereafter Bradshaw) as follows:


         "[M]s Bradshaw, a citizen of the  former  USSR,  had  been  granted
         indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a result of her
         fraudulent misrepresentations but asserted that she  was  stateless
         and so could not be removed. Lord MacLean,  sitting  in  the  Outer
         House of the Court  of  Session,  found  that  she  had  failed  to
         establish that she was a stateless person and that before she could
         be said to be stateless within the meaning of Article 1 of the 1954
         Convention, she would have had to apply to those states which might
         consider her to be and might accept her as a national, and that she
         had not done."


At [49] Kitchin LJ went on to cite the description given  of  the  'Bradshaw
principle'  by  Henriques  J  in  R  (on  the  application  of  Tewolde)   v
Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWHC 162: "namely,  that  a  person  who
claims to be stateless must apply for the citizenship of  any  country  with
which she has a close connection and  must  be  refused  before  he  can  be
entitled to reside in this country."


Analysis

5. Before proceeding to evaluate the SSHD's ground, it is necessary  to  set
out certain agreed matters.

6. It is not in dispute before me  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  third
claimant is stateless falls to be decided by reference to the meaning  of  a
"stateless person" as set out in Article 1(1)  of  the  1954  UN  Convention
Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, namely "a  person  who  is  not
considered as a national by any state under the operation of its  law":  see
paragraph 401 of the Immigration Rules.

7. It is also not in dispute before me that if the third  claimant  had  any
nationality at the date of hearing it could only  be  Indian:  she  was  not
eligible for British nationality (or any other nationality)  at  that  point
in time (nor still).

8. Nor does Ms Everett before me take any issue with the analysis of  Indian
nationality law as set out by Mr  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
Tribunal,  in R (on the application  of  MK)  (a  child  by  her  litigation
friend CAE v SSHD) [2017] EWHC 1365 (Admin) (hereafter MK) at paragraph 9:

         "9.  Proceeding then on the basis of the material before me I  find
             the following facts in relation to the  relevant  Indian  law.
             Indian citizenship is acquired by descent, and  a  child  born
             outside India after 1992 is a citizen of India by  descent  if
             either of the child's parents was at the time of his  birth  a
             citizen of India other than  by  descent.   If,  however,  the
             birth was outside India on or after 3 December 2004 (the  date
             of  commencement  of  the  Citizenship  (Amendment)  Act  2003
             (India)) the child is  not  a  citizen  unless  the  birth  is
             registered at an Indian consulate 'in such form  and  in  such
             manner as may be prescribed.'  If the  registration  is  after
             the child's first birthday it needs  'the  permission  of  the
             Central Government'.  In  either  case  the  parents  have  to
             declare, also 'in such form and  in  such  manner  as  may  be
             prescribed', that the child does not hold the passport of  any
             other country.  There is no  suggestion  that  citizenship  is
             granted from the date of registration: it is obtained  by  the
             birth, provided that the birth is registered."

9. I turn then to consider the SSHD's ground. The judge's finding  was  that
at the date of the hearing the third claimant was stateless because she  had
not been registered as a citizen of India at the High  Commission  of  India
and therefore  did  not  fall  within  the  personal  scope  of  the  Indian
Citizenship Act, 1955 as amended. The judge  considered  that  this  finding
was supported by the judgment of Mr Ockelton in MK.

10. In MK Mr Ockelton cited the Supreme Court decision in Al-Jeddah  v  SSHD
[2013] UKSC 62.  At paragraphs 31 to 37 he stated:

         "31. As I have made clear, these decisions are not specifically  on
             statelessness as it applies in paragraph 3 of  Schedule  2  to
             the 1981 Act.  They are on statelessness as it  applies  in  s
             40(4) of the same Act.  Before me, Mr Brown's  clear  argument
             was that the Supreme Court's decision  in  Al-Jeddah  was  not
             applicable to the present case because the guidance  to  which
             Lord Wilson refers at [34], and which he evidently regarded as
             the coup de grace to the Secretary of State's argument in that
             case, is applicable only to "persons who have no  other  right
             to remain in the UK but who cannot  be  removed  because  they
             would not be admitted  to  another  country  for  purposes  of
             residence to allowed to stay"  and  so  cannot  apply  to  the
             claimant because she would be admitted  with  her  parents  to
             India.


         32.  I am afraid that will not do.  The guidance, in 'Asylum Policy
             Instruction:  Statelessness  and  applications  for  leave  to
             remain' (the current edition is 18 February  2016)  indeed  is
             not specifically  on  point,  as  it  is  concerned  with  the
             application of Part 14 (paragraphs 401 and following)  of  the
             Immigration Rules and not of either of the statutory provision
             I am looking at.  But, as I have already noted, paragraph  401
             expressly incorporates the 1954 Convention's  definition  into
             the Rules, and this guidance is on how to apply the Rules.  It
             is necessarily implicit that this guidance on the  meaning  of
             'statelessness' within the Rules, and furthermore, because  of
             paragraph 401, is the Secretary of  State's  understanding  of
             the meaning of  statelessness  under  art  1(1)  of  the  1954
             Convention.


         33.  The point being made by Lord Wilson is that it is the  UNHCR's
             guidance on the meaning of statelessness for the  purposes  of
             art 1(1) of the 1954 Convention that has been adopted into the
             Secretary of State's own guidance [the  guidance  referred  to
             here is the 2014 UNHCR Handbook  on  Protection  of  Stateless
             Persons under the 1954 Convention].  The date of the  guidance
             excluded it from consideration in relation  to  the  decision-
             making in Al-Jeddah itself.   But  the  Court  makes  its  own
             decision on the meaning of statelessness at that  time  within
             the context of s40(4) and does so as  a  matter  of  statutory
             interpretation against the background of the Conventions  [the
             two Conventions referred to here are the 1954  Convention  and
             the Convention on the 1961 Reduction  of  Statelessness].   It
             then notes that the UNHCR Guidance produces the  same  result,
             and has been adopted by the Secretary of State.


         34.  Now it is clearly open to the Secretary of  State  and  indeed
             anybody else to say that the notion of having  no  nationality
             for the purposes of the Refugee Convention is  different  from
             that of statelessness for the purposes  of  the  Statelessness
             Conventions and  any  associated  national  legislation.   The
             terms are different, and the  context  is  different:  in  the
             Refugee Convention the essential  context  is  the  threat  of
             expulsion and issues of destination are crucial,  whereas  the
             statelessness issue is in essence static.  It would also  have
             been open to the Secretary of State to say in  the  course  of
             either the Al-Jeddah litigation or  this  case  that  for  the
             purposes of the legislation respectively  under  consideration
             the meaning of  statelessness  within  art  1(1)  was  neither
             determinative nor directly relevant.  Our  law  is  a  dualist
             system, and neither the 1954 nor the 1961  Convention  has  as
             such been incorporated, so the Conventions are not part of the
             law, and the UNHCR guidance is not a  source  of  English  (or
             United Kingdom) law.


         35.  What the Secretary of State is not entitled in my judgment  to
             do is to say that in  both  s40(4)  of,  and  paragraph  3  of
             Schedule 2 to, the 1981 Act, and in Part 14 of the Immigration
             Rules, the notion of statelessness  is  to  be  determined  in
             accordance  with  its  meaning  in  art  1(1)  of   the   1954
             Convention, but  that  it  has  different  meanings  in  those
             different provisions.  But that is what she seeks to  do.   In
             Al-Jeddah there is no sign, so far as  I  can  see,  that  the
             Secretary of State argued that 'stateless'  in  s40(4)  should
             not have the same meaning as in the 1954 Convention: the  crux
             of the argument was on surrounding issues, that is to say  the
             procedure of determining  the  issue  and  the  cause  of  the
             statelessness.  The Secretary of State's guidance on  Part  14
             of the Rules, which needs to follow the meaning of the term in
             the 1954 Convention, makes it clear that she applies the UNHCR
             guidance on the meaning of 'stateless'.  In the present  case,
             as noted above, it is specifically conceded that  the  meaning
             of statelessness is to be determined in the same  way.   There
             is no room for  applying  a  different  meaning.   'Stateless'
             means, in the provision with which I am concerned, the same as
             it means in the provision with which  the  Supreme  Court  was
             concerned in Al-Jeddah.  What it means in those provisions  is
             determined  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Al-Jeddah,  which  is
             obviously binding on me.  The Secretary of State has made  the
             matter even plainer by her adoption of the UNHCR  guidance  in
             relation to decisions made  in  under  the  Rules.   The  same
             meaning must apply to all the cases in which the matter is  to
             be  determined  in  accordance  with  the   meaning   in   the
             Convention.


             Conclusion on  the  meaning  and  effect  of  paragraph  3  of
             Schedule 2 to the 1981 Act.


         36.  The conclusions from what is set out  above  are  as  follows.
             For the purposes of the statutory provision in issue, a person
             is stateless if he has no nationality.  Ability to  acquire  a
             nationality is irrelevant for these purposes.  A child born on
             or after 3 December 2004, outside India, of parents  at  least
             one of whom is an Indian national, and who  has  not  been  to
             India, is not an Indian national unless  registration  of  the
             birth has taken place in accordance with the provisions of the
             Citizenship Act 1955 (India) as amended.  If the child has  no
             other nationality, the child is stateless for the purposes  of
             paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to the British Nationality Act  1981
             and, if the other requirements of that paragraph are  met,  is
             entitled  to  be  registered  as  a  British   citizen.    If,
             therefore, C's birth had on the date  of  the  decision  under
             challenge not been registered,  she  is  entitled  to  British
             Citizenship


         37.  I recognise of course that this conclusion  opens  an  obvious
             route to abuse.  Indeed, the facts of the present  case  might
             be said to  be  an  example  of  abuse.   M  and  F  are  both
             overstayers.  Both have  sought,  and  been  refused,  further
             leave.  They have preferred to allow C to be stateless all her
             life to date rather than to  register  her  birth  and  obtain
             Indian  nationality  for  her.   Yet  C's  right  to   British
             nationality (and the consequence  that  she  will  not  be  or
             become a national of India) will now  immeasurably  improve  M
             and F's prospects of being  allowed  to  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  But the Secretary of State's position in  this  case
             on the one hand, and the authorities on the other, necessarily
             lead to this result."


11. The UNHCR Guidance being referred to by the Supreme Court was the
"Guidelines on Statelessness No 1" issued on the 20 February 2012
HCR/GS/12/01. In Al-Jeddah at [34] Lord Wilson noted that in these
guidelines the High Commissioner:
     " addressed some of the effects of the authoritative definition  of  a
    stateless person in article 1(1) of the 1954 Convention. Para 43 of his
    guidelines, entitled "Temporal Issues", has been incorporated, word for
    word, into the Home Office  guidance  on  "Applications  for  leave  to
    remain as a stateless person" dated 1 May 2013, referred to at para  13
    above."
12. Lord Wilson then went on to quote para 3.4 of this guidance:
     "3.4 ... An individual's nationality is to be assessed as at the  time
    of determination of  eligibility  under  the  1954  Convention.  It  is
    neither a historic nor  a  predictive  exercise.  The  question  to  be
    answered  is  whether,  at  the  point  of  making  an   Article   1(1)
    determination, an individual is a national of the country or  countries
    in question. Therefore, if an individual is partway through  a  process
    for acquiring nationality but those procedures have not been completed,
    he or she cannot be considered  as  a  national  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 1(1) of the 1954 Convention. Similarly, where  requirements  or
    procedures for loss, deprivation or renunciation  of  nationality  have
    not been completed, the individual is still a national for the purposes
    of the stateless person definition."
13. The conclusion of Lord Wilson, with  whom  Lord  Neuberger,  Lady  Hale,
Lord Mance and Lord Carnwath agreed, was that that  since  the  Home  Office
had incorporated the UNHCR guidance on this issue into his own guidance,  it
was not open to the Secretary of  State  to  bring  an  argument  which  was
contrary to that policy.

14. I derive from the above cases, the following.
15. First, although the specific issue being decided in Al_Jeddah  concerned
whether an order made pursuant to section 40(2) of the  British  Nationality
Act 1981was valid if it would render a person stateless,  the ratio  of  the
decision was that the approach to nationality has to be what  I  shall  term
an 'actual  nationality' approach, according to which nationality  -  or  in
this case the lack of nationality -  is  to  be  assessed  at  the  time  of
decision by reference to whether a person has the nationality of a state  by
operation of its law. The SSHD had sought to  appeal  the  decision  of  the
Court of Appeal which had been expressed by Richards LJ as follows:
    "121. I  would  reject  the  Secretary  of  State's  argument  for  the
    straightforward reason that section 40(4)  requires  the  Secretary  of
    State (and, on appeal, the court) to consider the effect of  the  order
    made under section 40(2): would the order make the person stateless? If
    Iraqi nationality was not restored to the appellant automatically under
    the Iraqi legislation considered above, he was not an Iraqi national at
    the time of the order: his only nationality at that  time  was  British
    nationality. The effect of the order would therefore  be  to  make  him
    stateless. That would be  the  effect  of  the  order  irrespective  of
    whether he could previously have acquired another  nationality  had  he
    chosen to do so, or whether he could do so in the future."
16. In Al-Jeddah the challenge advanced by the Secretary to this ruling  was
that  the  approach  should  be  one  of  what  I  shall   term   "potential
nationality' (meaning nationality which a person does not  possess  but  has
an  entitlement  by  way  of  making  an  application  and  satisfying   the
authorities of that state that they meet  the  relevant  requirements).  The
Supreme Court rejected this as being both wrong in law and contrary  to  the
Secretary of State's own guidance on statelessness.
17. Second, it was the "actual nationality" approach of  the  Supreme  Court
in Al-Jeddah that Mr Ockelton applied in MK.

18. Third, the 'actual nationality' approach was confirmed by Mr  Ockelton's
confirmation in MK of an  'actual  nationality'  approach  in  the  specific
context of a child of Indian parents who had  not  as  yet  acquired  Indian
nationality, which was a form of  acquisition  dependent  upon  application.
Even though the issue in MK was focussed on whether the child  was  eligible
for British nationality under the 1981 Act, Mr Ockelton  correctly  explains
why, whether the legal framework is statelessness  under  the  1981  Act  or
statelessness under the Immigration Act and Rules, it is the  definition  of
statelessness set out in Article 1(1) of the 1954 Convention that applies.

19. Fourth, it was the 'actual nationality' approach taken in  MK  that  was
applied by the judge in the instant appeal.

20. What has thus to be decided by me is whether the decision  made  by  the
Court of Appeal in  AS(Guinea)  requires  a  different  view  to  be  taken.
AS(Guinea) not only post-dates MK but is a Court of Appeal decision.

21. In my judgement AS(Guinea) cannot be relied upon in the  way  sought  by
the SSHD in this appeal. There are two main reasons.
The ratio of AS (Guinea)
22. First of all, I consider it doubtful  that  the  ratio  of  AS  (Guinea)
endorses a 'potential nationality' approach, for a number of reasons:
    (i) the issue of whether the approach to determination  of  nationality
    (or lack of it) should be either an 'actual' or 'potential' nationality
    approach was not identified as an issue in the case: at [2] Kitchin  LJ
    stated that:
          "the appeal raises two points of principle: first, the standard of
         proof applicable to the determination of whether a person qualifies
         for the status of  a  stateless  person  as  defined  in  the  1954
         Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons  ("the  1954
         Convention"); and secondly, the  relevance  of  a  finding  that  a
         person is stateless  to  an  assessment  carried  out  pursuant  to
         paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules.";
    (ii) there is nothing to suggest that their lordships were directed  to
    the decision of the Supreme Court in Al-Jeddah;
    (iii) the Court of Appeal appears to have proceeded on the  basis  that
    the UNHCR guidance  should  be  accorded  "considerable  weight",  even
    though, as we know from Al-Jeddah,  that  guidance  adopts  an  'actual
    nationality' approach;
    (iv) at the time the case came before the Court  of  Appeal,  the  Home
    Office guidance remained the same and, as noted above, it endorsed  the
    UNHCR approach;
    (v) the principal passage of AS(Guinea) relied upon by the SSHD in this
    appeal is capable of being read as  being  concerned  with  a  rule  of
    evidence rather than as  a  pronouncement  about  basic  principles  of
    nationality law; and
    (vi)  I agree with Mr Ockelton that the 'Bradshaw principle' is capable
    of being read as a rule of evidence only.
The authority of Al-Jeddah
23. My other main reason for considering that the SSHD's grounds  cannot  be
relied upon in the manner sought is that, even assuming AS(Guinea)  is  read
as requiring that the approach to nationality be a  'potential  nationality'
approach, there is,  as  we  have  seen,  Supreme  Court  authority  to  the
contrary; and, by the doctrine of judicial precedent, if the Upper  Tribunal
is faced with two conflicting authorities, one from  the  Court  of  Appeal,
one from the Supreme Court, it must follow the latter.  Uncomfortable as  it
would be if AS(Guinea) is read in this way, that would seem to me  the  only
conclusion open to me to reach.

24. To conclude, it cannot be an error of law for a tribunal judge to  apply
an 'actual nationality' approach to  the  issue  of  whether  someone  is  a
stateless person within the meaning of the 1954 Convention,  since  that  is
the approach enjoined by  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Al-Jeddah.  The
subsequent Court of Appeal decision in AS  (Guinea)  has  not  altered  this
position.

The abuse issue

25. As Ms Everett made  clear  in  her  submissions,  there  is  an  obvious
concern on the part of the SSHD about the potential for  abuse,  illustrated
in her view by the facts of this case,  the  judge  having  found  that  the
first  two  claimants  had  exercised  bad  faith  in  failing  to  make  an
application to the Indian High Commission on  behalf  of  their  child,  the
third claimant.   As Mr Ockelton pointed out in MK,  the  current  state  of
the law opens up an obvious route to abuse and on the findings of the  judge
in the instant case the child's parents have deliberately avoided lodging  a
proper application. At the same time, whichever position is taken  regarding
acquisition of nationality - either the 'actual nationality' approach  taken
by the Supreme Court  or  the  'potential  nationality'  approach  seemingly
espoused by the SSHD's grounds - there will be  the  possibility  of   abuse
(as an example  of  abuse  in  the  context  of  a  'potential  nationality'
approach, consider a stateless applicant for refugee  status  whose  country
of former habitual residence is entirely safe but who has the  potential  to
apply for and obtain the nationality of another state which has just  become
unsafe (because, let us suppose, of a coup). If  a  'potential  nationality'
approach is applied, he or she may be able to require  the  SSHD  to  assess
risk on return by reference to the country of  potential  nationality,  even
if this person's only motive for considering this possibility  is  to  avoid
being assessed by reference  to  his  or  her  country  of  former  habitual
residence.

26. Further, proper application of the 'Bradshaw principle'  should  largely
prevent abuse, if fully operated as a rule  of  evidence.  Applied  in  this
way, the SSHD is entitled upon receipt  of  an  application  for  asylum  or
leave to remain to  require  the  applicant  to  take  reasonable  steps  to
acquire a potential nationality, so that the decision on the application  is
not made until the result of those efforts is known.

27. I accept that this option is not open to a tribunal  judge.    Once  the
decision has been made and an appeal lodged, the task of  the  judge  is  to
decide whether as a matter of fact the appellant concerned is  stateless  at
the date of decision. However, it would be open to the SSHD upon receipt  of
an applicant's appeal to withdraw the decision and issue  a  fresh  decision
and, before doing so, request the applicant to produce  evidence  that  they
had applied to the  relevant  Embassy/consulate  using  due  diligence.   By
those means the  'Bradshaw  principle'  is  still  operated  as  a  rule  of
evidence, requiring the applicant to prove statelessness.

28. Given that the SSHD's sole ground comprised a  challenge  based  on  the
Bradshaw principle, I can see no alternative to rejecting the SSHD's  ground
of appeal and upholding the decision of the FtT Judge.

29. In  case  this  matter  is  taken  further,  I  would  add  two  further
observations.

30. The first relates to the judge's comments at paragraphs 140-143:

         "140.    I also do not accept the evidence of the First and  Second
             Appellants with regard to their failure to make an application
             online and the fact that in their purported three  visits,  no
             one at the  High  Commission  mentioned  to  them  the  online
             process.


         141. However, I refer to the document entitled "Birth  registration
             of children eligible for Indian Nationality"  (AB130  to  134)
             and particularly the documents that would have to  be  annexed
             with a duly completed online application form.   At  paragraph
             vii,  it  states  "Visa  status:  copy  of  passport   page/UK
             Residents Permit  Card  showing  the  visa  status  should  be
             enclosed."


         142. It is not in dispute that neither the  First  nor  the  Second
             Appellant holds a valid visa entitling them to remain  in  the
             UK.


         143. As a consequence, whilst wholly unsatisfactory, there is  some
             force in the submission made by Mr Reynolds that, even had  an
             application been  lodged,  it  would  have  been  a  fruitless
             endeavour as neither the First nor Second  Appellants  have  a
             valid visa."

31. Leaving aside that the judge does  not  appear  to  have  been  entirely
consistent  as  to  whether  a  valid  visa  for  the  UK  was  a  mandatory
requirement under India nationality law (contrast paragraph 143  above  with
paragraph 163), the fact  that  there  exists  an  online  document  on  the
website of the  Indian  High  Commission  entitled  "Birth  registration  of
children eligible for Indian  nationality"  stating  that  documentation  of
visa status "should be enclosed" does not demonstrate that a valid  visa  is
a  mandatory  requirement.   It  would  be  at  least  curious   if   Indian
nationality by descent were  made  dependent  on  prospective  beneficiaries
complying with the immigration  law  of  foreign  countries.   At  the  very
least, the judge should have  sought  more  evidence  regarding  this  issue
before  deciding  that  an  application  "would  have   been   a   fruitless
endeavour."

32. The second matter concerns what the judge said at paragraph 156:

         "156.    However, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I
             must  approach  this  matter  on  the  basis  that  the  Third
             Appellant, whom I have found to be  stateless,  would  not  be
             permitted entry into India.  This means  that  if  I  were  to
             dismiss the appeals of the First and Second Appellants, it may
             lead to circumstances  in  which,  without  any  other  family
             support in the UK, the Third  Appellant,  who  will  be  three
             years old in July 2019, would be taken into the  care  of  the
             local authority."

33. It is difficult to see any evidential basis for the  judge's  assessment
that the third claimant  would  not  be  permitted  entry  into  India.  The
absence of evidence to the contrary did not amount to  evidence  that  entry
would not be permitted.  Whether that is correct has  to  be  a  matter  for
evidence. Whether  the  Indian  authorities  would  refuse  a  visa  to  the
legitimate child born to two Indian citizens (who were born  and  had  lived
in India for a considerable period  before  they  came  to  the  UK)  simply
because the child was stateless, was a question of fact.

34. On the basis of the above observations, the judge  made  two  errors  of
law.  However, as already noted, the  SSHD's  grounds  did  not  allege  any
error in either respect.  Hence I maintain my decision  to  uphold  the  FtT
Judge's decision.

35. To conclude:


    The judge did not materially err in law.  Accordingly, his decision  to
    allow the appeal must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  third  claimant
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify this claimant or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies  both  to  the  third  claimant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 5 August 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
