
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00924/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                        |On 16 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           offor daniel okpanachi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. O. Adebayo, David & Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walters, promulgated on 11 December 2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The respondent at the second page of the reasons for her  decision
         found that the  appellant  did  not  "currently"  meet  eligibility
         ("immigration status") requirements.  In  so  doing,  the  relevant
         time was taken  as  that  of  the  application,  29/10/15,  not  of
         decision, 17/12/15.


         Between those dates, on  18/11/15,  the  appellant  was  placed  on
         temporary admission.


         The appellant appealed to the FtT on the  basis  that  he  met  the
         eligibility requirements when he applied.  However, the  issues  of
         the legally relevant date, and of the correct  application  of  the
         "immigration status requirements" in appendix FM, do  not  seem  to
         have been well focused in the FtT by either party.


         The Judge found at paragraph 14 that it did  not  matter  that  the
         appellant was on temporary release because he  arrived  in  the  UK
         more than 6 months prior to  his  application.   That  is  not  the
         reason the respondent gave, and arguably not a good one in terms of
         the rules."

 3. The Appellant and Sponsor attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Error of Law

 4. It was established at the outset of  the  hearing  that  there  was  no
    agreement between the Appellant  and  Respondent  as  to  the  "legally
    relevant date".  I have carefully considered whether the date on  which
    the Appellant's immigration status fell to be considered was  the  date
    of application or the date of decision.  The Respondent did not address
    this specifically in the reasons for  refusal  letter,  but  considered
    whether paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 applied at the date of decision.


 5. It was submitted by Mr. Adebayo, by way  of  comparison  to  the  other
    requirements, that the immigration status requirement was  relevant  as
    at the date of application not decision.

 6. Ms. Fijiwala provided the "Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules"
    dated 29 October 2015.  She referred to the third paragraph on  page  2
    which states as follows:

         "The changes to Part 8 and Appendix FM set out in paragraphs 8.1 to
         8.2 and FM1 to FM8 of the  statement  shall  take  effect  from  19
         November 2015 and apply to all applications  decided  on  or  after
         that date regardless of the date of application."

 7. She then referred me  to  page  39.   Under  the  heading  "Changes  to
    Appendix FM" at FM5 it provides for the substitution  of  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.2.2 (a).  The version which is to apply is that as set out by  the
    Respondent in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   I  find  that  the
    Statement of Changes makes clear  that,  from  19  November  2015,  the
    substituted version of  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.2(a)  as  set  out  in  the
    Statement of Changes applies at the date of decision, not at  the  date
    of application, irrespective of when the application was made.

 8. I therefore find that, although at the time of application, 29  October
    2015, the Appellant was not on temporary release, by the  time  of  the
    decision, 17 December 2015, when paragraph  E-LTRP.2.2(a)  fell  to  be
    considered, he was on temporary release.  Therefore, in order  to  meet
    paragraph E-LTRP.2.2(a), he must have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    more than six months prior to the date  of  application  and  paragraph
    EX.1  must  apply.   There  is  therefore  no  error  in  the   Judge's
    consideration of this paragraph, and  the  Respondent  was  correct  to
    consider the position of the Appellant as at the date of the  decision.
    There is therefore no error in the Judge  considering  the  Appellant's
    appeal with reference to paragraph EX.1.

 9. It appears from the decision, as  was  referred  to  in  the  grant  of
    permission, that there was no full discussion  of  this  point  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However,  with  reference  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes which  makes  clear  that  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.2  falls  to  be
    considered as at the date of decision for all applications  decided  on
    or after 19 November 2015, regardless of the date of  application,  the
    "legally relevant date" was the date of decision.

10. The Judge set out at [12] the Appellant's  representative's  submission
    that "at the time of the visit  of  the  Immigration  Officers  to  the
    Appellant's home on 18.11.15 the Appellant had only been without  leave
    since 22.10.15".  I find that this does  not  make  any  difference  to
    consideration of paragraph E-LTRP.2.2(a).  At [14] the Judge states:

         "I therefore find that it matters not that  the  Appellant  was  on
         Temporary Release because the Appellant had  arrived  in  the  U.K.
         more than six months prior to the date  of  application  (29.10.15)
         and therefore the only remaining issue is  whether  paragraph  EX.1
         applies."

11. The way that the Judge has phrased  this  is  not  particularly  clear,
    given that it does matter that the Appellant was on temporary  release.
    However, it is not material as the Judge correctly identified that  the
    only issue remaining is whether paragraph EX.1 applies.

12. He considered paragraph EX.1 at [15] to [21].  Ms.  Fijiwala  submitted
    that there had been  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of
    paragraph EX.1, and there was no error of law in his consideration.   I
    considered the grounds of appeal before me, and at  [4],  [6]  and  [7]
    there is reference to paragraph EX.1.  There is no error identified  at
    [4] as I have found above  that  the  Judge  was  correct  to  consider
    paragraph EX.1.  At [6] it states that the Judge erred in  law  in  his
    assessment of  whether  it  was  unreasonable  or  not  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the UK.  At [7] it states that he erred at [15] where he
    stated that the only issue was whether there would be very  significant
    difficulties for the Appellant and his  wife  continuing  their  family
    life outside the UK.

13. While I accept that the Judge has not used the  phrase  "insurmountable
    obstacles" as set out in paragraph EX.1(b), this does not matter as  at
    [15] he has referred to the definition of "insurmountable obstacles" as
    set out in  paragraph  EX.2.   There  is  therefore  no  error  of  law
    identified at [7] of the grounds of appeal.

14. Although at [6] of the grounds it states that Judge erred in law in his
    assessment of  whether  it  was  unreasonable  or  not  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the UK, this was not pursued at the hearing  before  me.
    In any event, the issue before the Judge  was  whether  paragraph  EX.1
    applied, and he correctly identified at [15] what he needed to consider
    in this assessment.  There was no challenge to the  matters  which  the
    Judge  took  into   account   in   considering   whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph EX.1.  The Judge considered the evidence before
    him.  There is no error in his consideration of paragraph EX.1(b).

15. It was submitted for the first time at the hearing that there  had  not
    been a fair hearing in the First-tier Tribunal because the  Appellant's
    wife could not attend the hearing.  I find there is no merit  in  this.
    Mr. Adebayo  submitted  that  good  grounds  had  been  given  for  the
    Appellant's wife's failure to attend.  However at  [18]  and  [19]  the
    Judge found that it was not clear why  the  Appellant's  wife  did  not
    attend to give evidence as her medical appointment was "two days in the
    future from  the  date  of  hearing".   He  noted  that  there  was  no
    application for an adjournment.  Contrary to Mr. Adebayo's submissions,
    he did not consider that a good reason was provided for the failure  of
    the Appellant's wife to  attend.   The  Judge  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's wife's witness statement [20].  There is no error of law in
    his consideration of her evidence, nor in his proceeding  to  hear  the
    appeal in her absence, especially given that no  application  was  made
    for an adjournment.

16. I find that the Judge was correct  to  consider  paragraph  EX.1.   The
    Appellant was on temporary release at the  date  of  the  decision  and
    therefore  the  Judge  had  to  apply  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.2(a),  which
    requires consideration  of  paragraph  EX.1.   The  decision  does  not
    involve the making of an error of law.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set the decision aside.


18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 10 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
