
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/00419/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2017                            |On 13 July 2017                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               mohammad sajid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ghafoor, Ghafoors Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mohammad Sajid, was born on 12 November 1969  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant applied for leave to remain on
    the basis of his private and family life on 5 December 2015 but,  by  a
    decision dated 16 December 2015, the appellant refused the application.
     The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 17  November  2016,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant  asserts  that
    the judge applied the incorrect test when deciding whether  or  not  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The judge failed to  examine
    the "degree of hardship" which the appellant would face upon return  to
    Pakistan.  For reasons which I shall discuss in greater detail below, I
    do not find that this ground has merit.  In my judgment, as  the  judge
    has accurately expressed it 34], this is a case where  the  application
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not  leave  any  "gap"  between  the
    provisions of the Rules and the appellant's appeal on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  As the judge has shown, this is a case which  falls  squarely
    within the "Article 8" Rules of HC 395.

 3. Secondly,  the  judge's  decision  is  challenged  on  the  grounds  of
    procedural irregularity.  The  appellant  appeared  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing without a legal representative although he  did  bring
    with him two witnesses.   As  I  understand  it,  the  witnesses  speak
    English but the appellant does not.  The grounds [2] appear to  suggest
    that the witnesses required an interpreter but it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's decision (he gives a thorough summary  of  the  evidence  which
    they gave to the Tribunal) that the witnesses were able to  give  their
    evidence in English.  It appears (according to the grounds  of  appeal)
    that an interpreter attended late but was told by the  judge  that  his
    services were not required.  The question remains,  therefore,  whether
    the judge perpetrated a procedural irregularity by  proceeding  in  the
    absence of an interpreter whose services, it is argued,  were  required
    by the appellant, if not the witnesses.

 4. I find that the ground does not have  merit.   It  is  clear  from  the
    judge's record of proceedings and from the Rule 24 statement of 10  May
    2017 submitted by the  respondent  which,  in  turn,  quotes  from  the
    Presenting Officer's note of evidence, the appellant chose not to  give
    evidence at the hearing.  The appellant would  have  been  entitled  to
    make oral submissions to the judge but the grounds  of  appeal  do  not
    complain that he was denied the  opportunity  to  do  so.   Indeed,  it
    appears from the record of proceedings  that  the  appellant  had  been
    content to proceed without an interpreter.  I am  satisfied  that,  had
    the appellant asked for  the  services  of  an  interpreter,  then  the
    hearing would have been adjourned in order to enable one to attend.   I
    do not accept that a highly-experienced judge would have proceeded with
    the hearing if it had been made clear to him by the  appellant  or  the
    witnesses that the appellant had needed an interpreter in order to give
    oral evidence or make submissions. However, (i) the appellant chose not
    to give evidence (ii) he has not complained  that  he  was  denied  the
    opportunity to make oral submissions and (iii) no application was  made
    by the appellant for an interpreter to attend.

 5. Thirdly, the grounds assert that the judge made an error of fact.   The
    basis of the appellant's claim is that he  is  suffering  from  medical
    conditions, including epilepsy, which mean that he requires  assistance
    with his bodily functions every day.  At [27], the judge found:

         I do not accept the family in Pakistan would not be willing or able
         to assist the appellant if he returned for the  following  reasons.
         They are directly related.  There was no evidence that  they  would
         not [assist the appellant].  I  bear  I  mind  in  this  regard  TK
         (Burundi).  The family here can work  full-time  and  pay  for  the
         additional care required.  They can get medication from  the  local
         dispensary in the village and treatment from  that  clinic  or  the
         hospital which is only  twenty  minutes  drive  away.   Conflicting
         evidence as to the extent of any learning difficulty  [suffered  by
         the appellant] without any explanation as to  the  reason  for  the
         change in diagnosis or explanation from an expert as to how it  has
         been assessed means that it has  not  been  established  he  has  a
         cognitive impairment.

 6. On the basis of this finding, the judge concluded  that  the  appellant
    would be able to reintegrate into society in Pakistan.  He  found  that
    there  existed  no  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant
    reintegrating because he would be able to be cared for  by  members  of
    his family in Pakistan.  At [14], the judge  recorded  details  of  the
    appellant's Pakistan  family.   The  grounds  assert  that  he  did  so
    inaccurately.  The appellant does not  have  four  siblings  living  in
    Pakistan (as the judge appears to have found  at  [14])  but  only  "an
    elderly aunt" who has no "real" relationship with the appellant.   This
    aunt has, in turn, a daughter (the appellant's cousin) who  is  married
    with children and lives some distance away.  The  grounds  assert  that
    these relatives would be unable or unwilling to assist the appellant.

 7. I am not satisfied that the judge's error (if he has  perpetrated  one)
    is in any way material.  Where the judge states that the appellant  has
    four siblings in Pakistan he appears not to be making a finding of fact
    but to be recording the evidence of one of the witnesses [14].  In  any
    event, the issue does not appear to be  the  number  of  relatives  the
    appellant may have but whether or not they are likely to assist him  if
    he returns to Pakistan.  As regards that issue, I find that  the  judge
    has made sound findings.  As the judge states, there was no evidence to
    show that the relatives would not assist the  appellant.   Indeed,  the
    grounds of appeal simply proceed on the assumption  that  the  "elderly
    aunt" and the cousin would not assist.  It was  for  the  appellant  to
    prove his case and it is  clear  that  he  has  failed  to  do  so.   I
    acknowledge that the appellant's medical  conditions  are  problematic,
    but  it  is  simply  not  enough  to  assert,  without  evidence,  that
    assistance from family members would not be forthcoming.  I  also  find
    that the judge was entitled, for the reasons he gives at [27], to  find
    that the appellant does not suffer cognitive impairment.  The judge was
    clearly not satisfied with the expert evidence and he has given  cogent
    reasons for not relying upon parts of that evidence.   Ultimately,  the
    question in this appeal is whether the judge was entitled, on the basis
    of the evidence which he received, to make his  findings  at  [27].   I
    have concluded that he was so entitled and that his conclusions are not
    perverse as  the  grounds  seem  to  suggest.  In  the  light  of  that
    conclusion, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 6 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 6 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



