
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00223/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2016                          |On 13th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                MR AYAZ AHMED
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr M Shwenk (instructed by Lincoln Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
       appellant in relation to a decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Haria
       promulgated on 18 February 2016.  The  case  was  determined  on  the
       papers at the appellant's request.

    2. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  assert  that
       it was not possible to tell from the Decision  and  Reasons  why  the
       appellant lost his case and there had been no assessment  of  whether
       the appellant succeeded under the partner route of Appendix FM.

    3. The appellant's background is that he entered the United  Kingdom  in
       June 2008 as a spouse. That leave was curtailed due to  the  marriage
       ending. The appellant applied unsuccessfully for leave to  remain  on
       the basis of domestic violence and he became appeal rights  exhausted
       on 3 February 2011. The appellant then made a variety of applications
       for leave to remain, one under the EEA regulations and then in  April
       2014 as the unmarried partner of Sameera Sarwar.  She  is  a  British
       citizen and  has  a  daughter  from  a  previous  relationship.  That
       application was refused. The appellant appealed but then withdrew his
       appeal and made a different application based on his family life with
       his son born to Sameera on 21 February 2015.

    4. In her Decision and Reasons the Judge acknowledged that the appellant
       and Sameera had lived together as a family unit for  two  years  with
       two  children,  the  appellant's  stepdaughter  and  his   son.   She
       considered and  properly  concluded  that  the  appellant  could  not
       succeed under the parent route of Appendix FM. However,  she  totally
       failed to consider whether the  appellant  could  succeed  under  the
       partner route, a matter that was obvious and one that she should have
       considered.

    5. Furthermore, the Judge made a rather curious finding that because the
       child was  an  infant,  notwithstanding  that  the  family  all  live
       together, the appellant, as the father did not  have  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his child because  that  role  would  be
       fulfilled by the mother. Such a finding is perverse.

    6. Mr McVeety acknowledged the  Decision  and  Reasons  was  tainted  by
       material errors of law and agreed it  should  be  set  aside  in  its
       entirety.

    7. Mr McVeety accepted that the appellant and Sameera are in  a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship and accepted that  the  appellant  has  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with his son.

    8.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  meets  the  suitability
       requirements for leave  to  remain  as  a  partner.  So  far  as  the
       eligibility requirements are concerned the appellant is absolved from
       those because paragraph Ex.1 applies. The appellant has a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship with a British citizen child and, as
       the Secretary of State's  own  policy  indicates,  it  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect that British citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK.
       Accordingly, the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph R-LTRP
       for limited leave to remain as a partner. Mr McVeety did not seek  to
       argue otherwise.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal  Decision  and  Reasons  containing  material
       errors of law, it is set aside and in redeciding  the  appeal  it  is
       allowed.

   10. There has been no application for an anonymity order  and  I  see  no
       justification for making one.


Signed   Date 12th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
