
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00014/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype        |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 14 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                       ALDJOUMA SERGE MARIUS DIALLONKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Applicant:     Ms F. Shaw, instructed by Kamberley Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant claims to  be  a  national  of  the  Ivory  Coast  called
    Aldjoumas Serge Marius Diallonka.  That is the name he used  in  making
    the application which is the subject of this appeal.  He applied to the
    Home Office for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  what  he
    claimed was twenty years residence unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He has never claimed to  have  been  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully.

 2. The documentation which he provided in order to support his  claim  was
    not in the name that we have just given.  It was instead in the name of
    Serge Patrick Soro Gogbe, a person said to be  a  national  of  France.
    The  Secretary  of  State  dealt  briefly,  even  brusquely,  with  his
    application pointing out that the documents supposed to support it were
    documents in a different name and the Secretary of State did not accept
    that they were in truth documents which belonged to the person who  was
    making the application.  In line with that view, the Secretary of State
    also treated very briefly the  evidence  said  to  establish  that  the
    appellant  had  a  child  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  which  he  was
    responsible.

 3. Following the refusal of the appellant's claim there was an  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which was heard and determined by Judge Pooler.
     Judge Pooler dismissed the appeal because he was not persuaded on  the
    evidence before him that Serge Dogbe and the appellant  were  the  same
    person.  Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and by this Tribunal.  There was then a  challenge  by  means  of  Cart
    proceedings in the High Court  and  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
    permission was set aside.  Permission was subsequently granted  by  the
    Vice  President  with  reference  to  the  remarks  made  in   granting
    permission judicially reviewed in the High Court.

 4. The matter now comes before us to determine whether the judge erred  in
    law in making his  findings  on  the  evidence  that  was  before  him.
    Despite Mr Kotas' valiant attempt to defend the  judge's  decision,  we
    are entirely satisfied that for a number  of  reasons  it  was  not  an
    adequate treatment of that evidence.  We can well  understand,  and  we
    shall refer again to this point, that the judge  was  troubled  by  the
    appellant's assertion that he had essentially managed to secure  twenty
    years  lawful  residence  by  a  series  of  frauds  and  illegalities.
    Nevertheless, the material that was  before  the  judge  needed  to  be
    treated in rather more detail than was done.

 5. The four essential items of evidence before the judge were as  follows.
    First, there was the appellant's own oral  evidence  that  he  was  the
    person who was Serge Gogbe.  That was the subject of very brief  cross-
    examination  by  the  respondent:  the  Presenting  Officer   put   the
    respondent's view and asked  a  few  questions  about  the  appellant's
    acquisition of an Ivorian passport in 2016 and the employment  that  he
    had given for that passport (which was the employment which he had  had
    all those years ago before leaving the Ivory Coast as he said).   There
    was rather surprisingly at that stage very  little  investigation  with
    the appellant of his life as portrayed by the  documents  that  he  had
    produced; there was for example no enquiry into the sort of  work  that
    he did at the places where Serge Gogbe was said to have  worked;  there
    was no detailed enquiry into what the various  documents  presented  in
    terms of incidents of life which the appellant might have been able  to
    tell the judge about or might have been claimed to be able to tell  the
    judge about; there was no enquiry of that sort at all.

 6. The second source of evidence was  from  the  appellant's  partner  and
    mother of his child, and the  Birth  Certificate  was  exhibited.   The
    Birth  Certificate  itself  is  an  interesting  document  because  the
    father's name is given in it as Serge Patrick Soro Gogbe; the  mother's
    name is given in full (she was referred to in the trial as  Ms  Bodji):
    but the name of the child is a name which takes elements both from  her
    and from the appellant's name Gogbe, but also from the  name  which  he
    claims is his real name, Diallonka, which is one of the  child's  given
    names.  Ms Bodji herself said that she had known the appellant as Serge
    Gogbe from 2006 when she first met him until 2018  when  she  knew  his
    true name.  That evidence was not the subject of any cross-examination;
    the  judge  took  it,  therefore,  that  it  was  unchallenged  by  the
    respondent.  That is, there was unchallenged evidence before  him  that
    the appellant, who was in court, and was  no  doubt  identified  by  Ms
    Bodji in the course of her oral evidence, was a  person  whom  she  had
    known as Serge Gogbe.

 7. The third source of evidence was a person who Ms Shaw has  referred  to
    as Ms Solange but is referred to in the judgment as Ms Aoussi.  She did
    not know the appellant under his assumed name, but only under his  real
    name.

 8. The fourth source of evidence was the bundle of  documents  which  were
    said to show that Mr Gogbe had sufficiently continued his  presence  in
    the United Kingdom to establish the twenty years' presence.   That  was
    documentation going chiefly to employment. There were a number  of  odd
    features about the  employment  record,  including,  in  particular,  a
    number of P60s which misspelled the name of the employer  and  gave  an
    address for the employee which is obviously not an  address:  but  that
    was the bundle of documents which was available and if they related  to
    the appellant it is said that that bundle of documents is sufficient to
    show the twenty years presence.

 9. The judge's decision refers to Ms  Bodji's  evidence  but  not  in  any
    detail to the Birth Certificate and  the  features  to  which  we  have
    referred.   It  refers  to  Ms  Aoussi's  evidence.   So  far  as   the
    appellant's  evidence  is  concerned  it  merely  indicates  that   the
    respondent put the case that the respondent did not  believe  that  the
    appellant had the identity claimed.  The documentary  evidence  is  not
    dealt with in detail.  So far as that last point is concerned,  we  can
    well understand that as the judge took the view  that  as  he  was  not
    persuaded that Mr Gogbe and Mr Diallonka were the  same  person,  there
    was no particular reason to go into the employment details of Mr Gogbe:
    but the challenge made by Ms Shaw on behalf of the  appellant  is  that
    the judge's conclusion that the appellant was not Mr  Gogbe  is  really
    not consistent with the evidence before her.  Yes, as the judge pointed
    out, it is odd, and  there  was  no  direct  explanation  of  why,  the
    appellant had been known to Ms Bodji as Mr Gogbe but not to Ms  Aoussi.
    The judge rightly reminded himself not to speculate; but in failing  to
    speculate on that it does look with the greatest respect as  though  he
    lost track of the fact that one intimate friend of  the  appellant  had
    known him as Mr Gogbe, and was not challenged as having known him as Mr
    Gogbe for a period of twelve years out of the twenty.  That meant  that
    the judge needed to deal with how Ms Bodji  had  been  so  mistaken  in
    thinking when she was dealing with Mr Gogbe that she was  dealing  with
    the appellant, when in fact on the respondent's case she must have been
    dealing with someone else altogether.  There may  be  explanations  for
    that; it may be that Ms Bodji was not as frank and accurate  a  witness
    as the Secretary of State appeared to assume.  We do not know,  and  we
    will not speculate on that either, but it  is  clear  to  us  that  the
    judge's decision as a whole  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    evidence which he does set out in it as motivating  it,  and  for  that
    reason we regard it as incapable of standing as a proper  determination
    of this appeal.  We shall therefore set it aside for error of law.

10. Ms Shaw has been perfectly clear that she seeks a  rehearing  before  a
    judge who will (as she was content to accept as a suggestion) take into
    account all the evidence.

11. We said earlier that we would refer to the appellant's claimed history.
     There is no doubt at all that anybody dealing with this case is  bound
    to regard it as distasteful that the appellant is able to claim his own
    fraud and his own criminal conduct over a  very  long  period  of  time
    supported by evidence  of  work  that  he  was  not  entitled  ever  to
    undertake and employment that was obtained by him giving false identity
    to his employer; and to be rewarded for that.  It  would,  however,  be
    particularly unfortunate is if his claim to have  committed  the  fraud
    was itself fraudulent.  Ms Shaw's case of course is that the  fraud  is
    limited to the appellant's conduct over a long period of time,  not  to
    his conduct in court, but one can see that in a case of this sort it is
    necessary to be particularly careful that a person is not, as it  were,
    pulling the wool over two sets of eyes. It is perhaps  surprising  that
    the cross-examination was not more rigorous or that the examination  of
    the documents was not more rigorous: it is not clear for  example  that
    any reference was made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  alleged
    employer and so on.  But that is a matter for the parties to deal  with
    in due course.

12. Our decision is that the decision of Judge  Pooler  is  set  aside  for
    error of law, and we remit the appeal to be  reheard  afresh  before  a
    different judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                            Date: 5 May 2021

