
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/00167/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 March 2018                          |  On 27 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               khurram shazad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Levine, instructed by ILC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Khurram Shazad, was born on 10 April 1982 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He had applied for entry clearance to the  United
    Kingdom under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as  amended).
    His application was refused by a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 16 December 2016.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Mensah) which, in a decision promulgated on 20  March  2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant argues that the judge did not have  all  the  information
    necessary before her.  In particular, the judge did not have the  "Home
    Office bundle".  Secondly, the judge had  not  "fully  considered"  the
    appellant's circumstances in Pakistan.  Thirdly, the  appellant  failed
    to apply Articles 3 and  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  judge  was  wrong  in
    expecting to  be  provided  with  evidence  of  unreasonable  obstacles
    preventing the appellant's return to Pakistan.  The  appellant  submits
    that there were "no greater evidence of  insurmountable  obstacles  and
    the fact the appellant has no home in Pakistan, his wife is  a  British
    born and he  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  adjust  to  life  in
    Pakistan".

 3. The appeal is wholly without merit.  The judge does state at  [7]  that
    she did not have a Home Office bundle but it is quite  clear  from  the
    file that she did have the refusal letter and the notice of  appeal;  I
    find that she had the documents which she required fairly to  determine
    the appeal.  In addition,  there  were  written  submissions  from  the
    appellant's solicitors sent in before  the  judge  had  determined  the
    appeal on the papers together with some wage slips.  Even if the  judge
    had not considered these latter documents,  the  appeal  was  hopeless.
    Neither party  suggests  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  The fact remains that the burden of proof
    was on the appellant to show that he could  not  reasonably  return  to
    Pakistan and there was simply no evidence at all before  the  judge  to
    suggest that he could not.  It is not for the judge to read into scanty
    items of evidence factors which might support the appellant's case;  it
    is for the appellant to establish his case on the evidence. He did  not
    do so.

 4. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
