


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 25 May 2017                         |On : 30 May 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         guiherme fernando vaz joao
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Jones, instructed by Arlington Crown Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  10
April 2015 to refuse his human rights claim, further to a deportation  order
made against him on 27 March 2015 under section 32(1) of the UK Borders  Act
2007.

The appellant is a citizen of Angola, born on 5 October 1967. He arrived  in
the UK on 11 August 2000 and claimed asylum the  same  day.  His  claim  was
refused and he  unsuccessfully  appealed  against  that  decision,  becoming
appeal rights exhausted on 13 June 2003. Further representations  were  made
to the respondent on health grounds and, in March 2008, the  appellant  made
a fresh asylum claim which he later withdrew. The appellant's partner,  with
whom he had been in a relationship in Angola since 1997, joined him  in  the
UK after 2000 and was eventually granted indefinite leave to remain  outside
the immigration  rules  and  subsequently  became  a  British  citizen.  The
appellant and his partner had three children, twin sons [En] and  [Ek]  born
on [ ] 2003 and another son [Er] born on [ ]  2010,  all  British  citizens.
His son [Ek] suffers from autism.


On 29 January 2010 the appellant was convicted of driving  a  motor  vehicle
with excess alcohol and using a vehicle whilst uninsured.  On  13  September
2010 he was convicted of two counts of  possessing/control  false/improperly
obtained ID card and resisting or  obstructing  a  constable.  He  was  also
convicted,  on  the  same  day,  of  four   counts   of   possessing/control
false/improperly obtained another's identity  document,  acquiring  criminal
property and making a false statement or representation in order  to  obtain
benefit or payment. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.


On 14 October 2010 a liability to  deportation  notice  was  issued  to  the
appellant, but subsequent to the  receipt  of  further  representations  the
respondent decided  not  to  pursue  deportation  action  in  light  of  the
appellant's Article  8  rights.  The  appellant  was  granted  a  period  of
discretionary leave from 16 August 2011 until 8 August 2014.


On 29 May 2012 the appellant was convicted of driving a motor  vehicle  with
excess alcohol, using a vehicle whilst uninsured and driving otherwise  than
in accordance with a licence. He was sentenced on 15 June 2012 to 16  weeks'
imprisonment, suspended for 12 months.


On 29 July 2014 the appellant submitted an application for further leave  to
remain in the UK. The respondent then decided to pursue  deportation  action
and on 3 February 2015 a decision to deport was issued. The  appellant  made
further representations in response. On 27 March 2015  a  deportation  order
was made against the appellant under section 32(1) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
2007. On 10 April 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's  human  rights
claim.

In refusing the appellant's human rights claim, in her decision of 10  April
2015,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with his British partner and three children but  did
not accept that it would be unduly harsh for them to  live  in  Angola  with
him or for them to remain in the UK without him.  The  respondent  did  not,
therefore, accept that the appellant met the criteria  in  paragraph  399(a)
or (b) and neither was it accepted  that  he  could  meet  the  criteria  in
paragraph 399A on the basis of private life. The respondent considered  that
there were no very compelling circumstances outweighing the public  interest
in the appellant's deportation and that  his  medical  conditions  were  not
such as to lead to his deportation being in breach of Article 3.

The appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  was  initially
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 24 November 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Burns. The judge's decision dismissing the appeal  was,  however,  set
aside by reason of error  of  law  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce,  in  a
decision dated 3 August 2016, primarily on the basis of  a  lack  of  proper
consideration of the best interests of the children and  in  particular  the
circumstances of [Ek] and the impact upon him of his father's deportation.


The appeal was then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
and was heard  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  on  12
December 2016.


Judge McCarthy  refused  an  adjournment  request  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellant to obtain further documentary evidence. The judge found  that  the
appellant could not benefit from  paragraph  399A  since  he  had  not  been
lawfully present in the UK for most of his life and he found that  he  could
not benefit from paragraph 399(b)(i)  because  his  immigration  status  had
always been precarious. The judge noted that the respondent  was  no  longer
asserting that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  children  to  live  in
Angola but was pursuing the case on the basis that it would  not  be  unduly
harsh for them to remain in the UK without the appellant.  The  judge  noted
that the evidence produced  by  the  appellant,  including  the  independent
social worker's report, the evidence  from  the  children's  schools  and  a
statement of special needs was out of date and  incomplete,  and  considered
that it was exceptionally weak. He was not satisfied that the appellant  and
his partner had given truthful accounts about the nature and extent  of  the
appellant's involvement with his sons. He accepted that the appellant had  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with his sons but did  not  accept  that
he was their primary carer as  claimed  and  considered  that  the  evidence
before him was insufficient to establish that it would be unduly  harsh  for
the children to remain in the UK without their father. The judge found  that
the appellant could not therefore benefit from paragraphs  399(a)  and  (b).
He did not accept that there were very compelling circumstances  outweighing
the public interest in  the  appellant's  deportation  and  found  that  the
appellant's deportation would not  be  disproportionate.  He  dismissed  the
appeal on all grounds.


The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge McCarthy's decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on six grounds: that the judge had  erroneously  applied  the
burden of proof in the assessment of proportionality;  that  the  judge  had
failed properly to take [Ek]'s current needs in respect of his  autism  into
account; that there was a flawed  assessment  of  the  primary  carer;  that
there was a failure to take the children's views into  account;  that  there
was a failure to consider the impact of separation  with  reference  to  the
professional evidence; and that there  was  an  erroneous  approach  to  the
issue of the mother's ability to  cope  in  the  event  of  the  appellant's
deportation.


Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted on 10 March 2017 by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Chapman on the grounds that the judge  had  arguably  failed  to  apply  the
principles in MM  (Uganda)  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Rev 1) [2016] EWCA Civ 617; that there had  been  unfairness  in
the decision not to adjourn the proceedings; and that the judge  had  failed
to give proper consideration to the children's views and to  the  impact  of
the appellant's deportation on the autistic child.

The appeal came before me on 25 May 2017. Both parties made  submissions  on
the error of law. I have concluded that there are no errors of law in  Judge
McCarthy's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

Turning to the matter raised in the grant  of  permission  relating  to  the
judge's refusal to adjourn the proceedings, Ms Jones quite properly did  not
actively pursue the point. As Mr Wilding submitted, in order  for  there  to
be an unfairness point, there has to have been an  assertion  of  unfairness
made by the appellant in the first place, which was not the  case  here.  Ms
Jones said that it was disappointing not to be given a  further  opportunity
to produce further evidence but went no further  than  that.  Clearly  there
was no unfairness in Judge McCarthy's refusal to  adjourn  the  proceedings.
The appellant had had ample opportunity to provide further evidence but  had
failed to do so despite being prompted to by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce's
error of law decision. I note further from the correspondence on  the  court
file that there was a clear indication from the appellant's solicitors  that
they were ready to proceed with the appeal and  that  there  was  never  any
indication of any intention to produce further documentation. As Mr  Wilding
submitted,  it  is  relevant  to  note  that  there  is  still  no   further
documentary evidence. Accordingly no error of law arises in that respect.

Likewise there is no error of law arising from the judge's approach  to  the
burden of proof. Whilst the judge's choice of wording  at  [2]  was  perhaps
not the best, it is clear from [29] that he was fully aware that the  burden
of proof lay upon  the  respondent  when  considering  proportionality.  His
findings from [91] plainly reflect  a  proper  approach  to  the  burden  of
proof.


The main focus of the grounds is how the judge  dealt  with  the  children's
interests, in particular [Ek]'s interests. It is asserted on behalf  of  the
appellant that the judge failed to take [Ek]'s current needs  into  account,
in respect of his autism. However that is plainly not the  case.  The  judge
undertook a detailed consideration of the documentary evidence  relating  to
the children, and in particular to [Ek], at [64]  and  [65]  and  then  from
[70] to [85].  He noted that there was  no  recent  evidence  and  that  the
evidence that was available was out of date and  incomplete.  He  considered
the evidence given by the appellant and his partner and  also  took  account
of the independent social worker's report and the documents from the  school
as well as the statement  of  special  educational  needs.  The  grounds  of
appeal assert that the judge failed to consider the views of  the  children,
but again that is clearly not the case, as the judge  specifically  referred
to, and considered, their views at [75] to [77]. With regard to the  judge's
consideration of the appellant's partner's  ability  to  cope  without  him,
which in turn is linked to his assessment of the primary  carer,  the  judge
made clear and cogent findings in that regard. At [66]  to  [68],  [77]  and
[78], and [98] to [100] the judge  gave  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
appellant and his partner had not provided a truthful account of the  nature
and extent of the appellant's involvement with his sons and  considered  the
mother's ability to look after the children on  her  own.  In  so  doing  he
plainly had full regard to the views of the independent  social  worker  and
the school, referring specifically to the evidence at  [78]  and  [80],  and
providing clear and cogent reasons for placing the weight that he  did  upon
that evidence. Having considered all of the evidence in detail,  and  having
provided cogent reasons for his findings, the judge was  fully  entitled  to
conclude that both parents were involved with the children's care  and  that
their mother would be able to cope with them in his absence.

The decision granting permission refers to an arguable failure on  the  part
of the judge to apply the principles in MM (Uganda),  but  that  is  clearly
not the case. The judge plainly had that case in  mind  when  assessing  the
question of whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in
the UK without their father,  specifically  referring  to  it  at  [63].  If
anything, it seems to me that the judge applied a more generous approach  to
that question since his focus throughout the following paragraphs  was  upon
the children and their interests. Accordingly his conclusion, that it  would
not be unduly harsh for the children to be separated from their father,  was
one that was properly made on the evidence before him.


It  was  Ms  Jones'  submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
children's views and best interests and failed to give  any  weight  to  the
independent social worker's report when  considering  proportionality  under
Article 8. Ms Jones disagreed with Mr Wilding's submission  that  there  was
no need for the  judge  to  consider  all  the  issues  again  in  assessing
proportionality and that that would be double-counting. She  submitted  that
that was inconsistent with the principles set out in  Hesham  Ali  (Iraq)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  UKSC  60  which  made  it
clear that the immigration rules were not a complete  code  and  that  there
had to be a full and separate proportionality  consideration  in  accordance
with Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Sectretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2004] UKHL 27. However I find nothing in  Hesham  Ali  requiring
the setting out of a full and  repeated  consideration  of  all  the  issues
already considered under the rules  provided  that  it  is  clear  that  all
relevant matters have been considered and taken into account, as is  evident
in this case. The judge properly commenced  his  proportionality  assessment
by taking account of the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
consideration, finding that their best interests  were  for  the  family  to
remain together. He went on to consider the  impact  of  separation  on  the
appellant's wife and children and, contrary to  Ms  Jones'  assertion,  took
account of the professional reports in that  regard.  The  judge  took  full
account of the public interest, as he was required to do, and provided  full
and proper reasons for concluding that the appellant's interests, and  those
of his wife and children, did  not  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
deportation.

Accordingly I find no merit in the grounds. The judge's decision  was  based
upon a full and detailed assessment of all relevant  matters,  with  careful
consideration given  to  the  interests  of  the  appellants'  children,  in
particular to his son [Ek], and to  the  impact  upon  them  of  separation.
There was nothing erroneous in his consideration of  the  immigration  rules
and proportionality outside the rules or in his approach  to  the  evidence.
He reached a conclusion that was open to him on  the  evidence  before  him.
For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law. I  do
not set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    Although an anonymity order was made by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy did not make such an order. I see no
    need for an anonymity order, there having been no request  made  before
    me, and I therefore discharge the order  previously  made  pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.











Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  16 May 2017
