
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th November 2016                          |On 5th December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     naq
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Preston, Immigration Legal Advice Centre

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As the decision
contains information in relation to minors, it is appropriate to continue
that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 22nd  March  2016
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)   which   allowed   the
    Respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. The FtT in allowing his appeal found that the Respondent a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, had made out his claim, that it would be unduly harsh for his
    British born children to either follow him to Pakistan or remain in the
    United Kingdom without him.

 3. For the purposes of this  appeal  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as "the Respondent"  and  to
    NAQ as "the Appellant" reflecting their positions before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  25th  December  1975.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 22nd April 2005 on a settlement visa as a
    spouse, valid until April 2007.  Thereafter he applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain which was granted.

 5. On 13th December 2007  the  Appellant  received  a  caution  from  West
    Yorkshire police for possessing goods with a false trademark  for  sale
    or hire.

 6. On 26th January 2010 he was convicted at Leeds  Crown  Court  on  three
    counts of  attempt/handling  stolen  goods  for  which  he  received  a
    suspended sentence of imprisonment for 26 weeks,  wholly  suspended  on
    each count for a period of twelve months.

 7. On 2nd September 2014 the Appellant was convicted at Leeds Crown  Court
    of burglary and theft of a dwelling and handling stolen goods.  He  was
    sentenced to  sixteen  months  on  the  first  count  and  six  months'
    imprisonment on the second, to run concurrently.

 8. As a consequence of his criminal convictions the Appellant  was  served
    by the Respondent with a liability for deportation  letter  dated  10th
    October  2014.   In  response  to  that  letter  the   Appellant   made
    representations dated 17th November 2014.  However a deportation  order
    was signed on 4th March 2015 and the Appellant was removed from the  UK
    in October 2015 following certification by the Secretary of State under
    Section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was allowed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the current appeal follows that decision.

Onward Appeal / Error of Law Hearing

10. The Respondent challenged the FtT's decision on  three  grounds,  which
    can be distilled into the following headings:

      1) Failing to  give  reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters.

      2) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts  of  fact  or
         opinion on material matters.

      3) Making perverse or irrational findings on matters material  to  the
         outcome.

11. I am satisfied for the purposes of this decision that I can  deal  with
    all  grounds  together  since  I  find  that  the   challenges   raised
    essentially  amount  to  one  challenge  only,  namely  inadequacy   of
    reasoning for conclusions reached.

12. Mrs Preston who appeared for the Appellant, sought to persuade me  that
    the decision of the FtT is an adequately  reasoned  one  and  that  the
    grounds  seeking  permission  amount  to  no  more  than  a  series  of
    disagreements with the judge's findings.  She submitted that it is  for
    the judge to decide what weight he places upon the evidence and  it  is
    up to the judge to decide what amounts to "unduly harsh" in  the  fact-
    sensitive circumstances of this case.

13. I find I disagree with Mrs Preston's submissions.  Having  reserved  my
    decision at the error of law hearing, I now give my  reasons.  Although
    the FtT's decision is a comparatively lengthy one, paragraphs  [41]  to
    [69] do no more than simply set out  the  evidence  presented  together
    with the relevant case law.  I see no proper analysis of  the  evidence
    showing how the conclusions set out in [70]  have  been  reached.   The
    step by step fact finding process is missing.

14. Furthermore at [72] the judge says the following;

         "I do conclude that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
         live in Pakistan or to remain in the UK without the  Appellant.   I
         find that the children have no direct link with Pakistan."

    However that fails  to  recognise  that  the  children's  father  is  a
    national of Pakistan where he now lives, their grandmother lives there,
    and the eldest child has visited Pakistan.

15. Added to this, the judge  relied  upon  2.3.4  of  Chapter  13  of  the
    Respondent's IDIs without referencing and referring to Section 3.5  (a)
    (b) and (c) of that document. Those latter sections are the ones  which
    engage  with  the  questions  relevant  to  the  test  of  whether  the
    deportation of the foreign national is unduly harsh.  The judge has not
    shown when taking note of the IDI's that  he  has  had  regard  to  the
    public interest element when weighing matters in the balance.

16. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the FtT's decision is not  a
    fully  reasoned  one  and  has  not   taken   into   account   material
    considerations.  I therefore allow the Respondent's appeal  and  I  set
    aside the FtT's decision.  There will need to be  a  fresh  hearing  of
    this matter with full findings of fact being made.

Remaking the Decision

17. It was the view of both  representatives  that,  in  the  event  of  my
    finding an error of law in the FtT's decision, it would be  appropriate
    to remit the matter to that Tribunal to re-make the decision.  This  is
    on the basis that the FtT is the  primary  fact  finding  tribunal.   I
    agree with the representatives.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.   The  decision  will  be  remade  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Turnock).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     02 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

