
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00004/2015
                                                               PA/00467/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 July 2016                               |On 28 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                                ABDIRIZAK [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hoshi
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr [A] is a citizen of Somalia born in 1980.

 2. In brief his immigration history is as follows: he entered the UK on 22
    December 1994 as a dependent of his aunt who on the  same  day  claimed
    asylum.  Her claim was refused but she was  granted  exceptional  leave
    outside the Rules until 30 May  1996.   She  was  subsequently  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  Mr [A] on 31 March 2003 was  also  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 3. He was convicted on one count of conspiracy to commit violent  disorder
    and was sentenced on 24 October 2014 to fourteen months' imprisonment.

 4. On 6 February 2015 the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order.

 5. He appealed claiming that  deportation  would  breach  the  Immigration
    Rules and his human rights.

 6. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 11  August  2015  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Beach allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on
    Humanitarian Protection grounds.  She dismissed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

 7. At that hearing it had been agreed that the issues were whether Mr  [A]
    could succeed under paragraph 399/399A  of  the  Rules,  Article  3  on
    medical grounds and as an Internally Displaced Person (IDP) and Article
    15(c).

 8. The Tribunal's findings are at paragraph [67 ff].  She  found  that  Mr
    [A] has a child aged 3 who is a British national  who  lives  with  his
    mother.  There is a Contact  Order  and  Mr  [A]  has  'weekly  weekend
    contact with his son'.  The judge was satisfied that he has a  'genuine
    and subsisting relationship' with the child [72].

 9. It was noted that the Secretary of State  accepted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to live in Somalia.

10. The next issue was whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
    remain in the UK without his father (paragraph 399(a)(i)(b)).

11. The judge found that it would be.  He has a  'significant  relationship
    with his son'.  The unstable situation in Somalia  meant  that  it  was
    'extremely unlikely' that the son's mother would allow him to travel to
    Somalia to spend time with his father  if  such  was  even  practicable
    given the living conditions in which he may be living.   Also,  it  was
    unlikely that a Family Court would order that the child be allowed  out
    of  the  jurisdiction  to  visit  his  father   in   Somalia.    Making
    arrangements to visit his son in a different country 'would entail some
    expense' and there was 'no guarantee that (he) would be able to  access
    the level of funds required to allow for such  visits  to  take  place'
    [74].

12. Further, the child being so young 'it would be  difficult  for  him  to
    understand why his father had left him'.  Moreover, contact by Skype or
    similar methods was likely to be problematic given that he will  'still
    be re-establishing himself in Somalia and may well be in  an  IDP  camp
    for at least a period of time'.  Such electronic contact would  in  any
    event not 'be anywhere near equivalent' to the weekend contact his  son
    enjoys with his father.  The  boy  is  also  too  young  to  appreciate
    letters and emails even if these could be  arranged  in  Somalia.   The
    consequence was that there is 'likely to be  a  real  lack  of  contact
    between the Appellant and his son and this is likely to have an adverse
    impact on the child's  mental  health'.   The  separation,  accordingly
    would be 'more than difficult or  uncomfortable  and  would  reach  the
    higher test of being severe' [74].

13. Turning to consider paragraph 399A the judge  found  that  Mr  [A]  has
    lived lawfully in the UK for twenty years.  It was accepted that he was
    socially and culturally integrated in UK society.   He  speaks  English
    and his family and friends are here.

14. The judge went on to consider medical evidence including that  in  June
    2015 he was detained under the Mental Health Act.  A psychiatric report
    indicated he suffers from a  psychiatric  disorder  'which  is  closely
    related to his use of psychoactive substances  particularly  cannabis'.
    The judge found that he 'clearly has mental health problems' [80] which
    will 'make it harder for him to re integrate into Somalia' [81].

15. The judge went on to find that he has no family connections in  Somalia
    and is from a minority clan.

16. In concluding her consideration of paragraph 399A the judge again noted
    that Mr [A] has lived in the UK for over twenty years.  She found  that
    the  claim  not  to  speak  Somali  was  'likely  to   have   been   an
    exaggeration'.  However, in finding that he would face very significant
    obstacles in reintegrating into Somalia, she found relevant as well  as
    his long stay in the UK 'that Somalia is still an emerging country with
    pockets of civil unrest and parts of which are still controlled by  Al-
    Shabab' [83], that he would not have easy access to clan assistance  or
    to family in Somalia.  Also that his aunt is on benefits so has limited
    funds to send him while  he  reintegrates.   In  addition  he  has  few
    qualifications and very  little  work  experience  on  which  to  call.
    Finally, his mental health issues and pancreatic illness are likely  to
    make it harder for him to  readjust.   Medication  is  not  necessarily
    easily available.

17. Moving on to consider Humanitarian Protection, the  judge  again  noted
    that Mr [A] would not have family  to  support  him  in  Somalia.   His
    mental health 'may give rise to issues which bring him to  the  adverse
    attention of Al-Shabab'.  He will not know the areas to avoid and  will
    be placed at risk of suffering serious  harm  from  Al-Shabab.   Having
    been away for so long he would not have  the  resources  to  understand
    what was required of him in an Al-Shabab area which  could  lead  to  a
    real risk of harm.  Also 'his understanding  of  events  is  made  more
    difficult by his mental health difficulties which he seems to  find  it
    hard to cope with ...' [85].

18. All in all, the judge concluded that Mr [A] would be at  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm such as to succeed on HP grounds.

19. Dealing next with Article 3 she briefly considered  two  matters.   She
    found it likely that he would have to seek support and  shelter  in  an
    IDP camp.  Whilst conditions there are 'unlikely to be  of  a  standard
    which the Appellant would hope to live in' there  was  little  evidence
    before her with regard to conditions  in  the  IDP  camps.   The  judge
    concluded that the  conditions  'would  not  reach  the  high  standard
    required to engage Article 3' [86].

20. The judge on the second matter considered that Mr [A] could not succeed
    under Article 3 solely on medical grounds.

21. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which  was  refused.
    It was granted on reapplication on 31  May  2016.   At  the  same  time
    permission to appeal was also granted to Mr [A].

    Error of law

22. Mr Bramble for the Respondent did not seek to argue  the  first  ground
    (clan membership).  He sought to concentrate on the  judge's  treatment
    of paragraphs 399(a)(i)(b) and 399A.  On the former she had applied the
    wrong test (MAB (para 399; 'unduly harsh') USA [2015] UKUT  435  (IAC))
    and it was not clear that proper weight had been given  to  the  public
    interest in deportation.  On the latter the conclusion that there would
    be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration was  not
    one that was reasonably open to her.  He speaks  some  Somali  and  has
    worked in the UK.  There is no  reason  why  these  factors  would  not
    assist him on return.  Also even if her income,  through  benefits,  is
    modest there is no reason why his aunt could not  give  some  financial
    help.  Further, great weight had been  placed  on  his  mental  health.
    However, the documentary evidence submitted about that was vague.

23. The  remaining  matter  was  the  judge's  conclusion  on  Humanitarian
    Protection.  On this issue the judge again had placed emphasis  on  the
    Appellant's mental health as precluding his judgment and affecting  his
    ability to make sensible choices.  However his mental health  does  not
    appear to have prohibited him from working  in  the  UK,  nor  does  he
    appear to require 'supported living' albeit  that  he  lives  with  his
    aunt.  Her finding  that  he  might  be  at  risk  from  Al-Shabab  was
    speculative.  Inadequate reasons had been given as to why he  would  be
    incapable of living in Mogadishu.

24. In reply Mr  Hoshi  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  submissions  in
    respect of paragraph 399A amounted to nothing more than a  disagreement
    with the judge's findings.  The judge  had  given  sound  and  detailed
    reasons.   She  was  entitled  to  give  weight  to   the   significant
    deleterious impact that deportation would have on his mental health.

25. As for paragraph 399(a)(i)(b) Mr Hoshi submitted that even if it was an
    error of law to follow MAB  it was clear nonetheless that the judge had
    the strong public interest in deportation at the forefront of her  mind
    in particular at [68] and [69].

26. On the issue of Humanitarian Protection Mr Hoshi again  submitted  that
    the criticism amounted to no more than a bare disagreement.  The  judge
    had found that the Appellant would be likely to have to live in an  IDP
    camp.  This combined with his severe  mental  health  difficulties  was
    sufficient for the judge to find that he would be at  risk  of  serious
    harm.

27. In his submissions in the counter appeal  Mr  Hoshi  made  two  points.
    First, having found that the Appellant was likely to have to live in an
    IDP camp the Country Guidance indicated that  he  would  be  living  in
    conditions that  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian  standards.   In
    failing without explanation to follow the Country  Guidance  the  judge
    erred.  The appeal should have been allowed under  Article  3.   Having
    allowed the appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds it was materially
    inconsistent for her to dismiss it under Article 3.

28. Mr Hoshi did not press the final ground, that the judge failed to  deal
    with Article 15 (c).

Consideration

29.  In  considering  this  matter  I  deal  first  with  the  Respondent's
    submissions.  First paragraph 399(a)(i)(b).  The judge (at [74]) refers
    to MAB.  The Upper Tribunal held in that case that the  'unduly  harsh'
    test did not involve a balancing exercise between the  public  interest
    in deportation on the one hand and the impact on removal on  the  child
    on the other, rather the focus was exclusively on  the  effect  on  the
    innocent child.  However, subsequently in MA  (Pakistan)  &  Ors  v  UT
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the Appeal  Court  following  MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450, held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the 'unduly harsh' criteria.

30. The judge does (at [68]) mention the sentencing remarks which refer  to
    the offence as 'relatively serious'.  At [69]  the  judge  acknowledged
    that this was a 'serious offence and it is  clear  that  there  were  a
    number of aggravating factors in that offence'.  However, there  is  no
    reference at all in her analysis at [74] to the public  interest.   The
    consideration is solely about the effect on the child.  While I make no
    criticism in respect of her findings on the effect on  the  child,  the
    reference to MAB and the absence of any reference within  the  analysis
    to the public interest leads me to conclude that the  judge's  approach
    as to the 'unduly harsh' test was wrong and she thereby erred in law.

31. Turning to consider the analysis under paragraph 399A as indicated  the
    judge examined this at [75 ff].  She noted that the Appellant has lived
    lawfully in the UK for at least twenty years, that it was accepted that
    he was socially and culturally integrated  into  UK  society,  that  he
    speaks English and has family and friends here.  As for what  he  would
    have in Somalia it was found that he does speak some Somali,  but  that
    he does not have family there and is from a minority  clan.   Also,  he
    would have little financial support as his  aunt  is  on  benefits  and
    would have limited funds to send him.   These  were  findings  she  was
    entitled to reach on the evidence before her.

32. As  the  Respondent  noted,  the  judge  placed  great  weight  on  the
    Appellant's  mental  health.   It  was  claimed  that  the  documentary
    evidence on this was 'notably vague'.  I  disagree.   The  judge  dealt
    with this in considerable detail from [76] to [80].  It was clear  that
    the Appellant had a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder,  that  he  was
    detained under the Mental Health Act (indeed, he had three spells as an
    in-patient  at  an  NHS  mental  health  facility).   There  was   also
    considerable evidence before her that while imprisoned at HMP  Belmarsh
    (2014/15) he continued to suffer from mental  health  difficulties  for
    which he was prescribed anti-psychotic and other medications.  She  was
    also entitled to find (at [42]-[47]) that there is a paucity of  mental
    health care provision in Somalia.

33. I consider that it was  open  to  her  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would have a significant deleterious impact on  his  mental
    health, that such would make it harder for him in  respect  of  finding
    accommodation and work, and that such together with the  other  factors
    referred to by her in her consideration of  paragraph  399A  looked  at
    cumulatively  amounted  to  'very   significant   obstacles'   to   his
    integration into Somalia.

34.  Thus,  while  the  judge  erred  in  her  consideration  of  paragraph
    399(a)(i)(b), such  was  not  material  as  the  case  succeeded  under
    paragraph 399A of the Rules.

35. The other issue is Humanitarian Protection.  This is dealt with at [84]
    and  mainly  [85].   I  find  [85]  somewhat  confusing.   Despite  the
    submission that the Appellant's individual circumstances were such that
    there was a real risk that he would be placed in an IDP camp, the judge
    appears to have allowed the appeal on HP grounds essentially because as
    a result of his mental health problems, he might come to the  attention
    of, or wander into, an area where Al-Shabab had control.  It  seems  to
    me that such is entirely speculative.

36. On the more relevant issue of having to live in an IDP camp  the  judge
    finds (at [86]) that such is likely.  On the  evidence  found  in  that
    paragraph (long absence, lack of family/clan support  structures,  lack
    of likely financial support, serious mental health problems),  she  was
    entitled to reach  that  view.   However,  she  finds  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the conditions would be such  as  to
    reach the high standard needed to engage Article 3.

37. In fact, the judge in giving extracts from the  Country  Guidance  case
    MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 had  noted
    in her determination (at [41]) from the  headnote  that  relocation  in
    Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan, with no former links to  the
    city, no access to funds and no form of clan, family or social  support
    'there will be a real risk of having no  alternative  but  to  live  in
    makeshift accommodation where there will be a real risk  of  having  to
    live  in  conditions  that  will  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian
    standards' by which the UT meant conditions amounting to  a  breach  of
    Article 3: 'It is likely that those who do find  themselves  living  in
    inadequate makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp will be  experiencing
    adverse living conditions such as to engage the protection of Article 3
    of the ECHR' [420].  In failing to have regard, without reason, to  the
    Country Guidance the judge erred.

38. I consider that having  found  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the
    Appellant having to access an IDP camp (together with his mental health
    issues) the appropriate legal course was  to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 rather than on Humanitarian Protection grounds.





Notice of Decision

The decision shows no material error of law in respect  of  the  Immigration
Rules and the decision allowing the appeal under the Rules shall stand.

The decision to allow the appeal on Humanitarian  Protection  grounds  shows
error of law and is set aside to be remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed on Article 3 (ECHR) grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

