
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00250/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 April 2017                      |On 4 May 2017                         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          murugupillai pakeerathan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MAde)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Harris of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision
    promulgated on 10 October 2016 of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson
    which allowed the Article 8 ECHR appeal of Mr Pakeerathan.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer  to  Mr  Pakeerathan  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. There is no dispute to the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  As
    Judge Hodgkinson found at [21]  the  English  language  requirement  in
    paragraph 276B(iv) of the Immigration Rules in force at the date of the
    decision was not met.

 4. The judge went on in [27] to [37] to assess whether the appellant could
    succeed outside the Immigration Rules, concluding that he  could.   The
    judge sets out the correct Razgar questions at [27]. He finds  at  [29]
    that the appellant has established a private life  here,  having  shown
    that he came on 13 May 1996 and remaining continuously since then.  The
    finding outside the Immigration  Rules  that  the  applicant  had  been
    resident continuously since 1996 was not specifically challenged in the
    grounds and, on the  basis  of  the  extensive  materials  and  witness
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, was clearly a finding open  to
    Judge Hodgkinson; see [19] and [20].

 5. At [30] the judge took into  account  that  the  respondent's  decision
    reflected the public interest in effective immigration control. In [31]
    specific reference is made to s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 which states that  the  "maintenance  of  effective
    immigration  controls  is  in  the  public  interest."  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was clearly aware of  the  proper  role  of  the  public
    interest when making his decision therefore. In the same paragraph  the
    First-tier Tribunal explicitly weighs the appellant's poor  immigration
    history against him.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal goes on in [33] to consider the other  relevant
    provisions of s.117B, finding against the appellant regarding s.117B(2)
    and (3) as the appellant has not shown fluency in English or that he is
    financially independent. At [35], the judge  also  weighs  against  the
    appellant his access to free medical care and  ability  to  access  any
    requisite care in Sri Lanka.  He finds at [34] that the  appellant  has
    family to return to in Sri Lanka, making his  return  "feasible",  even
    after 20 years in the UK. The judge clearly took into account  at  [31]
    and [32] that the appellant's immigration status has been  "precarious"
    and that, following s.117B(5), statute indicates that his private  life
    should attract little weight in the proportionality assessment.  It  is
    not arguable, therefore, that the judge failed to address the  material
    provisions of s.117B.

 7. Having identified that s.117B "normally" allowed little weight  to  be
    attributed Judge Hodgkinson indicates at the  end  of  [32],  however,
    that "I find the appellant's circumstances to be exceptional, for  the
    reasons set out below." The case of Treebhawon and Others  (NIAA  2002
    Part 5A - compelling  circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT  00013  (IAC)
    provides authority for this approach, summarised in paragraph 3 of the
    head note, thus:


         "The Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA 2002 is  to
         give proper  effect  to  Article  8  ECHR.   Thus  a  private  life
         developed or established during periods of unlawful  or  precarious
         residence might conceivably qualify to be accorded more than little
         weight and s 117B (4) and (5)  are  to  be  construed  and  applied
         accordingly."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for finding in the applicant's favour
    notwithstanding the provisions of s.117B(5) are  set  out  in  [36]  to
    [37]:

         "36. The strongest element to the appellant's case, in terms of  an
         assessment of proportionality, is the fact that he has now  resided
         in the United Kingdom continuously for over twenty years and,  were
         he now to make an application for leave to remain on  private  life
         grounds, the evidence before me would suggest that such application
         should be successful, there being no suggestion, I reiterate,  that
         the appellant would fall to be refused as a result of the  relevant
         suitability requirements set out in Appendix FM, and this  was  not
         suggested by Mr Grennan at the appeal hearing  before  me.   Indeed
         the respondent, I  find,  could  not  realistically  contend,  with
         reference to the current appeal, that the appellant might fall  for
         refusal under the relevant  suitability  requirements,  bearing  in
         mind that,  inter  alia  in  the  refusal  letter,  the  respondent
         considered the potential application of paragraph 276ADE  and  gave
         no  indication  at  all  of  concern  regarding   the   suitability
         requirements.

         37. Thus, on the basis of the evidence before me, it appears  that,
         were the appellant to submit a fresh  application  at  the  present
         time, relying upon private life with reference to  276ADE,  then  I
         consider that it is more likely than not that he would  succeed  in
         such application.  In these very particular unusual and exceptional
         circumstances, having  taken  into  account  the  totality  of  the
         available evidence, I conclude that the respondent's decision  does
         not, as at the date of the hearing before me,  serve  a  legitimate
         purpose or, put another way, I conclude, albeit reluctantly bearing
         in mind the appellant's immigration history, that the decision is a
         disproportionate one.  Consequently,  exceptionally,  I  allow  the
         appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules."

 9. The renewed grounds before the Upper Tribunal upon which permission was
    granted state as follows:

         "Whilst it is accepted that it is for an appellant to make as  many
         applications as he wishes and it is for the Respondent to deal with
         any applications made.  It is argued that it is not the position of
         an Immigration Judge to allow an appeal Outside of the  Immigration
         Rules before an application has been  made  that  may  or  may  not
         succeed under the Rules."

10. The grounds go  on,  "It  is  respectfully  submitted  that  for  Judge
    Hodgkinson to find this appellant's  circumstances  exceptional  brings
    him into the realms of perversity".

11. The grant of permission dated 28 February 2017 states as follows in the
    second paragraph:

         "It is arguable that having found that the  appellant  cannot  meet
         the requirements of the rules the Judge had erred in  allowing  the
         appeal under article 8 of the ECHR when he has not  identified  any
         sufficiently compelling factors to show that his removal  would  be
         disproportionate and that therefore to that extent the decision  is
         perverse."

12. The challenge here is, therefore, that it was not open  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to find the fact that the applicant met the provisions of
    the Immigration Rules in  force  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing  a
    sufficiently exceptional factor  or  one  that  made  the  respondent's
    decision disproportionate.

13. In response, the  appellant  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    followed the  correct  approach,  taking  into  account  the  statutory
    requirements but ultimately making a decision on  proportionality  that
    was his to make and not perverse. In particular, I was referred to [60]
    of Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11:

         "60. It remains the position that the ultimate question  is  how  a
             fair balance should be struck between the competing public and
             individual  interests  involved,  applying  a  proportionality
             test. The Rules and Instructions in issue in the present  case
             do not depart from that position. The Secretary of  State  has
             not imposed a test of exceptionality, in the sense which  Lord
             Bingham had in mind: that is to say, a  requirement  that  the
             case should exhibit some  highly  unusual  feature,  over  and
             above the application of the test of proportionality.  On  the
             contrary, she has defined the word 'exceptional',  as  already
             explained, as meaning 'circumstances in  which  refusal  would
             result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual
             such  that  the  refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be
             proportionate'.  So   understood,   the   provision   in   the
             Instructions that leave can be granted outside the Rules where
             exceptional circumstances apply involves  the  application  of
             the test  of  proportionality  to  the  circumstances  of  the
             individual case, and cannot be regarded as  incompatible  with
             article  8.  That  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  express
             statement in the Instructions that 'exceptional' does not mean
             'unusual' or 'unique': see para 19 above."

14. I have set out above that the First-tier Tribunal decision here  showed
    that proper consideration was given to the public interest and  to  the
    s.117B factors. He explicitly identified the provisions  of  s.117B(5).
    He identified why the particular facts of this case,  specifically  the
    applicant meeting the long residence Rules as of the date  of  hearing,
    led to the conclusion  that  the  decision  was  disproportionate.  The
    wording in  [37]  about  the  absence  of  a  "legitimate  purpose"  is
    infelicitous where the judge has already,  correctly,  identified  that
    the decision reflected the public interest in an effective  immigration
    system; see [5] above. That infelicity is remedied immediately  by  the
    correct re-formulation of the key question as one  of  proportionality.
    It is  not  my  view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  on
    proportionality was perverse. He was obliged to consider the  situation
    as of the date of the hearing, was not wrong in law  to  conclude  that
    the applicant met the Immigration Rules then in force and it  was  open
    to him to conclude that this weighed the  balance  in  the  appellant's
    favour after taking into account the relevant statutory provisions.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 27 April 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
