
                                                        [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                          Appeal No:
HU/00561/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Royal Courts of Justice                  Decision Promulgated
On: 18 July 2016
 On: 20 July 2016



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant



                                     And

                                     CSC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Elliott-Kelly,  Counsel  instructed  by  McKenzie,
Beute & Pope



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or otherwise identify him or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
Court proceedings. I make this order in order to prevent a risk  of  serious
harm arising to the appellant's minor child.

This appeal is against the decision promulgated on 14 January 2016 of First-
tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth  which  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
against a decision dated 21 May 2015 refusing a  human  rights  application.


For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as  the
respondent and to Mr C as the appellant, reflecting their  positions  before
the First-tier Tribunal.


Mr C was born in 1960 and  is  a  citizen  of  a  Commonwealth  country.  He
maintains that he came to the UK in 1972 and was present  in  the  UK  on  1
January 1973. He argues that he is  therefore  exempt  from  deportation  by
operation of s. 7(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and s.33(1)(b)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007. I return to this disputed matter below.


What is common ground is that Mr C committed  a  wide  variety  of  offences
between 1981 and 2007. Those offences included robbery,  burglary,  forgery,
handling,  possession  of  offensive  weapon  in   public,   possession   of
controlled   drug,   cultivating   cannabis,   and   dishonestly   obtaining
electricity.


On 25 June 2013 he was convicted of the offence of supply of Class  A  drugs
and on 24 July 2013 received a sentence of 42 months. As  a  result  of  the
respondent made a deportation order against him on 26 November 2014.


The appellant made submissions under Article 8 ECHR  concerning  his  family
and private  life.  In  a  decision  dated  21  May  2015  the  refused  the
appellant's human rights claim.


The  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  came  before   First-tier
Tribunal Hollingworth on 1 October 2015 and 14 December  2015.  The  dispute
as to when the appellant arrived in the UK and his attempts  to  obtain  his
full file from the Home Office in order to support that  part  of  his  case
appears to have been a prominent feature of the  litigation.  The  appellant
maintained that serious formal attempts had been made  to  obtain  his  full
Home Office file (and those of close relatives) in order to  establish  that
he came to the UK in 1972.  It appears that the hearing on  1  October  2015
was adjourned until 14 December 2015 in order for the appellant's full  file
to be provided but that did not happen.


Judge Hollingworth commented thus at [68]-[72]:


      "68. I find that it is clear that insufficient attention has been paid
      to the range of potential material available and  to  actual  material
      namely in the fourth file not available to the Home Office  Presenting
      Officer before me. My conclusion  is  that  the  deportation  decision
      taken by the Respondent in the first  place  has  been  taken  in  the
      absence of  all  the  potentially  available  for  available  material
      capable of shedding light on the date of  the  first  arrival  of  the
      Appellant in the United Kingdom.


      69. The issue is of central importance to the case in deciding whether
      the Appellant can be the subject of automatic deportation  or  not.  I
      have set out the evidence given  at  the  hearing  before  in  October
      above. Witnesses on the Appellant's behalf have given  clear  evidence
      that he arrived before 1st January 1973. The gap in time between  that
      date and the first available documentary evidence is a short one.  The
      Home Office would clearly have wanted to  know  when  the  Appellant's
      brother [RC] arrived in the United Kingdom before taking any steps  in
      relation to him becoming a British citizen. The Respondent would  have
      had an interest in finding out when he first  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


      70. The Respondent has not only failed  to  gather  all  the  relevant
      information in  the  first  instance  before  making  the  deportation
      decision but has failed to answer the Subject Access Requests made  by
      those on behalf of the Appellant which have been designed for fairness
      to be achieved in this case.


      71. I find that the Respondent has failed to act  in  accordance  with
      the law by failing to seek all the relevant information before  making
      the deportation decision in the first place. I find that this  failure
      to act in accordance with the law has established a theme to which the
      Respondent has adhered, given the failure to act within the  statutory
      timescale in response to the Subject Access Requests which  have  been
      made. Further material under a covering letter dated the 24th December
      2015 is attached to the file.


      72. I allow the appeal on the basis that the Respondent has not  acted
      in accordance with the law in the making of the deportation decision."


The  "Notice  of  Decision"  then  states  "Appeal  allowed  to  the  extent
indicated above".

The respondent's challenge  to  those  paragraphs  is  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to allow the appeal in those terms.   The
changes to the appellate system brought  in  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014
meant that the appellant could only appeal on human rights grounds  and  the
Tribunal could only allow or dismiss a human rights appeal. The  appeal  was
not against the making of the deportation order. There was  no  jurisdiction
for a "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  decision  or  remittal  to  the
respondent for a new decision. The judge should have made a decision on  the
Article 8 claim.


Ms Elliott-Kelly did not dispute the  lack  of  statutory  jurisdiction  for
allowing the appeal on a "not otherwise in accordance with the  law"  basis,
that option having  been  removed  from  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration Act 2014.


She maintained that as the First-tier Tribunal was undoubtedly seized of  an
Article 8 appeal, it was open  to  Judge  Hollingworth  to  apply  the  five
"Razgar questions" from R (ex parte Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  This  is
what he did, answering the third question as  to  whether  the  interference
with the appellant's rights  was   "in  accordance  with  the  law"  in  the
appellant's favour.


 The "Razgar questions" are set out at [17] of the decision of the House  of
Lords as follows:


    "(1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
    with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private
    or (as the case may be) family life?
    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
    potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
    (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
    (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
    the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
    being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
    protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
    freedoms of others?
    (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
    end sought to be achieved?"
It is not possible to read the determination of Judge Hollingworth as
asking and answering any of those questions. There is no reference to or
substantive consideration at all of the "Razgar questions". There is no
application of any legal matrix relevant to the Article 8 ECHR appeal
before him in the material parts of his decision set out above.
The appeal was allowed as the First-tier Tribunal purported to exercise a
jurisdiction no longer open to it, finding that the respondent acted
unlawfully in failing to obtain proper information on when the appellant
came to the UK before making a deportation order and in failing to provide
that information when formally requested to do so by the appellant and the
Tribunal. There was no statutory jurisdiction for allowing an appeal on
that basis and in doing so the First-tier Tribunal fell into legal error.
For these reasons I set aside the decision in order for it to be re-made.
The parties submitted that in the event of an error of law being found, the
appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as no substantive
findings of fact at all were made on the appellant's Article 8 claim.  That
appears to me also to be the correct course of action. Notwithstanding what
is said at [68] of the decision of Judge Hollingworth, there is no extant
finding on when the appellant came to the UK. A finding in favour of the
appellant on this point is likely to have a highly material impact on an
Article 8 decision given the submission made by Ms Elliott-Kelly on the
relevance of the third "Razgar question" and, independent to that point,
any consideration of the provisions of paragraphs 398-399A of the
Immigration Rules and s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be re-made.

The appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal



Signed:

[pic]                                        Date: 19 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

