
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00014/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 30th August 2016                 |On: 20th January 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     GM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms C Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC)
    born in 1985.  On the  16th  September  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed his appeal against a decision to deport  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom. The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  now  has
    permission to appeal that decision[1].




    Anonymity Order

 2. The Respondent is a foreign criminal and as such would  not  ordinarily
    benefit from an order protecting his identity. This case  does  however
    turn in part on his relationship with his minor son who  lives  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  Identification  of  the  Respondent  could  lead   to
    identification of this child and for that reason, and for  the  purpose
    of this decision, I make an order for anonymity in the following terms:



         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    The Hearing

 3. This matter  first  came  before  me  on  the  30th  August  2016.  The
    Respondent did not attend the hearing.  The Tribunal clerk made efforts
    to contact the Respondent, and the representatives  who  were  last  on
    record, Perry Clements Solicitors. She managed to  speak  with  someone
    from the solicitors, who told her that  they  were  not  aware  of  the
    hearing. They were moving offices and were having problems having their
    post re-directed.  The woman on the phone assured  the  Tribunal  clerk
    that she would try and  get  hold  of  the  Respondent.  When  she  was
    contacted again she said that she had spoken to the Respondent's father-
    in-law who had said that he could not be contacted and that he  may  be
    at work. In a subsequent call it  was  said  that  the  Respondent  was
    actually in A&E and that  he  had  not  known  about  the  hearing.  Ms
    Isherwood noted that there was also a bail renewal listed, and that  on
    the information she had been given the Respondent  had  been  complying
    with his 'signing on' conditions at Becket House.  Given  his  apparent
    compliance with his bail conditions, I accepted that  the  Respondent's
    non-attendance was not intentional. I adjourned the proceedings.

 4. Fresh notices of hearing were sent out. At the resumed hearing  on  the
    3rd October 2016 there was still no attendance by the  Respondent.  The
    Tribunal received an email from a Mrs VR, who had previously  stood  as
    surety. I believe she is the maternal grandmother of  the  Respondent's
    son. VR explained that she had already requested that  she  be  removed
    from the record as a surety.  She  requested  that  the  Tribunal  stop
    sending her mail and said that she would not be attending the  hearing.
    The Tribunal clerk contacted VR from the court room.   VR informed  the
    Tribunal that although she had received the notice of hearing  she  did
    not know if the Respondent knew about it and she was unable to say what
    his current address was.

 5. Having considered all of the circumstances I decided not to adjourn the
    matter again. The  notice  of  hearing  had  been  sent  out  the  last
    addresses we had on file. If  VR  knew  about  the  hearing  it  seemed
    reasonably likely that the Respondent would know about it too. I  heard
    oral submissions from Ms Isherwood about whether or not the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained  a  material  error  of  law,  and  I
    reserved my decision.

 6. Following that hearing an item of  correspondence,  received  in  Field
    House on the 7th September 2016 but regrettably  not  attached  to  the
    file, was brought to  my  attention.  This  was  a  letter  from  Perry
    Clements Solicitors, from their office in  Rex  House,  Ballards  Lane,
    North Finchley, London N12 0DD. The letter reads that they continue  to
    represent the Respondent, and gives his address in Enfield.  The notice
    of hearing for the 3rd October 2016, sent  out  on  the  8th  September
    2016, was not sent to either of these  addresses.   In  light  of  this
    information, I did not consider it appropriate to proceed to  determine
    the Secretary of State's appeal until I could  be  confident  that  the
    Respondent and his representatives had had an opportunity to make their
    case.  With apologies to both parties for the inconvenience  that  this
    administrative error has caused I sent out directions to the solicitors
    and Respondent at the addresses given and  invited  submissions  as  to
    whether the hearing should be reconvened.

 7. I received no response from the Respondent. On the  9th  November  2016
    Field House received a letter  from  Perry  Clements  Solicitors  which
    indicated that they were without instructions, having lost contact with
    their client.

 8. Given the history of these proceedings and the strenuous attempts  made
    to communicate with the Respondent, I am  satisfied  that  any  further
    adjournment would  not  result  in  his  participation.  I  proceed  to
    consider the Secretary of State's appeal on the  documents  before  me,
    taking into account the oral submissions made by Ms  Isherwood  on  the
    3rd October 2016.




    Background and Matters in Issue

 9. The Respondent came to the United Kingdom in 1995 with his parents when
    he was nine or ten years old.   The family were refused asylum but were
    granted Exceptional Leave to Remain, and in  2007  the  Respondent  was
    granted Indefinite Leave.

10. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  took  this  action  to
    deport following the Respondent's conviction, on the 9th June 2009,  of
    making false representations in order to make gain. The Respondent  had
    been employed by B&Q at the time and had used the fuel card he had been
    given  to  purchase  diesel  in  cans  and  illegally  sell  them   on.
    Notwithstanding this breach of his employer's trust the Respondent  was
    given a suspended prison sentence and a community service order. It was
    his failure to comply with the terms of the latter  which  brought  him
    back to Wood Green Crown Court on the  15th  October  2014.  The  Court
    activated the suspended sentence and the Respondent was sent to  prison
    for 12 months.  This was the offence which led to the  action,  but  it
    was not the only conviction. GM had,  as  the  Notice  of  Decision  to
    deport has it, 17 previous convictions.

11. Before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Respondent  argued  that  he  fell
    within two of the 'exceptions' to the automatic deportation  provisions
    in Part 13 of the Immigration Rules. First, he submitted with reference
    to paragraph 399 that it would be unduly harsh for his British  son  if
    he were to be deported. Second, he pointed to his lack of ties  to  the
    DRC and his long UK residence to  submit  that  his  appeal  should  be
    allowed with reference to paragraph 399A.    The  Tribunal  agreed  and
    allowed his appeal under both heads.

12. The Secretary of State now appeals on the following grounds:

              i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give reasons as to why it
                 would be "unduly harsh" for the Respondent's  son  to  live
                 without him.

                 The written grounds refer to MAB (para 399 'unduly  harsh')
                 USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) and allege that  although  this
                 case is cited by the First-tier Tribunal, it  has  in  fact
                 failed to apply the guidance therein.   In  essence  it  is
                 pleaded that the Tribunal failed to give reasons as to  why
                 it would be "inordinately bleak" for child to be  separated
                 from father.

                 Before me Ms  Isherwood  was  given  leave  to  amend  this
                 ground, and to place reliance on MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA
                 Civ 450, the case in which the Court  of  Appeal  preferred
                 the approach taken in KMO  (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
                 [2015] UKUT 000543 (IAC) to that in  MAB.   The  effect  of
                 this new authority was that in weighing whether  separation
                 is unduly harsh, decision-makers are  bound  to  factor  in
                 matters beyond the child's control, such as the seriousness
                 of the offending behaviour of the parent.

             ii) Failing to give adequate reasons/weight in respect  of  the
                 public interest.

                 The Secretary of  State  submits  that  in  addressing  the
                 public interest the Tribunal fails to give adequate  weight
                 to the fact that this was GM's 18th  conviction  and  there
                 was therefore a powerful public interest  in  his  removal.
                 The First-tier  Tribunal  is  alleged  to  have  failed  to
                 identify and explain the public  revulsion  in  this  case,
                 deterrence to others and the need  to  build  and  maintain
                 public confidence in cases such as these.  This  submission
                 covers both limbs of GM's case. In respect of whether there
                 are "very significant obstacles" to  his  reintegration  in
                 the DRC the Secretary of State submits that  his  inability
                 to speak Lingala is not sufficient reason to find this test
                 met.

            iii) Failure to consider the factors set out at  section  117A-D
                 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
                 amended by s19 of the Immigration Act 2014).

                 Although it is recognised that the  Tribunal  mentions  the
                 relevant sections, it is submitted that it failed  to  deal
                 with them substantively in the body of its reasoning.



    My Findings

    Paragraph 399(a)

13. Whilst I am satisfied that the Tribunal  gave  sound  reasons  for  its
    findings, it is now clear that it did so following legal  misdirection.
    At paragraphs 28-30 the Tribunal evaluates the question of  whether  it
    would be "unduly harsh" in the context of the guidance  given  in  MAB.
    That approach required the Tribunal to consider only  the  impact  upon
    the child.  The Court of Appeal has now given clear indication that  it
    was wrong to do so. The proper approach was that advocated in KMO.  The
    Tribunal is required to consider  all  factors,  balancing  the  public
    interest in removal against  any  adverse  impact  on  the  child.   It
    follows that the findings on that matter must be set aside.

    Paragraph 399A

14. The appeal was allowed in the alternative with reference  to  paragraph
    399A of the Rules. This provides that a person sentenced to  12  months
    in  prison  (and  so  falling  within  paragraph  398(b))   can   avoid
    deportation if he  can  show  that  the  following  three  factors  are
    established:

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

15. At paragraphs 31-32 the Tribunal makes clear findings of fact that  the
    Respondent can do just that. He left the DRC when he  was  three  years
    old and cannot speak Lingala.  His  family  are  all  British  citizens
    living in the UK. He had at the date of the appeal been in  the  United
    Kingdom some 20 years, approximating two thirds of his life. He  speaks
    fluent English and is socially and culturally integrated in the  United
    Kingdom, having finished his education here, having been in  employment
    for over ten years and having had  a  long  term  relationship  with  a
    British woman.  He is father to  a  British  child.  The  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that he would be returning to the DRC after an absence of  27
    years, with no support, accommodation or employment.  Taking all  those
    factors into account the Tribunal was satisfied that the  exception  at
    339A was engaged.

16. The Secretary of State takes no issue with the findings in  respect  of
    399A (a) and (b). Her complaint as to (c) is framed as follows:

         "it is further submitted the FTJ  erred,  at  para  32,  when  they
         considered there would  be  'very  significant  obstacles'  if  the
         Appellant was returned to the DRC, because he  is  unfamiliar  with
         the language. That is not a circumstance that outweighs the  public
         interest in deportation and the Appellant would have some knowledge
         of the DRC through his parents"

17. It seems to me  that  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks,  in  the  short
    paragraph, to raise three discrete points.

18. First  it  is  suggested  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  because  the
    Respondent does not speak Lingala.  I cannot accept that the  reasoning
    is limited to that. As I summarise above, the Tribunal had regard to  a
    number of factors, most pertinently the fact that  the  Respondent  has
    not been to that country since he was three years old. That he knows no-
    one there, has no familiarity with the country and without contacts  or
    language  skills  would  have  considerable   difficulty   in   finding
    employment and thereby accommodation  were  plainly  matters  that  the
    Tribunal was entitled to take into account.

19. Second it is suggested that an inability to  speak  Lingala  is  not  a
    matter which outweighs the public interest. As I note  above  this  was
    not the sum total of the reasoning. I do note however that there is  no
    authority to the effect that the public  interest  plays  any  part  in
    determining, as a matter of fact, whether there are  'very  significant
    obstacles' to integration. Either there are such  obstacles,  or  there
    are not.

20. Thirdly the Secretary of State submits that the Respondent  would  have
    some knowledge of the DRC "through his parents".   Although it  is  not
    clearly articulated, presumably  the  Secretary  of  State  intends  to
    submit that this was a factor not given due weight by the Tribunal.  It
    is true that it does not explicitly feature at paragraphs 31-32.  I  am
    not however satisfied that it is a factor  that  would  have  made  any
    material difference to the Tribunal's reasoning. It  may  well  be  the
    case that his parents  have  imparted  to  him  some  understanding  of
    Congolese culture (if not an ability to speak Lingala) but  since  they
    themselves left that country almost 3 decades ago it  is  difficult  to
    see what "knowledge" they could give their son that would equip him  to
    overcome the obstacles identified by the Tribunal.







    Conclusion

21. Although I have found ground (1) to be made out,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any material  error  of  law  in  this  determination  in
    respect of paragraph 399A.  It follows that the error identified is not
    such that the decision must be set aside.




      Decisions

22. The First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain an error of law  such
    that it must be set aside.

23. There is a direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  18th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
Freeman on the 20th July 2016.

