
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00659/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              mrs surinder kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Legal Representative, Fast Track
Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 14 September 2018 Judge Havard of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    India, against the decision made by the respondent on 30 November  2017
    refusing her leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The appellant's grounds contend first of all that the judge  failed  to
    consider the appellant's case under the transitional provisions of  the
    Immigration Rules requiring that the appellant's  case  be  dealt  with
    under the Rules in force as at 8 July  2012.   This  failure  was  said
    secondly to undermine his findings  with  respect  to  the  maintenance
    requirement and the  English  Language/Knowledge  of  Life  in  the  UK
    requirement  and  by  extension  the  judge's  consideration   of   the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances outside the Rules.

3.   As regards the first ground, Ms Everett did not dispute that the  judge
    had failed to assess the appellant's case under the correct Rules.  She
    pointed out that the respondent had proceeded on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's case fell to be considered under the pre-9 July 2012  Rules
    and in the respondent's view so should have the judge.

4.   I concur with the  representatives  that  the  appellant  was  entitled
    under transitional provisions to have her  application  for  settlement
    decided under the  pre-9  July  2012  Rules.   She  had  submitted  her
    application prior to 9 July 2012.  Accordingly  it  was  wrong  of  the
    judge to apply the post-9 July 2012 Rules to the appellant's case.

5.   In order to show that this error was material, however,  the  appellant
    has to show that it had a material impact on the outcome of the judge's
    assessment of the appellant's circumstances under the Rules or  outside
    them.

6.   Mr Wells submits  that  the  judge's  error  was  material  because  by
    applying the strict evidence requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE the
    judge misdirected himself in relation to  the  approach  taken  to  the
    assessment of income from salaries and from the company.

7.   Mr Wells submits that there was also  material  error  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the appellant's failure to sit the Knowledge  of  Life  in
    the UK test, since she had explained in her covering  letter  that  she
    had valid medical reasons, which were supported by medical evidence and
    the judge failed to consider whether the  respondent  had  conducted  a
    consideration in accordance with the guidance  document  "Knowledge  of
    Language and Life in the UK."

8.   Further, Mr Wells submits that the appellant was able  to  comply  with
    the English language requirements as they stood prior to 9 July 2012.

9.   I am not persuaded that the appellant's second ground is made out.

10.  Whilst it is true that the judge erroneously assessed  the  appellant's
    financial circumstances by reference to post 9 July 2012  requirements,
    his principal findings of fact meant that the appellant was also unable
    to meet the pre-9 July 2012 maintenance requirements.  From  paragraphs
    84-104 it is clear that,  quite  separately  from  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had failed  to  provide  specified  documents,  she  had  not
    produced  satisfactory  evidence  to  show  she  could  be   adequately
    maintained.  At paragraph 90 the judge stated:

         "Not  only  was  the  documentation  supplied  by   the   Appellant
         inadequate and non-compliant with the  Rules,  the  evidence,  both
         oral and documentary, in respect of income, was contradictory to  a
         material degree."

11.  The judge went on to note that there was no evidence  in  the  form  of
    bank statements of any monthly payments of wages being  made  into  the
    appellant's current account (paragraph 93); and that the appellant  had
    not established she had been paid a dividend by her  husband's  company
    (CLSL) (paragraphs 96-98).  In relation to the maintenance  requirement
    under the pre-9 July 2012 Rules, the onus of proof lay on the appellant
    to show that such maintenance would be  adequate  using  the  level  of
    income and other benefits that would be available if  the  family  were
    drawing income support as a  yardstick  (KA  and  Others  (adequacy  of
    maintenance).   It  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied by the evidence that she had  discharged  this  burden  quite
    apart from the issue of  whether  she  met  additional  (more  onerous)
    requirements introduced by the 9 July 2012 Rules.

12.  As regards the Life in the UK requirement Mr Wells accepted  that  this
    was a requirement that was applicable under the pre-9 July 2012  Rules.
    The simple facts regarding this test are:

    (1)  that the appellant took it and failed it; and


    (2)  that she requested an exemption for this test;


    (3)  the respondent (albeit doing this under "Modernised Guidance") did
         consider this request but decided not  to  exercise  discretion  to
         waive it because the medical evidence was insufficient; and that


    (4)  the judge also considered whether a  waiver  was  appropriate  and
         decided not, stating at paragraphs 108-111 that:


             "108.    The Appellant has  not  taken  the  English  language
                  test.  She states that the reason for her failure to do so
                  is as a result  of  suffering  from  persistent  headaches
                  which prevents her from concentrating for  any  length  of
                  time.  The Appellant  suggests  that  any  activity  which
                  calls  for  prolonged  concentration  will  bring   on   a
                  headache.


             109. In support of her application the Appellant had  included
                  a handwritten note from City Hospital  dated  18  February
                  2017 which refers to her undergoing medical treatment  for
                  depression and headaches and that she had been admitted on
                  18 February 2017 for hypertension and chest pain  although
                  there was no further information about what  has  happened
                  since.  Otherwise, there is a letter from the  Appellant's
                  GP dated 28 June 2017 which confirms that the Appellant is
                  suffering from recurrent headaches for which she had  been
                  prescribed Amitriptyline which can make  her  drowsy.   It
                  states that she has been referred to a neurologist  and  I
                  have been informed that the Appellant is due to  attend  a
                  consultation with a neurologist and I have  been  informed
                  that the Appellant is due to attend a consultation with  a
                  neurologist in August 2018.


             110. The Appellant confirmed that, despite her headaches,  she
                  was able to continue her work until she was prevented from
                  doing so by the Home Office in August 2017.  She  accepted
                  that, had she not been prevented from working by the  Home
                  Office she would have continued to do so.   This  involved
                  standing at a conveyor belt for seven or eight hours a day
                  sorting through a potato crop, removing any potatoes which
                  did not meet the required standard.


             111. On her own evidence, the Appellant was and is capable  of
                  working as described between four to six days a  week  and
                  between seven to eight hours a day.  Whilst I accept  that
                  the Appellant may  suffer  from  headaches,  there  is  an
                  absence of any medical evidence to support her  contention
                  that she suffers from headaches to the extent that she  is
                  unable to sit the English test."

13.  It is true that the judge's analysis was directed  to  the  appellant's
    failure to meet the  English  language  requirement,  but  the  judge's
    reasons for finding the medical evidence unsatisfactory as regards  the
    Knowledge of Life in the UK test were equally applicable to  the  issue
    of whether  the  appellant's  failure  in  respect  of  this  test  was
    attributable to valid medical reasons.  Mr  Wells  has  not  sought  to
    suggest that different medical  or  other  considerations  should  have
    applied to both tests.

14.  It remains that the judge was wrong to consider  that  the  appellant's
    failure to meet the English language requirements of the  post  9  July
    2012 Rules was relevant.  It is not now in dispute that she was able to
    meet the relevant English language requirements of the pre-9 July  2012
    Rules.

15.  Particularly given therefore that the judge erred in  applying  post  9
    July 2012 financial and English language requirements, it is  necessary
    to ask whether these errors  had  a  material  impact  on  the  judge's
    assessment of the  appellant,  Article  8  considerations  outside  the
    Rules.  Despite Mr Wells' valiant attempts to persuade me  otherwise  I
    cannot see that there was any material impact.

16.  Had the judge applied the  correct  Rules  he  would  still  have  been
    obliged to conclude that the appellant did not meet their  requirements
    both as regards the maintenance requirement and the Knowledge  of  Life
    in the UK requirement.  It is not in dispute that in doing so he  would
    still also have been obliged to have regard to the  considerations  set
    out in s.117A-D of the NIAA 2002.  But when doing so,  he  would  still
    have been obliged to conclude that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and to treat this failure  as  a  significant
    factor and to count against her  lack  of  financial  independence.   I
    accept that in paragraphs 121 and  123  the  judge  treated  as  public
    interest factors weighing against the appellant  not  just  (correctly)
    her failure to pass the Knowledge of Life in  the  UK  tests  but  also
    (incorrectly) her failure to meet  the  English  language  requirement.
    But even had the judge understood that her English language proficiency
    was sufficient under the relevant Immigration Rules applicable to  her,
    it would not have significantly  altered  the  assessment  he  made  as
    regards whether she had shown compelling circumstances.  In this regard
    what the judge stated at paragraphs 124-125 is very significant:

         "124.    I have come to the conclusion that there are no compelling
             reasons to support a finding that the Respondent's decision to
             refuse the Appellant's application was  disproportionate.   In
             my judgement, on the basis of my findings, the public interest
             in maintaining immigration control outweighs the interests  of
             the Appellant and her right to a family life.


         125. I have reached the same conclusion with regard to her right to
             a private life.  I have taken into account what has been  said
             by the Appellant at paragraph 17 of her statement.  I  do  not
             accept that it would not be possible for  both  the  Appellant
             and her husband to earn a living if they  were  to  return  to
             India.  I also do not accept that, having lived in India until
             2013,  it  would  now  represent  a  foreign  country  to  the
             Appellant.  I have considered what the Appellant's husband has
             said at paragraph 14 of his statement.  It is not specific  in
             setting out any obstacles the Appellant may face if  she  were
             to return.  The Appellant has spent the vast majority  of  her
             life in India.  The Appellant's husband  came  to  the  UK  in
             2010.  Although the Appellant became married in 2011,  it  was
             not until June 2013 that she came to the  UK.   The  Appellant
             therefore managed to live in India from 2010 until 2013 whilst
             her husband was in the UK.  She has family in India and it  is
             also open to her husband to return with  her.   The  Appellant
             will not experience any  language  difficulties  and  will  be
             fully aware of the country's culture and norms  of  living  in
             India.  I do not consider that there would be very significant
             obstacles to the Appellant's integration into day-to-day  life
             in India."

17.  Paragraph 124 makes clear that there  was  a  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration controls against the  appellant.   Paragraph
    125 makes clear that there would not be very significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant and her husband resuming their family life in India.  The
    judge's findings in this regard  were  entirely  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses. Neither the appellant's  grounds  nor  Mr  Wells'
    skeleton argument identify any set  of  considerations  that  could  be
    taken  to  amount  to  compelling  circumstances,  even  assuming   the
    appellant had been assessed under the correct Immigration Rules.

18.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 31 December 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
