
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00099/2018
                                                               HU/00100/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th February 2019                         |On 21 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1)  Ester [R]
                               (2)  EDSON [C]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Lay (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss S Cuhna (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andonian, promulgated  on  12th  September  2018,  following  the
    hearing at Taylor House on 24th August 2018.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellants are both citizens of Malawi.  The  first  Appellant  was
    born on 10th July 1969 and is a female.  The second Appellant was  born
    on 11th June 1963 and is a male.  He is  the  dependant  of  the  first
    Appellant.   Both  had  applied  for  the   regularisation   of   their
    immigration status on the basis of family and private  life  which  was
    refused by the Respondent on 2nd December 2017 and  3rd  November  2017
    respectively.

The Judge's Determination

 3. In a long and protracted determination (running into 81 paragraphs) the
    Judge concluded that the Appellants could not succeed on a  balance  of
    probabilities.  There were no exceptional circumstances  allowing  them
    to qualify to remain in this country under Article 8.  The decision  to
    refuse the human rights claims was a lawful decision.  There  would  be
    no great consequences as a result of the refusal of  the  human  rights
    claim.  The Appellants had indicated that they can  live  in  Zimbabwe.
    The first Appellant could  go  to  Zimbabwe  from  Malawi  on  his  own
    passport.  The second Appellant had gone to the extent  of  asking  for
    his passport back as he had the intention  of  returning  to  Zimbabwe.
    But had then changed his mind.  Both have  a  number  of  relatives  in
    Zimbabwe.  (Paragraph 81).

Grounds of Application

 4.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellants could return to Zimbabwe was contrary to the case law.  They
    also state that the judge failed to understand the medical condition of
    the first Appellant.  The  judge  had  also  placed  reliance  upon  an
    outdated country of origin policy.

 5. On 21st December 2018, permission to appeal  was  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that

         "Much  of  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ  is  a  rehearsal  of   the
         Respondent's reasons for refusal letter.  It is therefore difficult
         to separate findings or conclusions made  by  the  judge  from  the
         views of the  Secretary  of  State.   It  is  unclear  whether  the
         findings and conclusions at paragraph 81 are the  only  conclusions
         reached by the judge himself..." (at paragraph 3).

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 11th February 2019, Mr Lane,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following submissions.   First,  that
    the Respondent based his position on the fact  that  the  2012  country
    information indicated that dual nationality could not be held by Malawi
    nationals.  That was the position as  reiterated  in  the  Respondent's
    2017 country information note.  This was a case  where  the  Appellants
    had entered the UK on Malawi passports.  They were  to  be  treated  as
    from Malawi.  Judge Andonian, however, did not deal  with  the  central
    issue of return to Malawi.  The question was whether  they  would  face
    very significant obstacles to integration within paragraph  276ADE(vi).
    There were no clear  findings  as  to  whether  it  was  accepted,  for
    example, that one  or  both  of  the  Appellants  had  a  very  limited
    connection to Malawi owing to the fact that  the  first  Appellant  was
    indeed born in Malawi and had spent her life there, but that the second
    Appellant had moved to Zimbabwe aged 6 months and  stayed  there  after
    that, including a long stint in government service, and that  they  had
    family members in Zimbabwe at least  until  recently.   The  judge  had
    indeed made adverse findings as to credibility of the Appellant's claim
    that they have no family in Zimbabwe (see paragraphs 70,  74,  and  81)
    but there were no findings as regards connections to Malawi.

 7. Secondly, submitted Mr Lay, there was no engagement with the  obstacles
    to any proposed return to Zimbabwe.  First, this could have  been  done
    on the basis that the Appellants are  Malawi  nationals.   It  was  not
    clear upon what basis the judge was assuming that they would  have  the
    right to return to Zimbabwe, having left fifteen  years  ago,  although
    they had previously lived in that country on  some  unspecified  basis.
    Secondly, however, it is settled policy of  the  Zimbabwean  government
    not to grant emergency travel documents to individuals  who  did  state
    that they are willing to return and the Respondent could  not  lawfully
    require someone to tell officials at the Zimbabwean Embassy that he  or
    she agrees voluntarily to return to Zimbabwe: see JM (Zimbabwe)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1669.

 8. The third submission that Mr Lay had before me was that the  assessment
    of the suicide risk within the well-established case of J v SSHD [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629 and the case of Y (Sri Lanka) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362,  was
    tainted  by  the  misconstruction  of  the  first  Appellant's  medical
    condition and the reliance on outdated country information.   This  was
    because there were two medical reports by  Dr  Magda  Czerwinska.   The
    first report was dated 31st October 2012.  The relevant report from the
    expert was the one which referred to  recent  evidence  of  a  risk  to
    relapse, self-harm, and the causal link to return (see page 92  of  the
    bundle).  This report stated that, "I  am  concerned  that  if  she  is
    forced to go back to her homeland, her mental health  will  deteriorate
    quickly, she will lose all her support  and  care  and  she  will  most
    likely have a psychotic relapse".  The judge nowhere  refers  to  this.
    Although the judge does refer (at paragraph 55 of the determination) to
    a letter by Dr Magda Czerwinska, this appears to be  referring  to  the
    much older report of 16th May 2017 (which appears at page  100  of  the
    bundle).  These errors, in relation to the use  of  the  wrong  medical
    report, are compounded by the judge's reliance  on  the  older  country
    information report on Malawi (at paragraph 47)  when  the  Respondent's
    own country information note was updated in  December  2017.   Instead,
    however, the judge quotes from the previous information note dated 31st
    October 2012.

 9. For her part, Miss Cuhna submitted that there was no error of law.  The
    outdated October 2012  country  information  report  was  not  material
    because it would have no adverse impact upon the consideration  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  This was a case where the judge had, in any  event,
    considered the position, not just in relation to the Appellant's return
    to Zimbabwe, but also in relation to their return to Malawi.  This  was
    clear from what the judge stated but pointing out  that,  she  did  not
    want to return to Zimbabwe or  Malawi"  because  "there  is  widespread
    poverty in Malawi and Zimbabwe" (paragraph 31).  Indeed, the judge  had
    then gone on to conclude that,  given  that  the  first  Appellant  was
    resourceful, "there was no reason  why  she  could  not  use  the  same
    resourcefulness to establish her life in Zimbabwe or Malawi" (paragraph
    37).

10. Second, there was  also  no  error  in  the  judge's  determination  in
    relation to whether the expert report of Dr Magda Czerwinska  had  been
    taken into account from 16th May 2017 (which was the  older  letter  at
    page 100 of the bundle), or the more recent report of 2nd November 2017
    (which appears at page 92 of the bundle).  This is  because  the  judge
    had addressed the very issue here of concern when he pointed out  that,
    "it is accepted that the crisis assessment treatment team have given  a
    probable diagnosis of psychotic depression  following  an  overdose..."
    (paragraph  55).   This  suggested  that  there  had  been  a  specific
    consideration of the Appellant's "psychotic depression".   Indeed,  the
    judge had also given consideration to the fact that the Lister Hospital
    "has provided evidence to indicate that suicidal thoughts  are  genuine
    and there may be some causal link between her removal and the treatment
    she would inflict on herself" (paragraph 57).  All in  all,  therefore,
    there could be no error.

11. In reply, Mr Lay submitted that at S1 of the Respondent's bundle, there
    were already findings that the Appellants must be returned  to  Malawi,
    in which they were citizens, and there was no  prospect  of  return  to
    Zimbabwe, such that the judge had to approach the matter on  the  basis
    of the well-established principles  in  Devaseelan,  given  an  earlier
    determination in this regard.  The judge had failed to do so.   Second,
    it was plain, upon any consideration of the relevant paragraphs in  the
    determination, that the judge had only had regard to the earlier expert
    report of 16th May 2017 from Dr Magda  Czerwinska,  and  of  the  later
    report of 2nd November 2017, which alone expressly  stated  that  there
    was a causal link between the Appellant's condition and  the  resultant
    harm that would accrue to her.  The judge had not considered this.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (such that  I  should  set  it
    aside) (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) and remake  the  decision.   My
    reasons are as follows.  First, although Miss Cuhna has argued that the
    judge has considered the return  of  the  Appellants  to  Zimbabwe  and
    Malawi equally (by reference to paragraphs 31 to 32 and paragraph  37),
    it is not clear what the judge's findings are in this regard.  When the
    judge concludes (at paragraph 37) he does so in  the  following  terms:
    "it was said that the Appellant had shown resourcefulness in the UK and
    that there was no reason why she could not use the same resourcefulness
    to establish her life in Zimbabwe or Malawi".

13. This, however, appears to  suggest  that  the  judge  is  referring  to
    someone else's  allegation,  namely,  that  of  the  Respondent,  that,
    because the Appellant had shown resourcefulness,  relocation  could  be
    realistically undertaken to Zimbabwe  or  Malawi.   However,  the  next
    sentence then goes  on  to  say  "there  should  be  no  difficulty  to
    integrate into Zimbabwe or Malawi society", and this does not  indicate
    that the judge is making a finding himself, but referring  to  what  is
    being alleged.  The  third  sentence  in  that  paragraph  states  "the
    Appellant also said that with the Malawi passport she could  easily  go
    to Zimbabwe from Malawi  if  need  be",  which  now  appears  to  be  a
    statement from the Appellant herself, rather than the  finding  of  the
    judge.  In any event, as Mr Lay has submitted, the starting  point  for
    the judge in this hearing was what appeared at S1 of  the  Respondent's
    bundle, which was the express finding earlier in a  determination  that
    the Appellants are citizens of Malawi and are returnable there, so that
    the principles of  Devaseelan  could  be  applied.   That  is  not  the
    position that appears to have been taken here.

14. Second, although, as Miss Cuhna submits, there is a  reference  to  the
    Appellant's "diagnosis of psychotic depression" (at paragraph  55)  the
    judge appears to have been referring only to the first letter  from  Dr
    Magda Czerwinska of 16th May 2017, and not  the  later  letter  of  2nd
    November 2017, which is altogether different in  terms  of  the  causal
    link that the doctor is referring to.

15. Third, there was no engagement in the determination with the  obstacles
    to any proposed return to Zimbabwe.  This is important for two reasons.
     First, the Appellants are Malawi nationals, who left Zimbabwe  fifteen
    years ago, and whose basis of stay in that country is unclear.  Second,
    it is the settled policy of the  Zimbabwean  government  not  to  grant
    emergency travel documents to individuals who do not make it clear that
    they are willing to return to Zimbabwe and there  is  no  such  express
    desire on the part of these Appellants.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)  such  that  I  should  set
aside the decision and remake  the  decision.   I  remake  the  decision  as
follows.  This appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
determined by a  judge  other  than  Judge  Andonian  pursuant  to  Practice
Statement 7.2(b).

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th March 2019


