
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00186/2020
                                                               HU/00188/2020
                                                               HU/00192/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 19 August 2021                  |On: 3 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  Tuton [B]
                                  Rima [S]
                                    [K B]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, instructed by Westbrook Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh. The first appellant  was  born
   on 21 February 1981. He entered the UK on 23 December 2010 with leave  to
   enter as a Tier 4 student, which was extended to  16  June  2013.  On  20
   September 2012 the appellant's  leave  was  curtailed  to  expire  on  19
   November 2012, but he was then granted further leave to 22 February  2014
   following an application made on 1 November 2012. The  appellant's  wife,
   the second appellant, arrived in the UK on 7  June  2013  and  was  given
   leave to enter as his dependant until 22 February 2014. Their  leave  was
   subsequently extended to 21 February 2015.

2. On 20 February 2015 the first appellant applied for leave  to  remain  in
   the  UK  with  his  wife,  on  family  and  private  life  grounds.  That
   application was refused on 7 September 2015 and their human rights  claim
   was certified as clearly unfounded, with allegations  made  of  deception
   and fraudulently obtaining a TOEIC certificate in relation to  the  first
   appellant's application of 1 November  2012.  The  appellant's  son,  the
   third appellant, was born on 4 November 2015. The first appellant applied
   for judicial review of the certified decision  but  his  application  for
   permission was refused on 24 March 2016.

3. On 22 June 2016 the first appellant claimed asylum on the basis  that  he
   was Hindu and was  at  risk  as  such  from  the  Islamic  community  and
   extremists in Bangladesh. His claim was refused on 15  December  2016  on
   the basis that it was not credible and that he was at no risk  on  return
   to Bangladesh. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed
   by the First-tier Tribunal on 20 February 2017 again on  the  basis  that
   his account was not accepted as credible.

4. The first appellant then made further submissions  for  himself  and  his
   wife and child on 21 June 2019 on the basis of their family  and  private
   life in the UK under  Article  8.  In  those  submissions  the  appellant
   contested  the  allegation  of  cheating  in  relation   to   his   TOEIC
   certificate, as stated in the decision of 7 September 2015, relying  upon
   the change in the caselaw since he had challenged that decision by way of
   judicial review and in particular upon the case of Ahsan v The  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2017] EWCA Civ  2009.  He  also
   referred to the fact that his son was at school  and  he  relied  upon  a
   psychological report which referred to his and his wife's depression  and
   to evidence of his heart problems. The respondent treated the submissions
   as a fresh human rights claim, but refused the claim in a decision  dated
   9 December 2019.

5. In that decision, the respondent considered  that  the  application  fell
   for refusal on  grounds  of  suitability  under  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  of
   Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules  on  the  basis  that  the  first
   appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good owing
   to his reliance, in his application of 1 November 2012, on a fraudulently
   obtained TOEIC English language certificate.  The  respondent  considered
   that  the  appellant  did  not,  in  any  event,  meet  the   eligibility
   requirements in Appendix FM as his wife  and  son  were  not  British  or
   settled in the UK, that he did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
   276ADE(1) and that there were no  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
   rules for any of  the  family  members.  The  respondent  considered  the
   appellant's and his  wife's  medical  and  mental  health  problems,  but
   concluded that there was appropriate medication and  treatment  available
   in Bangladesh and that neither the Article 3 nor Article 8 threshold  was
   met on that basis.

6. The appellants appealed against that decision and their appeal was  heard
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rae-Reeves on 3  November  2020.  The  first
   appellant gave oral evidence before the judge. The judge  relied  on  the
   judgment in Abbas, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2017] EWHC 78 in regard to the three-stage process  for
   discharging the burden of proving deception.  He  found  that  the  first
   stage was not met and that the respondent had  failed  to  discharge  the
   evidential burden of proof, but in any event he found the appellant to be
   a credible witness and accepted that he  had  discharged  the  evidential
   burden of raising an innocent explanation in response to  the  allegation
   and that the respondent had not established  a  case  for  rejecting  the
   appellant's  innocent  explanation.  He  therefore  concluded  that   the
   suitability provisions did not apply.

7. The judge went on to consider the appellants' Article 8 claim.  He  found
   that the appellants had established a family life in  the  UK,  that  the
   documentation  showed  that  the  first  appellant   had   been   offered
   employment, that he would be capable of gainful employment, that  he  and
   his family were not and would not be a burden on  the  public  purse  and
   that they spoke English. The judge also took into account, in his balance
   sheet analysis, the injustice suffered by the first appellant having been
   wrongly accused of deception and the toll that  that  had  taken  on  his
   physical and mental health and that of his  wife.  The  judge  considered
   that the public interest in immigration control was outweighed  by  these
   factors and that  the  respondent's  decision  was  disproportionate.  He
   accordingly allowed the appeals of all three appellants.

8. The Secretary of State sought, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal
   Judge Rae-Reeves's decision both in regard to the  findings  on  the  ETS
   deception and the appellants' Article 8 human rights claim.

9. The matter came before me on 29 March 2021 and I heard  submissions  from
   both parties on the error of law question. In a decision  promulgated  on
   15 April 2021, I found that Judge Rae-Reeves had materially erred in  law
   in relation to his findings on the Article  8  claim.  I  set  aside  the
   decision on the following basis:

         "16. Although there  was  no  final  determination  of  the  issues
         arising in relation to the APPG report in the case of DK and RK, it
         seems to me that there is sufficient to conclude from  the  panel's
         decision in that case that  Judge  Rae-Reeves  erred  in  the  case
         before him by departing from the settled caselaw in regard  to  ETS
         cases and finding that the respondent had failed to  discharge  the
         initial, evidential burden. However, I agree with Mr Lay that  that
         is immaterial in this particular case because the judge went on  to
         consider the second and third stages in the alternative, as  though
         the evidential burden had been met.  The  judge  provided  detailed
         reasons for concluding that the first appellant had discharged  the
         burden of providing an innocent  explanation  in  response  to  the
         allegation  of  deception.  The  judge  made  it  clear  that   the
         appellant's  proficiency  in  the  English  language  was   not   a
         determinative issue and that there  could  be  a  number  of  other
         reasons for applicants to cheat, but he was  nevertheless  entitled
         to give some weight to the evidence of  the  appellant's  level  of
         English at the time he took the TOEIC test.  I  therefore  disagree
         with Ms Cunha that the judge erred in that respect, particularly as
         he  went  on  to  give  various  other  reasons  for  finding   the
         appellant's account credible, referring to  the  specific  evidence
         before him which supported the appellant's account. The  judge  had
         the benefit of hearing from the  appellant  and  in  light  of  the
         reasons cogently given, I conclude that he was entitled to make the
         findings that he did. I therefore uphold his decision on the  issue
         of fraud and deception and the suitability provisions in S-LTR.

         17. However, I find merit in Ms Cunha's submissions in relation  to
         the judge's overall Article  8  assessment.  The  judge's  starting
         point was that family life had been established in the UK, but that
         was clearly an erroneous finding in the context of  Article  8,  as
         none of the appellants were settled here or had any lawful basis of
         stay. Further, whilst the judge properly conducted a balance  sheet
         approach when considering proportionality under Article 8,  I  have
         to agree with Ms Cunha  that  there  were  material  omissions  and
         errors in his assessment. The judge considered the appellants to be
         of good character and  found  that  their  unlawful  residence  was
         outweighed by other factors but failed to consider that  the  first
         appellant had previously made a false asylum claim. The judge  gave
         consideration, at [49], to the fact that the appellant's claim  had
         been found not credible, when considering his explanation  relating
         to the deception allegation, but he did not have any regard to  the
         matter in assessing proportionality under Article 8.  Further,  the
         judge accorded weight to matters upon which he  speculated,  namely
         the appellants' lack of reliance upon public funds  and  the  first
         appellant's ability to find  employment,  and  accorded  weight  to
         their assumed financial independence and their  level  of  English,
         which were, as Ms Cunha submitted,  neutral  factors.  For  all  of
         these reasons I find that the judge did not carry out  a  full  and
         proper Article 8 assessment and  that  he  erred  in  law  in  that
         respect. That part of his decision has to be set aside and re-made.

         18. Having canvassed with the parties  the  appropriate  manner  of
         disposal of the appellants' case should my conclusions be  as  they
         are, the suggestion was that  I  should  make  directions  inviting
         submissions on whether a  further  hearing  was  required.  Mr  Lay
         pointed out that the Secretary of State's policy, in cases where  a
         previous deception allegation had been rejected  by  the  Tribunal,
         was to grant a period of 60 days' leave to the appellant. I do  not
         know whether that would be the  case  with  these  appellants,  but
         directions of the  kind  suggested  by  Mr  Lay  would  enable  the
         Secretary of State to clarify her  position  in  the  light  of  my
         findings on the error of law.

         19. Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision on the Article  8
         proportionality assessment, but uphold and preserve the findings in
         relation to deception and  suitability  under  S-LTR.  I  make  the
         following directions for the re-making of the decision:

         DIRECTIONS:

               a) No later than 14 days from the date this decision is  sent
                  out, each party shall file with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
                  serve on the other party written  submissions  as  to  the
                  disposal of the  appeal,  to  include  submissions  as  to
                  whether a further oral hearing  is  required  and  on  the
                  correct balance sheet approach, and to be  accompanied  by
                  any further documentary evidence relied upon.

               b) The matter will then be brought before  myself  to  decide
                  whether to list the appeal for a resumed, oral hearing  or
                  to determine it  on  the  basis  of  the  submissions  and
                  evidence before me..."

10. The Secretary of State did not respond to  the  directions  and  neither
   did she respond to the appellant's representative's letter dated 18 April
   2021 referring to the Home Office policy contained  in  the  "Educational
   Testing Service (ETS): casework instructions" version 4.0 of 18  November
   2020 which stated, at page 9 of 11:

         "If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but  a  finding
         is made by the Tribunal that the appellant did not obtain the TOEIC
         certificate by deception, you will need  to  give  effect  to  that
         finding by granting six months leave outside the rules.

         This to enable the appellant to make any application they  want  to
         make or leave the UK."

11. In that letter, it was made clear that further written  submissions  and
   attendance at an oral hearing would  be  unnecessary  if  the  respondent
   granted the appellants six months' leave in accordance  with  the  policy
   and indicated that the appeal could be withdrawn if leave  were  granted.
   The letter invited the Secretary of State to grant the  appellants  leave
   on that basis and to clarify her position.

12. It is unfortunate that the Secretary of State did  not  respond,  either
   to the appellant's  representatives  or  to  the  Tribunal's  directions,
   because an oral hearing then became necessary to resolve the  matter.  It
   is also unfortunate that at that hearing, listed before myself, Ms  Cunha
   still had no instructions  on  the  respondent's  position  and  was  not
   properly prepared to respond to Mr Lewis'  detailed  written  submissions
   which had been filed with the Tribunal and served on the respondent on 12
   May 2021.

13. In those submissions, it was asserted on behalf of the  appellants  that
   the public interest  in  removal  was  significantly  outweighed  by  the
   cumulative impact of various factors, as set out in some detail,  and  in
   particular the need to remedy the historical injustice  suffered  by  the
   appellants as a result of the allegation of deception.

14. I asked Ms Cunha what was the public interest  in  removal  where  there
   was a policy to grant six months' leave to remain in  circumstances  such
   as those faced by the appellants. She replied that there was none and she
   accordingly invited me to allow the appeals on Article 8 grounds.

15. In light of Ms Cunha's concession I see no need to set out any  reasoned
   decision or findings.  I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  I  would  be
   preparing only a short decision in light  of  the  concession,  to  which
   there was no objection. Given that Ms  Cunha  invited  me  to  allow  the
   appeal in relation to the appellants' Article 8 claim, I do that. I allow
   the appellants' appeals on Article 8 human rights grounds.



DECISION

16. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law  and  the
   decision  was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing   the
   appellants' appeals.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 19 August 2021
