
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00050/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2018                         |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                             mrs batoul al daas
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fadi Al Swidani, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Syria who applied to join her husband, Mr
    Al  Swidani  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Respondent  refused   the
    application on the basis that various requirements of  the  Rules  were
    not shown to be satisfied and the  Appellant  exercised  her  right  of
    appeal.

 2. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler who found that
    the Immigration Rules had not been met and dismissed the appeal on that
    basis and on human rights grounds.  The judge found that the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant and her husband intended to live permanently with
    the other was not made out by the Appellant and the  judge  noted  that
    there was nothing in Mr Al Swidani's witness statement or orally at the
    hearing that they intended to live together.   The  judge  went  on  to
    dismiss the appeal.

 3. Grounds of Application were lodged on the basis,  principally,  because
    the judge had said the marriage was subsisting it followed that it  was
    genuine and the judge had imposed his own expectations of how a  couple
    might conduct their relationship and this was wrong in law.  Permission
    to appeal was granted.

 4. A Rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the Secretary of State  saying
    there were fundamental problems with parts of the evidence  before  the
    judge both in  respect  of  credibility  and  a  lack  of  evidence  of
    intention to live together.  It was open for the judge to  find  as  he
    did.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. Before me the Sponsor, Mr Al Swidani appeared and  the  solicitors  did
    not.  A telephone call made by my clerk  to  the  solicitors  indicated
    that they were acting for the Appellant and not the  Sponsor  and  that
    the parties had split up.

 7. Mr Al Swidani accepted that his wife had left him and that the marriage
    was no longer subsisting.

 8. For the Home Office it was observed that the challenge to  the  judge's
    decision had therefore fallen away and  the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    seeking a remedy.

 9. Mr Al Swidani acknowledged the position namely that  the  appeal  could
    not be taken further.  He enquired  about  what  might  happen  in  the
    future if he sought to bring another wife to the United  Kingdom  which
    is of course a separate matter.

10. In short, it can be said that the judge was correct to find as he  did,
    namely that this marriage was not  genuine  and  subsisting.   As  such
    there is no error of law in the judge's decision which must stand.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.

13. No anonymity order is required or made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date  20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

