
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00781/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision and Reasons            |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|on 14 November 2016             |On 15 December 2016             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               TAFADWA MABVIRA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill instructed by Peer and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sills
    promulgated on the 5 February 2016,  in  which  the  appellants  appeal
    under both the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds  was
    dismissed.
 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen on the 14 July 2016 in the following terms:


         2. Ground (i) of  the  helpfully  clear  and  succinct  application
         complains that in applying the  Immigration  Rules  [276ADE(1)(vi)]
         the judge referred to the test to be applied as "very  serious"  as
         opposed to "very significant".  Whilst at [15] the judge  sets  out
         the terms of the rule correctly, it is arguable  that  the  use  of
         "very serious", at two places in [20], was erroneous.
         3. Ground (ii) complains that the judge erred under [Art 8 ECHR] in
         dealing with the interests of the appellant  before  those  of  the
         public.  I am not satisfied that this constitutes an arguable error
         of law.


 3. Although Miss Revill in her oral  submissions  asserted  permission  to
    appeal had been granted on both Ground i and ii this is clearly not the
    case. The permission judge did not accept that  Ground  ii  established
    any arguable legal error material to the decision and for  that  reason
    did not grant permission. It has not been made out that this is a point
    that should be revisited at this stage. The scope of  this  hearing  is
    therefore limited to considering the merits of Ground i.


Error of law - Discussion


 4. In her sekelton argument in relation to Ground (i) Miss Revill writes:


         By ground (i) the Appellant argues that the Judge materially  erred
         by imposing a threshold of 'very serious obstacles' to  integration
         in Zimbabwe rather than one  of  'very  significant  obstacles'  as
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) requires.
         Although, as the Respondent's rule 24 reply notes, the Judge  cites
         the correct test at paragraphs 6 and 15, this is in the context  of
         summarising the Respondent's refusal letter and reciting the  Rule.
         It is not until paragraph 20 that he sets out his own reasoning  on
         paragraph 267ADE(1)(iv); in that paragraph he twice  misstates  the
         threshold as one of  'very  serious  obstacles'.   The  error  thus
         arises at a material point in the determination.
         At paragraph 3 of the rule 24 reply, the  Respondent  asserts  that
         the Judge's reference in paragraph 20 to the Appellant experiencing
         'some hardship' indicates that he is not 'using a considerably more
         elevated threshold'.  She adds that  an  elevated  threshold  would
         have been apparent if  the  word  severe,  for  example,  had  been
         substituted for some [sic]'.  This submission does not make  sense.
         The reference to 'some hardship' is a finding of fact and does  not
         purport to be a statement of the threshold applied by the Judge.
         In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 813, the Court of Appeal rejected the contention that  being  a
         young man in good health and capable of working  meant  there  were
         not very significant obstacles to an appellant's integration in the
         country of return.  It emphasised at paragraph 14 that  integration
         is not limited to 'the mere ability to find a  job  or  to  sustain
         life while living in the other country',  but  rather  incorporates
         'the capacity to participate in [society]... and to build up within
         a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private and family  life'.   Had  the
         Judge applied paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)  correctly,  then,  having
         regard to the scope of the test as set  out  in  Kamara,  he  might
         arguably have concluded that it was  satisfied  in  the  Appellants
         favour.


 5. It is necessary in this case to consider whether this is a  dispute  in
    relation to form over substance, or a matter in  which  the  Judge  has
    misdirected himself such as to amount to a material legal error.
 6. The Judge sets out the legal framework at [14-18] including at  15  the
    correct wording of paragraph 276ADE which at sub paragraph (vi) reads:


         "subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
         continuously in the UK for less  than  20  years  (discounting  any
         period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration  into  the  country  to
         which he would have  to go if required to leave the UK."


 7. It is clear that the Judge was therefore fully  aware  of  the  correct
    test to be applied when assessing  the  ability  of  an  individual  to
    satisfy the rule.  The question  whether,  notwithstanding,  the  Judge
    then forgot or failed to apply the correct test arises from the wording
    of paragraph 20 of  the  decision  under  challenge  which  is  in  the
    following terms:


         "The issue under Rule 297ADE is whether the Appellant can show very
         serious obstacles to integration  if  he  were  to  be  removed  to
         Zimbabwe.  It would no doubt cause the Appellant some hardship.  He
         has lived in the UK for 17 years.  He has been living in the  Stoke
         area for a number of years and has studied and worked  in  the  UK.
         However, he is familiar with the culture of Zimbabwe  having  grown
         up there for around the first 18 years of his life.  He has studied
         abroad and has qualifications and skills, which may assist  him  in
         finding work.  No country evidence was submitted in support of  the
         appeal to show any difficulties caused by the current situation  in
         Zimbabwe.   His  parents  still  live  in  Zimbabwe.   I  note  the
         difficult relationship that the appellant has had with his parents,
         however I  consider  that  the  relationship  has  not  necessarily
         permanently broken down and they may be able to reconcile   In  any
         event, the Appellant would be able to  rely  on  support  from  his
         siblings in the UK.  The Appellant is in good health.  I find  that
         the  Appellant  would  not  face  very  serious  obstacles  to  his
         integration if he were to be removed to Zimbabwe.  His appeal under
         the Immigration Rues falls to be dismissed.


 8.  'Serious'  can  be  defined  as  'severe  in  effect,   bad'   whereas
    'significant' can be defined as 'important or noticeable,  noteworthy'.
    There is therefore an overlap between the two definitions in that if an
    obstacle is 'severe' it can  also  be  'significant'  although  it  may
    argued that an obstacle that is 'significant' may  not  necessarily  be
    'severe'. If  the  Judge  was  looking  for  evidence  of  things  that
    prevented integration that were 'severe' in effect it may  be  arguable
    that this is too high a test, but a reading of the  decision  does  not
    show this is what the Judge did. It is also relevant to note  that  the
    wording in 276ADE (vi) is 'very  significant'  which  admits  a  higher
    threshold that just significant is required, especially as  this  is  a
    provision allowing a person to remain in the UK on the basis of  length
    of residence when they are unable to satisfy the primary requirement of
    20 years residence, it is therefore an exception to the general rule.
 9. The finding of the Judge is not that  as  a  result  of  the  fact  the
    appellant can work he can  re-integrate,  as  implied  by  Miss  Revill
    through her reliance on Kamara, but that the  appellant  (i)  lived  in
    Zimbabwe for 18 years and  was  familiar  with  the  culture  (ii)  has
    studied abroad and had qualifications and skills that may assist him in
    finding work (iii) had not established that any estrangement  from  his
    parents who still live in Zimbabwe is permanent,  meaning they  may  be
    able to reconcile and the existence of familial support in the country,
    and (iv) that in any event, the appellant  will  have  the  benefit  of
    support from his family in the UK.
10. A reading of the evidence relied upon by the appellant at  the  hearing
    showed that he will experience difficulties in readjusting but does not
    make out that the threshold of 'very significant obstacles' is met. The
    grounds of appeal did not seek to challenge the factual  findings  made
    in relation to the appellants situation and nor was permission  granted
    to challenge the same. Permission has not been  sought  or  granted  to
    Miss Revill to raise this as a separate head of challenge at this  late
    stage. The assessment has to be whether on the basis  of  the  fact  as
    found the conclusion that the appellant had not shown  he  is  able  to
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE has been made as a result  of
    the application of too high a threshold.  I find this has not ben  made
    out. On the basis of the  findings  and  evidence  made  available  the
    obstacles have not been shown to  even  reach  the  'very  significant'
    threshold.
11. I find the Judge has erred  in  paragraph  20  of  the  decision  under
    challenge by the use of the word 'serious' but I do not find the  error
    to be material as the Judge was aware of the correct test  and  it  has
    not been shown on the basis of  the  findings  made  that  the  refusal
    arises as a result of the alleged material  misdirection.  I  find  the
    inclusion of the word' serious' is more likely to be as a result  of  a
    lack of care in dictation and a failure  to  properly  proof  read  the
    decision before promulgation. It  is  an  error  in  form  and  not  in
    substance.


Decision


12. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.


13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the      7 December 2016
