
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00914/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 13 April 2021                   |On 23 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Panagiotopoulou, instructed by Yemets
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  AS's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  his  asylum  and
      human rights claim.

   3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
      Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  AS  as  the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine, born on 13  November  1983.  He
      claims to have entered the UK in September 2017 hidden in a lorry.  He
      was encountered on 2 December 2017 during an enforcement visit and was
      served with illegal entry papers. Removal directions were set for  his
      removal to Ukraine on 12 December 2017, but removal was deferred  when
      he claimed asylum on 8 December 2017.

   5. The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Ukraine  as  a  draft
      evader. Whilst he had managed to defer his military service at the age
      of 18 and 19 years, he did not respond to a call-up notice when he was
      24 years old, nor to further call-up notices in 2015, 2016  and  2017.
      He was told by his brother  that  a  court  summons  had  been  issued
      against him for a date in June 2017. His brother had the court  papers
      and he had not seen them. He did not respond  to  the  summons  as  he
      feared being imprisoned for avoiding military service.  He  was  aware
      that the trial went ahead in his absence but he did not know what  the
      sentence was. He heard from his neighbour that the police came looking
      for him at his registered address shortly after the trial.

   6. The appellant's claim was refused on 19  April  2019.  The  respondent
      noted that the court summons was dated 13 July 2016, which was  before
      the  draft  notices  he  claimed  to  have  received.  There  was   no
      confirmation from the appellant's brother to show that he had sent the
      documents to him.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant's
      ability and willingness to remain in Ukraine despite the issue of  the
      call-up notices, at a time when there was  a  military  conflict,  was
      inconsistent with his claim that the authorities were looking for him.
      The respondent did not accept that the appellant had  been  tried  and
      sentenced in his absence and in any event noted that he did  not  meet
      the criteria for being summonsed to military service.  The  respondent
      considered that the appellant would not be  a  suitable  candidate  to
      engage in acts contrary to international  law.  Further,  even  if  he
      continued to express his refusal to  undertake  military  service,  he
      would not receive punishment amounting to  persecution.  His  fear  of
      being wanted by  the  authorities  was  based  upon  speculation.  The
      respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  a
      genuine subjective fear of military draft on  return  to  Ukraine  and
      rejected his claim to be a draft evader. It was  considered  that  the
      appellant was at no risk on return to Ukraine  and  that  his  removal
      would not breach his human rights.

   7. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell on  23  October  2019.  The  case
      before the judge was that the appellant feared imprisonment in Ukraine
      in consequence of a sentence for his  failure  to  undertake  military
      service and that he had been sentenced in July 2017  to  a  period  of
      three years imprisonment. He claimed that the prison conditions  would
      engage Article 3  and,  further,  that  the  actions  of  the  Ukraine
      military in eastern Ukraine amounted to  violations  of  international
      humanitarian law and  that  punishment  for  evasion  was  accordingly
      persecutory. The judge accepted that the appellant's  claim  was  true
      and  he  accepted  as  reliable  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
      appellant, referring to some discrepancies but noting that the correct
      date for the court summons, as re-translated, was 13 July 2017 and not
      2016, so addressing the respondent's concerns. He  therefore  accepted
      that the appellant had been summoned to perform military service, that
      he evaded the summons  and  that  he  was  sentenced  in  absentia  to
      imprisonment for three years for his failure to answer the draft.  The
      judge found that the appellant fell into the categories  of  those  at
      risk, as set out in VB & Anor (draft evaders and prison  conditions  :
      Ukraine) (CG) [2017] UKUT 79 as someone who would be at risk of  being
      detained on arrival and being subjected to Article 3 violation because
      of the conditions of detention and imprisonment in Ukraine.  He  found
      that the appellant would be subjected to persecution  arising  out  of
      his political opinion or perceived political opinion  because  of  his
      refusal to participate in the kind of military action in Ukraine.  The
      judge accordingly allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.

   8. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  Judge  Russell's
      decision on two grounds: firstly that the judge erred in his  approach
      to the documentary  evidence  by  mischaracterising  the  respondent's
      stance on the documents, ignoring discrepancies in the  documents  and
      by effectively reversing the burden of proof; and  secondly  that  the
      judge failed to address the appellant's brother's witness statement.

   9. Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal but was subsequently
      granted on a renewed application in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. AS's representatives  filed  a  Rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
      permission, in which it was asserted that  the  Secretary  of  State's
      grounds erroneously characterised the proceedings before the  FTT  and
      were in parts disingenuous. Reference was made to the extremely  brief
      submissions from the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  (HOPO)  at  the
      hearing before the FTT and to the fact that, despite the judge on  two
      occasions stating that he had documentary evidence to corroborate  the
      appellant's claim, the HOPO did not state at any stage that there  was
      any serious challenge to that documentation and made no submissions of
      the sort outlined in the grounds. Reference was also made to the  fact
      that it was accepted at  the  hearing  that  the  original  documents,
      including the envelopes in which they were sent from Ukraine  to  AS's
      solicitors, were in the possession of the Home Office,  although  they
      were not produced at the hearing as the HOPO did  not  have  the  Home
      Office file  with  her.  Accordingly,  it  was  disingenuous  for  the
      Secretary of State, in her grounds, to criticise the judge for finding
      the documents genuine when he only had  photocopies  before  him.  Any
      criticism on the basis that the documents  were  incomplete  was  also
      disingenuous when it was the Secretary of State's appeal bundle  which
      had mismatched the documents to the translations and omitted parts  of
      documents. The assertion in the grounds, that there was no evidence of
      the provenance of the documents, was also untrue as the appellant  had
      provided such provenance.

  11. The appeal was then listed for  a  remote  hearing  conducted  through
      Skype for Business and came before me.



Hearing and submissions

  12. Both parties made submissions before me.

  13. Ms Everett submitted that the challenge boiled  down  to  the  judge's
      misunderstanding  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  position,  as   the
      Secretary of State did not accept the documents and the judge did  not
      appreciate that that was  the  case.  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the
      original documents had been in the possession of the Home  Office  and
      she submitted that the author of the grounds was probably  unaware  of
      that when preparing the grounds, and did not intend  to  mislead.  She
      did not have the Home Office file herself and so  was  unable  to  say
      exactly what submissions were made, but  the  HOPO's  minutes  of  the
      hearing showed  that  the  challenge  to  the  appellant's  claim  was
      maintained and that it was not accepted that the documents  were  what
      they were claimed to be.

  14. Ms Panagiotopoulou referred me  to  the  witness  statement  from  the
      Counsel who had appeared on behalf of the appellant at the  FTT  which
      made it clear that the HOPO's submissions had been very brief and  she
      submitted that the Secretary of State's grounds were misconceived  and
      were in parts disingenuous. There were a number of  points  raised  in
      the grounds about the documents but none of those were raised  by  the
      HOPO at the hearing. The grounds were therefore an attempt to re-argue
      the case for the Secretary of State. The only specific challenge  made
      by the Secretary of State to the documents in the refusal decision was
      in regard to the time frame of the court summons in  relation  to  the
      draft notices, but that had  been  resolved  when  the  error  in  the
      translation had been clarified. The  judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
      issues in the case and considered the documents in the round  together
      with the evidence as a whole in  accordance  with  the  principles  in
      Tanveer Ahmed.

  15. In response, Ms Everett submitted that the judge ought to  have  given
      more reasons why the documents were accepted at face value.

Discussion and conclusions

  16. The assertion made in the  appellant's  rule  24  response,  that  the
      HOPO's submissions before the FTT were very brief, is indeed reflected
      in the record of proceedings in the  court  file,  which  records  the
      submissions in the same terms  as  set  out  at  [8]  of  the  judge's
      decision and supports the appellant's  claim  that  no  particularised
      challenge was made by the HOPO to the documents. I accept that  it  is
      not the case that the Secretary of State made  any  actual  concession
      about the  reliability  of  the  documents,  given  that  the  refusal
      decision made it clear at [58] that the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
      draft evader was rejected,  but  it  is  the  case  that  the  refusal
      decision  did  not  refer  to  any  particular  discrepancies  in  the
      documents other than that the summons appeared  to  have  been  issued
      before the draft notices. That matter was resolved before  the  judge,
      however, and he accepted that it was simply a  mistranslation,  having
      had that confirmed by the interpreter and having  been  provided  with
      the untranslated version clearly showing the  date  as  13  July  2017
      rather than 13 July  2016.  The  judge  therefore  accepted  that  the
      chronology was consistent with the appellant's account and it  was  on
      that basis that the judge, at [16], accordingly  considered  that  the
      respondent's concerns about the documentation at [35] of  the  refusal
      decision had been adequately addressed and that  there  was  otherwise
      "no serious challenge to the authenticity of the documents".

  17. The grounds assert that the resolution of the  time-line  was  not  in
      itself sufficient reason for the judge to accept  that  the  documents
      were genuine and reliable. However, that was not the sole  reason  why
      the judge accepted  the  documents  as  reliable.  He  considered  the
      documents in the light of the evidence as a whole, in accordance  with
      the principles in Tanveer Ahmed, noting at [15] that,  notwithstanding
      the appellant's delay in seeking protection, his claim was  internally
      consistent and was consistent with the background country evidence.  I
      have to agree with the rule 24 response that, in  such  circumstances,
      and in the absence of any specific submissions made by the HOPO as  to
      why or how the documents were deficient or otherwise  unreliable,  the
      judge was entitled to accept them as reliable.

  18. In so far as the grounds refer  to  discrepancies  in  the  documents,
      those were not raised before the judge and only  appear  belatedly  in
      the grounds. As for the assertion that the judge  erred  by  accepting
      documents which had been provided in photocopy format,  I  agree  with
      the appellant that such a challenge is misconceived, when it  was  the
      case that the original documents were in the possession  of  the  Home
      Office, having previously been provided to  them  by  the  appellant's
      solicitors, but they were not made available at  the  hearing  and  no
      adjournment request was made by the respondent to enable  them  to  be
      produced. As for the assertion in the grounds that the  provenance  of
      the documents was unknown, again  that  was  a  matter  for  which  an
      explanation had been provided and  the  original  envelopes  had  been
      supplied to the Home Office. In addition,  as  the  rule  24  response
      states at [17], any implication in the grounds  that  the  appellant's
      documents were incomplete was also misconceived, given that it was the
      respondent's appeal bundle which  had  mismatched  the  documents  and
      translations and omitted parts of the documents, whereas the appellant
      had supplied a complete set of documents to the Home  Office  and  had
      ensured that the judge had sight of the complete documents.

  19. Accordingly, it seems to me that the Secretary of State's grounds  are
      simply a belated attempt to present arguments which ought to have been
      made before the judge but which were not made. On  the  basis  of  the
      evidence before him and the case put to him by the respondent  at  the
      hearing, the judge was perfectly entitled to accord the weight that he
      did to the documentary evidence and to accept it as reliable. The fact
      that the judge did not specifically make findings on  the  appellant's
      brother's statement is not a material matter and the appellant's  rule
      24 response adequately responds to that ground at [22]  to  [25].  The
      grounds do not otherwise challenge the judge's decision in  regard  to
      his assessment of  risk  on  return  and  indeed  his  assessment  was
      properly  made  in  the  light  of  the  relevant  background  country
      information  and  caselaw.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  reach   the
      conclusion that he did.

  20. For all of these reasons I find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision requiring it to be set aside and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to allow the appeal  stands  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  14 April 2021
