
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00090/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Promulgated             |
|On 12th March 2019                   |On 29th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               FITZROY DUCRAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco, instructed by SLK Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Jamaican citizen, born in 1965.  He  arrived  in
         the UK as a visitor in April 1993, was subsequently  granted  leave
         to remain as a working holiday maker, then as a student, then as  a
         spouse of a person settled in the UK.  He  was  granted  indefinite
         leave to remain in the UK on 27  August  1998.  He  has  two  birth
         children with his wife, one of whom is now aged  over  18  and  the
         other (born 2002) lives with his wife from whom  he  is  separated.
         Both children are British Citizens. He, his former wife  and  their
         children have not lived as a family unit for many years. The First-
         tier Tribunal judge found that he had played a significant role  in
         the children's upbringing and in their  lives.  He  has  known  his
         current partner for the past 14 years or more and they  decided  to
         marry in 2014. She has a daughter, born about 2008, who has contact
         with her biological father. The appellant has not  lived  with  his
         current partner and her daughter although the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge accepted that he had played a role in her life, albeit not as
         a father.

      2. By a decision promulgated on 15th June  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge M A  Hall  dismissed  the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal
         against the decision of the respondent dated 8 August 2017.  On  12
         May 2017 a deportation order was signed against the  appellant.  He
         has the following convictions:

           . 18 months imprisonment on  7th  June  2006  for  assisting  an
             offender and failing to answer bail (he successfully  appealed
             a deportation decision made after this conviction);

           . Financial penalty on 9th June 2011 for having  a  knife  in  a
             public place

           . 7years  and  4  months  imprisonment  on  5th  June  2015  for
             transferring prohibited ammunition and firearms.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal judge found, inter alia:

           . The best interests of the appellant's son would be  to  remain
             living with his mother and to continue having contact with the
             appellant;

           . The best interests of  his  partner's  daughter  would  be  to
             remain living with her mother and to continue  having  contact
             with the appellant;

           .  The  appellant  can  speak  English   and   was   financially
             independent prior to going into custody;

           . The appellant has not been lawfully present in the UK for most
             of his life (at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
             he had been lawfully present for 24 years. He arrived  in  the
             UK aged 27);

           . The appellant's convictions "proved" he was not  socially  and
             culturally integrated in the UK;

           .  There  would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             reintegration into Jamaica;

           . There is a subsisting parental relationship  between  him  and
             his son;

           . He has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  current
             partner, who is a British Citizen;

           .  There  is  no  parental  relationship  between  him  and  his
             partner's daughter;

           . The appellant, his partner and her  daughter  have  not  lived
             together as a family unit.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge noted that he was  impressed  by  the
         witnesses who gave evidence on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  who
         believed that the appellant would not re-offend. He referred to the
         appellant's partner's elderly mother who his partner cares for  and
         to the partner's daughter's diabetes.

      5. In [53] the judge self-directed himself in his  assessment  of  the
         evidence that

             "the case law indicates that  the  more  pressing  the  public
             interest in removal, the harder it will be to  show  that  the
             effect on a partner and child would be unduly harsh".

      6. He went on to state

             "59. My conclusion is  that  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
             deportation upon his partner and his son would not  be  unduly
             harsh, having attached very significant weight to  the  public
             interest int his case.

             60.  Therefore I find that Exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply  in
             this case. Even if the Exceptions  had  applied,  because  the
             appellant has received a sentence in excess  of  4  years,  in
             order to succeed in his appeal, he would  need  to  show  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  contained  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2. The evidence fails to demonstrate any very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  contained  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2."

      7. Permission to appeal was sought, and granted by me, on grounds that
         the First-tier Tribunal judge had applied  the  incorrect  test  in
         assessing "unduly harsh". Permission was also sought on the grounds
         that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to consider and  make
         findings on the  issue  of  rehabilitation,  had  failed  to  place
         adequate weight on the length of time the appellant had been in the
         UK and had failed to give any  or  any  adequate  reasons  why  the
         evidence of his difficulties on returning to Jamaica had  not  been
         accepted.

      8. The respondent did not seek to cross  appeal  any  of  the  judge's
         findings.

      9. Both parties confirmed that they were content with me  hearing  the
         appeal.

     10. No issue was taken with the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge, a summary of which I have set out in [3] above.

     11. The respondent in the Rule 24 response accepted that there  was  an
         error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         such that the decision should be set aside to be remade.

     12. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make specific findings on the
         issues that I have referred to in [4] above.  I  however  take  the
         view that the judge accepted that the evidence before him supported
         a finding that the appellant's partner cared  for  her  mother  and
         that her daughter suffered from diabetes. I also take the view that
         the judge accepted that the witnesses were of the genuine view that
         the appellant would not re-offend.

     13. The judge refers, under the sub-heading 'Oral submissions', to  the
         OASys report. It is incorrect that the judge has not formed a  view
         on rehabilitation. In [57] he states

             "I have taken into account and given weight to the evidence of
             the witnesses who all wish the appellant to remain in  the  UK
             and who believe he will not reoffend. I take into account that
             the appellant's behaviour in prison has been exemplary. I also
             take into account the OASys assessment that there is  a  lower
             risk of the appellant reoffending although he poses  a  medium
             risk of causing serious harm to the public."

     14. Mr Franco submitted that had the judge not placed weight  upon  the
         criminality in reaching a decision that it was not unduly harsh for
         the partner and his son to be left in the UK on the deportation  of
         the appellant, he would have reached a decision that it was  unduly
         harsh. This in turn would have fed into  the  decision  on  whether
         there were very compelling circumstances given that the sentence of
         imprisonment was in excess of four years. A factor that  needed  to
         be considered in reaching that assessment,  was  the  very  lengthy
         period of lawful residence the appellant had whilst in the  UK  and
         rehabilitation.

     15. The nature and  extent  of  criminality  is  not  a  factor  to  be
         considered in assessing whether a person meets Exception  1  and/or
         2. It is a threshold test - does the appellant  meet  the  criteria
         for Exception 1; is or is not the threshold test  of  unduly  harsh
         met. Mr Ducram does not meet Exception  1.  There  is  no  'sliding
         scale' or 'near miss'. He simply does not have the requisite period
         of lawful residence and the finding that he  is  not  socially  and
         culturally integrated has not been challenged.

     16. The findings to be factored into an assessment whether  the  unduly
         harsh test is met are summarised in [3] above. Mr  Franco  did  not
         refer me to any other significant or material evidence that had not
         been considered by the judge. The First-tier Tribunal judge  refers
         to the relationship the appellant has with his  son  and  with  his
         partner and finds these to be significant. But there was inadequate
         evidence to support a finding that the appellant's departure  would
         be unduly harsh. Yes, it would be distressing  and  upsetting;  the
         ability to visit the appellant whilst in prison would be  lost  and
         it may well be that the number  of  telephone/skype/facetime  calls
         would have to reduce. But evidence that this reduction  in  contact
         following the deportation of the appellant would amount to anything
         approaching undue harshness, was not there. Although the First-tier
         Tribunal judge took into account the appellant's criminality, it is
         inconceivable, on the evidence that was before him, that  he  would
         have reached any different conclusion if he had applied the correct
         test.

     17.  The  appellant  has  been  sentenced  to  more  than  four   years
         imprisonment for serious crimes. In his evidence to the  First-tier
         Tribunal he denied responsibility  for  the  offence  to  which  he
         pleaded guilty. As stated in  RA  (s117C:  unduly  harsh;  offence:
         seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), rehabilitation will  not
         normally bear material weight in favour of a foreign  criminal.  In
         this case, the appellant is remorseful but denied he had  committed
         the offence. He had already  successfully  appealed  a  deportation
         decision in 2006 yet had gone on to commit a very serious crime. He
         has undertaken various courses whilst in prison. Even taken at  its
         highest  and  accepted  wholeheartedly,  the  evidence   from   his
         witnesses that he will not commit further crimes, the fact  remains
         that he has committed serious  crimes  and  the  intention  not  to
         commit further crimes carries little weight.

     18. MS (s.117C (6): "very compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019]
         UKUT 00122 (IAC) makes clear that, unlike the assessment undertaken
         in reaching  a  decision  on  Exception  1  or  2,  criminality  is
         relevant. The sentencing remarks of the judge  in  this  case  paid
         tribute to the  positive  impact  the  appellant  has  had  on  the
         upbringing of his children, to the  early  guilty  plea,  that  his
         involvement was limited to two days, that he  is  not  a  dangerous
         offender as  defined  in  the  Act,  but  it  was  the  appellant's
         responsibility within the crime group as a  whole  to  deliver  the
         firearms and the ammunition. The submissions made by Mr  Franco  do
         not identify any factor that could be considered to be factors over
         and above the distress that would be caused to his children and his
         partner at his deportation. Mr Franco submitted that the cumulative
         impact of the factors to be found within Exceptions 1 and 2,  could
         contribute to a finding of very compelling circumstances. That  may
         of course be correct but in this case the appellant does not  reach
         either threshold.

     19. Mr Franco submitted that the appellant would have difficulties  re-
         integrating into Jamaica. He does not have family or friends  there
         and owns  no  land  or  property.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         considered the evidence before him. He reached the conclusion  that
         the appellant had not proved he would be unable to find employment;
         there would be no language or cultural difficulties. The judge bore
         in mind in reaching his findings that an individual must  have  the
         capacity to  participate  in  the  life  in  the  country,  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted and be able to operate  on  a
         day to day basis. The judge reached a conclusion that  was  clearly
         open to him: that there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to
         reintegration. That conclusion was  not  perverse,  was  adequately
         reasoned and was taken on the basis of the evidence that was before
         him.

     20. The factors relied upon to support the submission that  there  were
         very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   the  Exceptions
         including  his  partner's  mother,  her  daughter's  diabetes,  the
         evidence of witnesses that he would not reoffend, the OASys report,
         the length of time he has been in the UK, the length of time he has
         been away from Jamaica do not come anywhere close to  amounting  to
         very compelling circumstances.

     21. Taking all these matters into account I am satisfied there  are  no
         very compelling circumstances.  There  were  no  other  significant
         matters brought to my attention. It  follows  that  I  dismiss  the
         appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


     Date 24th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
