
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/01885/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2017                          |On 29 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                Shehriyar Ali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McIntosh promulgated on 10 April 2017, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 24 January 2017  refusing  a
    human rights claim was dismissed.

2.   The appeal before Judge McIntosh was decided without a hearing 'on  the
    papers', the relevant box having been ticked on the Notice of Appeal to
    indicate, on its face, that that was the wish of the Appellant.

3.   Judge McIntosh dismissed the Appellant's appeal for the reasons as  set
    out in her Decision.  The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 11 October 2017.  The  Respondent
    has filed a Rule 24 response  dated  16  November  2017  resisting  the
    challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  8  November  1991.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in June 2010 with a  visa  conferring  leave
    valid until 30 August 2011.  He was  granted  a  subsequent  period  of
    leave up until  27  January  2014.   However,  on  12  April  2011  the
    Appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom was curtailed to take
    effect on 11 June 2012.

5.   The Appellant married Ms Naila Naseer, a  British  citizen  born  on  5
    March 1992, on 9 June 2012 - just two days before  his  curtailment  of
    leave was due to take effect.  Since that time the Appellant has made a
    number of applications for further leave to remain.   His  applications
    were rejected in January 2014 and June 2014.  The  instant  application
    was made by way of form FLR(FP), signed on 5 March 2015.  The Appellant
    sought leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with Ms Naseer,
    and necessarily therefore his application was treated as a human rights
    claim by the Respondent.

6.   The Respondent refused  the  application  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 24 January  2017.   Amongst
    other things the Respondent gave consideration to Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and in particular the  so-called  '10  year  partner
    route' in respect of family life.

7.   I pause to note that the reference to a '10 year route' is  because  it
    is that period of time that needs to pass before a successful applicant
    is likely to obtain  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom.   10  years'
    residence in the United Kingdom is not a prerequisite to success  under
    those particular parts of the Rules.  The relevance of this parenthetic
    clarification will become apparent in due course.

8.   The Respondent in the RFRL accepted that the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    'suitability' requirements in respect of the 10 year partner route, and
    also  indicated  satisfaction   in   respect   of   the   'eligibility'
    requirements.  Regard was therefore had to paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM, but the Respondent concluded that this provision was not satisfied.
     In particular, it was stated in the RFRL that the Respondent "has  not
    seen any evidence that there are insurmountable obstacles in accordance
    with paragraph EX.2".

9.   Notwithstanding that observation, it is  pertinent  to  note  that  the
    Respondent's decision-maker went on to say the following in respect  of
    the Appellant's partner:

         "Furthermore, although it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  your
         partner to leave the United Kingdom and accompany you to  Pakistan,
         it is open to her to do so if she chooses and you would be there to
         help her to adapt to the lifestyle there and you would be  able  to
         enjoy  your  life  together  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom   in
         Pakistan."

10.    Whilst   necessarily   the   concepts   of   'unreasonableness'   and
    'insurmountable obstacles' are not congruent, it might be thought  that
    an  acknowledgement  of  'unreasonableness'  would  be  significant  in
    informing any evaluation of proportionality.
11.  Be that as it may, the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application
    under  the  10  year  partner  route,  and  went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's private  life  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1),  in
    particular  subparagraph  (vi).   The  Respondent  decided   that   the
    Appellant did not satisfy the rule, in particular because  there  would
    be no very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Pakistan
    bearing in mind his age, the length of time he had been in  the  United
    Kingdom, and the fact that he had spent  his  childhood  and  formative
    years in Pakistan where it could  be  considered  that  he  would  have
    retained knowledge of the life, language and culture.

12.  The Respondent also concluded  that  there  were  no  such  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant  the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  -
    although in that part of the RFRL it was  again  acknowledged  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant's  spouse  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

13.  Before turning to particular  consideration  of  the  Decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate to make reference to the  grounds
    of challenge that have been mounted before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds upon which permission to appeal  were  granted  set  out  in  a
    number of introductory  paragraphs  circumstances  in  respect  of  the
    background to the Appellant's appeal being determined on the  papers  -
    and indeed asserts matters which would not have been known to the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

14.  In short: the Appellant advances a claim  that  his  previous  advisers
    had let him down.  He had been  unaware  that  his  appeal  was  to  be
    determined on the papers without a hearing.   That  had  not  been  his
    election, and the Notice of Appeal necessarily therefore had  been,  he
    now claimed, completed without his knowledge or instruction.  Moreover,
    aspects of the documentary evidence advanced in support of  his  appeal
    which related to supposed difficulties in Pakistan  by  reason  of  his
    conversion to the Ahmadi  faith,  were  said  to  have  been  presented
    without his authority and not  to  reflect  fact.   The  Appellant  has
    confirmed before the Tribunal today that he at no  point  converted  to
    the Ahmadi faith, and he denies that  he  ever  instructed  anybody  to
    advance his case on that  basis.   What  is  said  is  that  his  legal
    representatives, with whom he had minimal contact directly, prepared an
    appeal for him which not only did not reflect  the  way  he  wished  to
    advance the case - i.e. it did  not  reflect  his  wish  to  give  live
    evidence before the Tribunal - but also misrepresented quite  seriously
    the substance and facts of certain elements of his case.

15.   I  have  noted  these  claimed  circumstances   in   considering   the
    submissions before me today.  However, I particularly sought assistance
    from the Appellant's  counsel  on  the  manner  in  which  the  claimed
    circumstances - misrepresentation of the  facts  of  his  case  by  his
    previous representatives, and denial of  an  opportunity  to  attend  a
    hearing of his  appeal  by  reason  of  the  conduct  of  his  previous
    representatives - might be said to amount to an error  of  law  on  the
    part of the Tribunal such that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    could be impugned.  Mr Rees submitted that the circumstances were  such
    that there had been a procedural impropriety.


16.   With  respect,  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  any  such   possible
    impropriety rests with the Tribunal. I am not  persuaded  that  it  has
    been shown on the facts of this  particular  case  that  there  is  any
    relevant error of law.  That is not to say that I rule  out  altogether
    that in principle a decision of the Tribunal might be vitiated where  a
    representative has badly failed an appellant; however it  seems  to  me
    that what would be necessary would be some consequence resulting  in  a
    fundamental and material misconception of fact. Mr Rees  had  not  made
    any such contention.

17.  Moreover, although Mr Rees has brought to my attention the case  of  BT
    (Nepal) [2004] UKIAT 311, he acknowledges that he is not in a  position
    to put before the Tribunal  any  of  the  sort  of  evidence  that  the
    Tribunal in BT (Nepal) thought would be required in order to  mount  an
    action or  challenge  of  the  nature  intimated  in  the  introductory
    paragraphs of the grounds of appeal.

18.  In all such circumstances in my judgement the matters set  out  in  the
    introductory paragraphs of the grounds  of  appeal  do  not  avail  the
    Appellant for the present purpose of  the  Upper  Tribunal  considering
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

19.  Moreover, in order to make out  the  factual  premise  that  there  had
    indeed been some sort of misservice, or disservice, on the part of  the
    Appellant's representatives, considerably more would be required by way
    of evidence rather than what is presently essentially a matter of  mere
    assertion.

20.  I turn then to the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge itself.

21.  It is common ground before me that the  decision  is  not  well-worded,
    that there are errors of  syntax,  and  that  the  stylisation  of  the
    Decision is unorthodox.

22.  Mr Rees argues in substance that there is such a degree of  absence  of
    clarity and coherence, that there is such a  degree  of  confusion  and
    muddle, that it would be  unsafe  to  rely  upon  the  Decision  as  an
    adequate determination, or 'safe' disposal, of the Appellant's case.

23.  Mr Bramble  argues  that  with  careful  analysis  it  is  possible  to
    identify within the body of the Decision that all relevant issues  have
    been  addressed  in  substance  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge,
    notwithstanding the uncertainties as to form.

24.  I acknowledge the force of  the  submission  advanced  by  Mr  Bramble.
    However, ultimately I have come to the conclusion that the standard  of
    the Decision falls short of what is to be reasonably expected in such a
    document, to an extent that the Decision  does  not  offer  the  reader
    sufficient confidence that all  issues  have  properly  been  addressed
    within the terms of the applicable jurisprudence.

25.  I  note  in  particular  the  following  aspects  of  the  Decision  as
    informing my judgement that due and proper regard has not been given to
    the Appellant's case in all material respects.

    (i) This was a human rights appeal.  However, that does not  mean  that
    the Immigration Rules were not a relevant matter of consideration - and
    indeed required to be considered as offering something  of  a  starting
    point with regard to the yardstick of where proportionality  might  lie
    in any particular case.


     (ii) At paragraph 27 the Judge states:

         "Although the Appellant applies for leave under the ten year  route
         as outlined above I find that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
         requirements as at the date of his application  the  Appellant  had
         been present in the United Kingdom for less than five years."


    On its face, this appears to be a finding that the Appellant could  not
    avail himself of Appendix FM because he had not  been  present  in  the
    United Kingdom for 10 years. This is  powerfully  indicative  that  the
    Judge fundamentally misunderstood the nature of Appendix FM.




     (iii) With regard to the private life elements of the case,  the  Judge
    refers to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 28  of
    the Decision.   The  paragraph  sets  out  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)-(vi)
    preceded by the following sentence:  "Under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules the Appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    (iii), (iv) and (v), paragraph 276ADE provides:"   Nothing  further  is
    said in respect of paragraph 276ADE in the concluding paragraphs of the
    decision.  The references to subparagraphs (iii), (iv) and (v),  whilst
    correct and indeed not disputed, do not for a moment begin  to  address
    subparagraph  (vi).   Although  subparagraph  (vi)  is  reproduced   at
    paragraph 28, it is  not  in  substance  addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. Indeed, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  silent  in
    respect of subparagraph (vi) in the opening stanza of paragraph 28.  It
    is impossible in those circumstances to see that the Judge has properly
    turned her mind to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


     (iv) It is also to be noted that when the Judge gives consideration  to
    Article 8 at paragraphs 29-32, she speaks exclusively in terms  of  the
    Appellant having established a private life in  the  United  Kingdom  -
    albeit that she refers to a private life established with his wife  and
    the extended family.  The  Judge  nowhere  refers  to  the  Appellant's
    freestanding Article 8 claim on the basis of family life.  The  concern
    arises that perhaps the Judge did not consider  it  necessary  to  have
    further regard to family life once it  had  been  determined  that  the
    Appellant had not been present in the UK for 10 years.


    (v) Paragraph 31 appears in the main to be an adequate traverse of  the
    Razgar questions, concluding with the simple sentence "I find that  the
    decision is proportionate in the circumstances".  Little else is  given
    by way of reasons for that conclusion - save the brief consideration at
    paragraph 32, which essentially refers  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's British citizen wife. Whilst this repeats  to  some  extent
    the contents of the RFRL by referring to the possibility that  she  may
    wish to remain in the United Kingdom  but  has  the  option  to  go  to
    Pakistan, nowhere within that paragraph - or indeed  anywhere  else  in
    the  Decision  -  does  the  Judge  acknowledge  that  the   Respondent
    recognised that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
    partner to leave the United Kingdom.




    (vi) Nor does the consideration of Article 8 make any reference to  the
    public interest considerations pursuant to section  117B  of  the  2002
    Act. Whilst this might not have availed the Appellant in  any  material
    way, it does seem to me that it reinforces the underlying nature of the
    unsatisfactory application of  jurisprudence  to  an  extent  that  the
    reader of this Decision is left uncertain as to the extent to which the
    Judge understood the  law  that  she  was  required  to  apply  to  the
    particular facts of the case.

26.  As I say, notwithstanding the foregoing I have  nonetheless  recognised
    the force of Mr Bramble's submissions in regard to the possibility that
    the Judge has considered all relevant matters.  For  example  there  is
    some appearance that the Judge might have addressed  the  substance  of
    the issue of insurmountable obstacles. However, on closer scrutiny:  at
    paragraph 24 there is ambiguity as to whether the  Judge  is  making  a
    finding or merely recording what was said in the RFRL; the findings  at
    paragraph  32,  whilst  possibly  relevant  to   a   consideration   of
    insurmountable obstacles, are not referenced in any such context by the
    Judge.

27.  I have also taken into account that it is possible that ultimately  the
    Appellant's case will be found to have little  of  merit.   So  far  as
    276ADE is concerned, and the Appellant's private life, it is  difficult
    to see that anything of substance has been advanced as to why he  would
    have problems reintegrating into the country of his nationality,  given
    the relatively brief absence from that country.  So far  as  continuing
    family life in Pakistan with his partner, again, it is not  clear  that
    any more is being said than that the Appellant's partner is British and
    is unfamiliar with Pakistan. However, be that as it may, it seems to me
    that what is fundamentally important here is that I cannot be confident
    that the Appellant has had a full and fair consideration  of  his  case
    because of the nature of the deficiencies in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

28.  On that basis it seems to me that it is appropriate to  set  aside  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and require that the appeal now  be
    remade before the First-tier Tribunal before any Judge other than Judge
    McIntosh.

29.  In remaking the decision I understand  that  the  Appellant  would  now
    wish to have an oral hearing of his appeal and that should be  arranged
    accordingly.  It may  be  that  in  due  course  at  that  hearing  the
    Appellant will need to address in  some  detail  the  circumstances  in
    which the nature of the case he advances is now to  be  different  from
    the nature of the case advanced, he says, without  his  authority.   To
    that end it may be that more  than  has  been  provided  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of the conduct of his previous representatives will
    require to be obtained and filed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  lest
    the Appellant encounter arguments in respect of credibility because  of
    the changes in his account. However,  those  matters  are  between  the
    Appellant and any advisers he may now have or may have in  the  future,
    and are in turn ultimately a matter  for  the  Judge  who  remakes  the
    decision - I express no particular view and merely alert the  Appellant
    to the likelihood that something more by  way  of  explanation  may  be
    required of him given the fundamental nature of the differences between
    the case that he says he wishes to advance and that which he  says  was
    advanced without his authority.






Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set side.


31.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with all issues at large before any Judge  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh.


32.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing



Signed:                                 Date: 25 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

