

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01503/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 28th September 2020               |On 05th October 2020                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            AHMED CHAYOWA LESHEVE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Baker ('the Judge') promulgated on 24  January  2020
        in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's human rights appeal.
     2. The appellant  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Keane on 23 April 2020, the operative  part  of  the
        grant being in the following terms:

             "Notwithstanding their length the grounds  amounted  in  large
             part no more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  of  the
             judge, an attempt to reargue  the  appeal  and  they  did  not
             disclose an arguable error or errors of law but for which  the
             outcome of the  appeal  might  have  been  different.  It  was
             contended (with some force) that in preparing the decision  as
             long as four months after the date of the  hearing  the  judge
             delayed inordinately. The author of the grounds contended that
             the delay rendered findings  arrived  at  in  respect  of  the
             appellant's credibility unsafe. Such however, was not  a  true
             characterisation of concerns advanced  by  the  judge  in  the
             decision.  The  author  of  the  grounds  did  not  explicitly
             identify a claim made by or on behalf of the  appellant  which
             Judge rejected. Rather, the judge chose  not  to  accord  that
             weight to expert medical evidence in line with the appellant's
             counsel's submissions. Any procedural impropriety  constituted
             by the judges delay even if an arguable error of law  did  not
             amount to a material error of law. The judge however, arguably
             did not  have  regard  to  all  relevant  considerations  when
             considering  the  weight  to  be  accorded  the  private  life
             established by the appellant during his period of residence in
             the United Kingdom. It was common ground between  the  parties
             to the appeal that the respondent  only  made  a  decision  in
             respect of the appellant's most recent application  for  leave
             to remain dated 16 January 2017 on  8  January  2019.  Such  a
             delay,  amounting  to  very  nearly  2  years,  was   arguably
             inordinate. In assessing the  appellant's  private  life,  the
             judge arguably should have taken into account such a period of
             delay as reinforcing the appellant private  life.  Nowhere  in
             the decision did the judge to do  so.  It  was  common  ground
             between the parties to the appeal that the  appellant  arrived
             in the United Kingdom on 7 April 2008 and his leave to  remain
             in the United Kingdom expired on or shortly  after  24  August
             2010. The appellant had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a
             period  greater  than  two  years.  At  paragraph  36  of  the
             decision, however, judge stated that, "Development of  private
             life: has developed his private life in the UK  at  all  times
             whilst his status was precarious". Such  a  finding  that  the
             appellant had developed his private life in the United Kingdom
             at all times [my underlining] while his status was  precarious
             could not be reconciled with the agreed  immigration  history.
             Rather, the appellant had  acquired  a  period  of  two  years
             lawful residence and there was the additional  period  in  the
             region of two years in which (through no fault of his own  but
             attributable to the neglect of the respondent) he had to await
             a decision in respect of  his  most  recent  application.  The
             judge  arguably  did  not  take  into  account  all   relevant
             considerations when assessing the  appellant's  private  life.
             The application for permission to appeal is granted."

     3. Following the grant directions were sent to the parties  indicating
        a provisional view that the question of whether the Judge had erred
        in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
        could be determined without a hearing. The parties were invited  to
        express their views in relation to such a proposal and  to  provide
        any further informational they sought to rely  upon.  Both  parties
        have responded. At [18] of his submissions dated 25 August 2020 the
        appellant writes:

             "18.     I would like there to be  a  hearing  to  decide  the
                  error of law issues in my case. I believe this is relevant
                  as the Home Officers miscomputed my  case  and  the  First
                  Tier Immigration Judge  has  further  failed  to  properly
                  assess it."

     4. The respondent's position, set out in the response dated 18  August
        2020, is that there is no need to have a hearing  in  any  form  to
        decide the error of law issue.
     5. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     7. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:

             '34.-


             (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                  make any decision without a hearing.


             (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                  by a party when deciding whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                  consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


             (3)  In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                  Tribunal must hold a  hearing  before  making  a  decision
                  which disposes of proceedings.


             (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                  Tribunal to-


                  (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                      or 8(2);


                  (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                  (c)  determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                      judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                  (d)   make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                      pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

     8. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers. Nothing on the facts or in
        law has been shown to make  consideration  of  the  issues  on  the
        papers not in accordance with overriding objectives at this  stage.
        Consideration has been given to not only the submissions  but  also
        the evidence provided to the Judge  in  documentary  form  and  the
        grounds of  appeal  when  considering  this  question.  Whilst  the
        appellant may want to come along and  speak  to  another  judge  in
        relation to this matter it  is  not  made  out  there  is  anything
        factually or legally complex or that it is  a  case  in  which  the
        interests of justice can only be served  by  there  being  an  oral
        hearing. It is not made out there is anything that needs to be said
        orally that has not been said in writing



Background


     9. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on  13  February  1985.
        The appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
        private life in the United Kingdom and what he claims  to  be  very
        significant obstacles to his integration to  Tanzania,  exceptional
        circumstances concerning his immigration history,  and  his  health
        issues.
    10. It was not made out before the  Judge  that  the  appellant  has  a
        partner, parents, or children in United Kingdom,  or  was  able  to
        succeed based on his family  life  either  within  or  outside  the
        Immigration Rules.
    11. After carefully considering the documentary and oral  evidence  the
        Judge sets out her findings of fact from [27] of the decision under
        challenge. This is a detailed and carefully  written  determination
        in which the Judge assesses the merits  of  the  appellant's  claim
        under a number of relevant headings. For example,  the  appellant's
        mental health issues are considered that [27(q)] and the background
        evidence on  healthcare  provisions  in  Tanzania  at  [27(s)]  and
        thereafter. The Judge notes the appellant has  a  diagnosed  mental
        health disorder, paranoid  schizophrenia,  for  which  he  receives
        ongoing treatment by assessment and medication. The  Judge  records
        that  the  appellant  fears  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
        integration including but not limited to his belief concerning  the
        societal  stigma  in  Tanzania  attached  to  such  mental   health
        disorders, family rejection, and lack of state provision for mental
        health. At [32] the Judge writes:

             "32.     Drawing together all my  relevant  findings  above  I
                  conclude that  the  appellant  would  be  regarded  as  an
                  insider  and  so  be  accepted  in  Tanzania,   not   face
                  discrimination by  third  parties  nor  rejection  by  his
                  family. He also has his ability to use his skills  in  the
                  employment market in Tanzania not  limited  to  healthcare
                  employment, which he has gained whilst in the UK.  I  find
                  that he would  be  able  to  participate  successfully  in
                  society in Tanzania  not  withstanding  his  diagnosis  of
                  paranoid schizophrenia just as he has done in  the  UK.  I
                  accordingly find there are not very significant  obstacles
                  to his integration into Tanzania. I find  that  he  cannot
                  qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE. I have
                  reached this decision on the basis of all the evidence  in
                  this appeal."

    12. The Judge then goes on to consider article 8  ECHR  in  a  properly
        structured manner finding the appellant has private life recognised
        by  article  8  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the   proposed
        interference  with  that  private  life,  as  a   result   of   the
        respondent's decision, is of sufficient severity to engage  article
        8. The Judge identifies that the key  question  in  the  appeal  is
        whether the respondent's  decision  is  proportionate.   The  Judge
        adopts a 'balance  sheet  approach'  to  assessing  proportionality
        setting out factors against the appellant between  [36  -  38]  and
        those  in  favour  of  the  appellant  between  [39  -  43]  before
        concluding  that  it  was  not  made  out  that   the   appellant's
        circumstances are exceptional. The  Judge  considers  section  117B
        finding little weight should be  given  to  the  private  life  the
        appellant has developed whilst  his  immigration  status  has  been
        precarious. This is not a finding that the  appellant  has  had  no
        lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom but recognition of the
        fact that any leave he had was not settlement  or  of  a  permanent
        nature and that for the majority of his time in the UK he has  been
        an overstayer.  The Judge finds when  applying  the  balance  sheet
        approach that  the  countervailing  factors  do  not  outweigh  the
        importance attached to the  principles  of  legitimate  immigration
        control and that whilst the appellant may face some difficulties on
        return to Tanzania they did not mean his article 8 rights  will  be
        breached. The Judge concludes at [45]:

             "45.     Putting all the factors into the balance, I find that
                  the interests of the appellant in the UK do  not  outweigh
                  the interests of immigration  control.  I  find  that  the
                  balance does not come down in favour of  those  rights  as
                  against the principle of legitimate immigration control. I
                  find that the hardship consequent on refusal of  leave  to
                  remain does not go far enough beyond the baseline to  make
                  removal  a  disproportionate  use  of  lawful  immigration
                  controls. The appellant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
                  return to Tanzania where he could continue his  life.  The
                  appellant can be expected to reintegrate into that country
                  and make a  life  for  himself  there.  I  find  that  the
                  interference with the appellant's rights to a private life
                  is not of such a level as to breach those rights and  that
                  the decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  is  therefore
                  proportionate under Article 8 of the European Convention."


Error of law


    13. In relation to the time it took to provide the determination,  date
        of hearing 18 September 2019 date of promulgation 24 January  2020,
        such delay does not per se automatically makes the decision  unsafe
        sufficient to amount to a procedural impropriety or material error.
         The appellant claims that in a case in which  credibility  was  an
        issue the evidence in the proceedings would not have been fresh  in
        the mind of the Judge when she sat down to consider his  case.  The
        appellant asserts such a  proposition  applies  whether  it  is  an
        asylum or human rights  case  and  that  the  delay  amounts  to  a
        travesty of justice.
    14. It is accepted that the First-tier Procedure Rules  make  provision
        for the period in which it is hoped a judge of that  tribunal  will
        promulgate their decision but it is not made out that if a decision
        cannot be made within such period a procedural irregularity occurs.
        The wording of the relevant rule is also important. It reads:

             'Decisions and notice of decisions


             29.- (1) The Tribunal may give a decision orally at a hearing.


                  (2)  Subject to rule 13(2) (withholding information likely
                  to cause serious harm), the Tribunal must provide to  each
                  party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after  making  a
                  decision (other  than  a  decision  under  Part  4)  which
                  disposes of the proceedings-


                      (a)  a notice  of  decision  stating  the  Tribunal's
                      decision; and


                      (b)  notification of any right of appeal against  the
                      decision and the time within which, and the manner in
                      which, such right of appeal may be exercised.'

    15. It is not made out the period in which the decision was provided is
        outside that when it was  reasonably  practicable  to  provide  the
        same.
    16. The case law is also against the appellant on this point. In Arusha
        and Demushi (deprivation of citizenship -  delay)  [2012]  UKUT  80
        (IAC)  it  was  held  that  to  establish  that  a  delay  in   the
        promulgation of a decision has led to an error of law it has to  be
        shown that the decision was not safe and therefore unlawful.  There
        must be a nexus between the delay and the safety of  the  decision:
        see Secretary of State v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868.
    17. The Court of Appeal in R (on the application of SS  (Sri  Lanka)  v
        SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1391 approving  the  decision  in  Arusha  and
        Demushi held that there was no rule that delay of more  than  three
        months rendered the decision unsafe.  The correct approach  was  to
        ask whether the delay had caused the decision to be unsafe so  that
        it would be unjust to let it stand. The only  significance  of  the
        fact that delay between the hearing and the decision exceeded three
        months was that, where the decision is challenged on an appeal, the
        Upper Tribunal should examine the FTT judge's factual findings with
        particular care to ensure that the delay has not  caused  injustice
        to the appellant.
    18. The  factual  findings  made  by  the  Judge  have  been  carefully
        considered in accordance with the guidance provided by the Court of
        Appeal by considering not only the determination  holistically  but
        also the evidence relied upon by the appellant in  support  of  his
        appeal. It is noted the Judge took a clear legible  typed  note  of
        the proceedings and had access to not only the statements and other
        evidence but also to submissions made on the appellants  behalf.  A
        clear understanding of the issues in the appeal and evidence  given
        can be ascertained by a reader of this material even though not the
        judge who heard the case. It is not made out the  Judge's  decision
        is unsafe so that it will be unjust to let it stand.  No  injustice
        is made out to the appellant in relation to the alleged  delay  and
        is not made out the period after which the  Judge  promulgated  the
        decision supports the appellant's claim of  procedural  impropriety
        sufficient to amount to a material error of law.
    19. The appellant also asserts a failure by the Judge to consider delay
        by the respondent in the decision-making process of some two years.
        Such claim is without arguable merit. The Judge was  clearly  aware
        of the chronology as a reading of the decision shows. The Judge was
        not required to set out findings in relation to each aspect of  the
        evidence provided it was properly considered, which I find  is  the
        case. In EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 the House of  Lords
        said that  delay  could  be  relevant  in  three  ways.  First  the
        applicant may  during  the  period  of  any  delay  develop  closer
        personal  and  social  ties  and  establish  deeper  roots  in  the
        community than he could have shown earlier.  The longer the  period
        of delay the likelier this is to be true.  To the extent that it is
        true the applicant's case will be  strengthened.   Secondly,  delay
        may be relevant to an immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain
        who is in a precarious situation, liable to removal  at  any  time.
        Any relationship into which such an  applicant  enters  is  likely,
        initially, to be tentative, being entered into under the shadow  of
        severance by administrative order.  This is  more  true  where  the
        other party to the relationship is aware of the  precarious  nature
        of the position and is treated as relevant to the  quality  of  the
        relationship.  With delay the  sense  of  impermanence  in  such  a
        relationship will fade.  Thirdly delay may be relevant in  reducing
        the weight that would  otherwise  be  accorded  to  fair  and  firm
        immigration control if the delay is shown to be  the  result  of  a
        dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable and unfair results.
         The Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 considered (para  52),
        referring to EB (Kosovo) that the cogency of the public interest in
        the removal of a person living in the UK unlawfully was  liable  to
        diminish or looking at the matter from  the  opposite  perspective,
        the weight to be given to precarious  family  life  was  liable  to
        increase if there was a protracted  delay  in  the  enforcement  of
        immigration control.
    20. Delay of  two  years  in  making  a  decision  in  the  context  of
        immigration and asylum applications in the United  Kingdom  is  not
        arguably excessive.  I appreciate that for an individual  applicant
        awaiting a decision on their application the  same  could  be  very
        frustrating but the appellant failed to  establish,  either  before
        the Judge or in his grounds of appeal, that any delay that occurred
        in making the decision was sufficient on the facts  to  render  the
        respondent's decision unlawful. The delay enabled the appellant  to
        further develop his private life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
        benefit from the medical care and assistance he received  from  the
        UK authorities. The Judge clearly took into account the appellant's
        evidence regarding this aspect and accepted that he had established
        private life in United Kingdom and the nature of the same.  It  is,
        however, the case as noted by the Judge that despite the  appellant
        having being in the United Kingdom since 7 April 2008, at that time
        a period of eight years and nine months at the date of the hearing,
        his time was made up by a mixture of lawful, unlawful, and  section
        3C residence rights, with no evidence that the appellant  had  ever
        been granted settled status.
    21. It is not clear why Judge Keane granted permission in  relation  to
        the Judge's finding that little  weight  should  be  given  to  the
        private life relied upon by the appellant  whilst  his  immigration
        status was precarious. In Rhuppiah [2018]  UKSC  58  it  was  held,
        referring with approval to AM, that a person's status is precarious
        if  he  has  leave  to  remain  which  is  other  than  indefinite.
        Considering the nature of the appellant's previous leave  and  lack
        of a right to remain when the same expired, his status  has  always
        been precarious. The provision of section 117(5) of  the  2002  Act
        required the Judge to apply  little  weight  to  the  private  life
        developed during such a period. There was nothing made  out  before
        the Judge to suggest  that  this  was  a  case  in  which  judicial
        discretion should be exercised to attribute greater weight  to  the
        appellant's private life than the Judge did, on the facts.
    22. The appellant also relies upon an  argument  the  Judge  failed  to
        adequately consider and assess his medical condition  asserting  in
        his submissions  of  25  August  2020  that  the  Judge  failed  to
        adequately consider his position in accordance with  the  judgement
        in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] as the Judge  only  applied  the  threshold
        required in N v the United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39.
    23. A reading of the decision under challenge does not show  the  Judge
        relied upon any specific authority  and  the  assertion  the  Judge
        failed to  apply  the  law  relating  to  the  appellant's  medical
        condition or to give legal reasons as to why they are  insufficient
        to engage article 3 or 8 has no arguable merit when the decision is
        read as a whole. It is also the case that the Supreme Court  handed
        down its decision in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17 on the  29  April
        2020 and was not a decision the Judge could have taken into account
        as  it  did  not  exist  at  the  date  the  Judge's  decision  was
        promulgated. The decision under challenge shows the  Judge  clearly
        assessed the merits of the medical aspect of the  appellants  claim
        in accordance with the guidance of the Court of Appeal in force  at
        that time.
    24. It  is  also  clear  the  Judge  considered  the  medical  evidence
        provided, background evidence on healthcare provisions in Tanzania,
        and gives adequate reasons for why  the  appellant  was  unable  to
        succeed under either article 3 or 8 ECHR.
    25. It is not disputed  that  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM  lowered  the
        threshold previously established in N v UK but it still  maintained
        a high threshold by reference to the applicable test.  The  finding
        of the Judge that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  on  medical
        grounds is a finding, if transposed into the judgement in AM,  that
        he could not meet that test.  There  was  nothing  in  the  medical
        evidence before the Judge, including the expert reports, to support
        a claim that he could as it was not made out that he  will  face  a
        real risk of being exposed to a serious,  rapid,  and  irreversible
        decline in his state of health resulting in intense suffering or  a
        significant reduction in life  expectancy  and  that  any  serious,
        rapid, or reversible decline in health leading to intense suffering
        or the substantial reduction in life expectancy would  arise  as  a
        result of the absence of appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
        country or the lack of access to such treatment.  The  Judge  finds
        that medical assistance or treatment that was required is available
        in Tanzania which has not been shown to be a  finding  infected  by
        arguable legal error.
    26. Reference by the appellant to  paragraphs  EX.1  and  EX.2  do  not
        assist him as these are not freestanding provisions and appendix FM
        is not relevant or applicable on the facts.  Paragraph  276ADE  was
        properly considered. There was nothing in the facts as found by the
        Judge  to  suggest  the  appellant  would  face  very   significant
        obstacles on his return to  Tanzania  or  that  such  return  would
        result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.
    27. Whilst the  appellant  disagrees  with  the  Judge's  findings  and
        conclusions and wishes to remain in the United Kingdom the  grounds
        fail to establish arguable legal error sufficient  to  warrant  the
        Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.  This  is  a
        carefully  considered  and  written  decision  in  which   a   very
        experienced judge clearly took  the  required  degree  of  care  to
        establish  the  factual  matrix,  in  ensuring  the  correct  legal
        provisions applicable at the date the decision was handed down were
        applied, and in  providing  adequate  reasons  in  support  of  the
        findings  made.  The  appellant   fails   to   establish   anything
        procedurally improper or wrong  in  the  way  in  which  the  Judge
        assessed the proportionality of the respondent's  decision  meaning
        the only challenge arguably open to the appellant will be on public
        law grounds.  It  is  not  made  out  there  is  anything  arguably
        irrational or perverse in the  Judge's  conclusions.  There  is  no
        material legal error in the Judge's decision which shall  therefore
        stand.


Decision

    28. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 September 2020











