
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01591/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2017                         |On 14 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                         Mr olufemi ademola adeniran
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Owoynfa, Barrister, Victory Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Ghani sitting at Sheldon Court  in  Birmingham  on  10  November
    2016) dismissing his appeal against the decision of an Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse to grant him entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled here.  The Judge found  that  the  appellant
    was not exempt from the English language requirement in accordance with
    E-ECP.4.2 of Appendix FM, and that his  application  had  been  rightly
    refused under the Rules as  he  had  not  passed  an  English  test  in
    speaking and listening at a minimum of level A1 of the Common  European
    Framework of Reference for languages with a provider  approved  by  the
    Secretary of State, as required by E-ECP.4.1 of Appendix FM.  The First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the appellant or his spouse requires anonymity for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 15 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb gave detailed reasons for
    granting the appellant permission to  appeal.   He  observed  that  the
    grounds were poorly drafted.  They re-stated the  case  and  failed  to
    understand the need to identify legal points, effectively  leaving  the
    appellant in a position of not being represented.  With this mind,  and
    noting the vulnerability of the sponsor, he had read the  determination
    with care.  He said that two  matters  of  concern  appeared  to  merit
    further consideration as to whether there had been legal  errors.   The
    Judge continued:

     4.  In [17] the Judge referred to  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
        ability to study for the language test as post-dating the  decision.
        Under the amended s82 and s85 of the 2002 Act, post  20-10-2014  all
        relevant evidence could be considered.  [17] as a whole is  unclear,
        but there is a concern that the  Judge  erred  in  law  at  [17]  in
        excluding post-decision evidence (on this point it may  be  relevant
        that the determination has an OA reference  on  all  but  the  first
        page).  If the letter diagnosing dyslexia  was  rejected  for  other
        reasons, it is arguable that no reasons were given for  doing  so  -
        this  is  particularly  important  because   this   would   be   the
        determinative issue  following  the  positive  findings  as  to  the
        genuineness of the relationship.

        5. The second arguable legal point  concerns  the  consideration  of
        Article 8 at [19].  There is no longer  a  compelling  circumstances
        test following Agyarko -v- Secretary of State [2017] UKSE  11.   The
        brief  proportionality  assessment  omits  any  reference   to   the
        sponsor's vulnerability,  and  proceeds  without  reference  to  the
        dyslexia evidence  (which  returns  to  the  first  point).   It  is
        therefore arguable  that  the  proportionality  assessment  was  not
        conducted within the correct legal framework; and  that  it  omitted
        relevant evidence.

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 8 June 2017 a member  of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  a
    detailed Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary,  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal had  directed  himself  appropriately.   The
    Judge had not excluded the evidence submitted  by  the  appellant  with
    regard to the assessment of his intellectual ability.  While the  Judge
    noted that the report was post-decision, there was nothing  to  suggest
    directly or indirectly that it was excluded.  This was supported  by  a
    further reading of the determination, which showed that the Judge  took
    the report into account and found that the report did not show that the
    appellant was unable to take the test.  The report said that  he  could
    take the test with the assistance of  personalised  tuition.   So,  the
    report was fully considered by the Judge, but found not to  assist  the
    appellant.

 4. In terms of the Article 8 proportionality assessment,  the  appellant's
    circumstances were considered under the  Rules;  and,  given  that  the
    appellant was unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  the
    evidence was insufficient to demonstrate that the requirement to make a
    further application once he had taken an English language test would be
    disproportionate.  The  decision  maintained  the  status  quo  of  the
    relationship of the appellant and the sponsor, and as such there was no
    interference.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Owoynfa directed my attention to a bundle  of  documents  which
    her firm had served on the Upper Tribunal on 17 July 2017.  This bundle
    contained additional evidence relating to the  appellant's  ability  to
    take the English language test that had not been put before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a covering letter, dated 17 July  2017,  she  sought
    permission to adduce new evidence in accordance with Rule 15(2A) of the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  She submitted that the outcome of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was unfair as the  result  of  a
    mistake of fact, and this constituted an error of law, following E&R -v-
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49  and  MM
    (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).   She  submitted  that
    the new evidence was admissible in accordance with the principles  laid
    down in Ladd -v- Marshall [1954[ EWCA Civ 1.

 6. With Ms Owoynfa's assistance, I reviewed (a) the relevant evidence that
    was put before the First-tier Tribunal, and (b) the new  evidence  that
    was now sought to be relied upon in support of  a  separate  ground  of
    appeal.  Ms Owoynfa clarified that her primary case was that the  Judge
    had erred in law in not finding that the  applicant  had  a  disability
    which prevented him from meeting the English language  requirement,  on
    the evidence that was before him.  Her alternative case  was  that  the
    matter was now put beyond doubt by the latest expert evidence,  and  so
    the Judge had made a mistake of fact about the appellant's  ability  to
    meet the requirement - and it was a mistake for which the appellant was
    not responsible.

Discussion

 7. In his application for entry  clearance  as  a  spouse,  the  appellant
    represented that he was competent in the  English  language.   He  said
    that he had studied in the English language medium at both primary  and
    secondary school for 12 years.  He said that English language was  also
    the mode  of  instruction  when  he  was  studying  for  a  diploma  in
    Electronics, a course of study which had lasted 6 years.  So  he  could
    assure the Entry Clearance  Officer  of  his  proficiency  in  reading,
    writing and understanding the English language.

 8. The date of refusal of the application was  27  May  2015.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer noted that he had provide a diploma  in  Electronics,
    but this was not an academic qualification recognised by NARIC  UK,  to
    be the equivalent to the standard of a Bachelors or Masters  degree  or
    PhD in the UK which was taught in  English.   So  his  application  was
    refused under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM.







The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. It was not until over a year later, while the appeal was still pending,
    that the appellant's legal representatives first intimated  that  there
    might be an issue as to the appellant's capacity to pass the test. They
    served a bundle of documents at the beginning of September 2016, with a
    covering letter in which they said that he had attended English classes
    with a view to satisfying the English language requirement, and he  had
    been certified as not being able to pass  the  English  language  test.
    This was not because he was "mentally sick", but  because  he  did  not
    have access to "education basics" on time.  They requested the Tribunal
    to waive the English language requirement, so as to allow the appellant
    to join his British wife in the UK.   The  documents  served  with  the
    covering letter comprised a very brief letter from Dr Olowale dated  11
    April 2016; an undated letter from Mrs Akande, the appellant's  English
    language tutor; and a lengthy report by a Clinical Psychologist at  the
    University of Ibadan who had carried out an assessment of the appellant
    on 29 June 2016.

10. Dr Olowale said that the appellant had been seen in  their  unit  on  6
    April 2016.  Their assessment of him revealed that he had suffered from
    developmental dyslexia, and this had had a significant  effect  on  his
    educational attainments.

11. Mrs Akande, Principal of St Kwary Comprehensive College, said that  she
    had referred the appellant to the  Counselling  and  Human  Development
    Studies Department at the University of Ibadan for an expert assessment
    of his intellectual capabilities.  She said that the appellant had been
    coached by her in preparation for his IELTS exams, for a  period  of  8
    months.  Although he had tried his  best,  he  was  not  performing  as
    expected.

12. The report of the Clinical Psychologist appears to have been a response
    to the referral  from  Mrs  Akande.   Her  report  indicates  that  the
    appellant was not in fact educated in the English language medium as he
    represented in the application form, but was  taught  in  Yoruba.   She
    states that he was brought  up  in  a  relatively  poor  socio-economic
    background which made it impossible for him to retake his O-level exams
    after an unsuccessful first attempt in 2004.

13. She summarises the results of the tests which  he  has  undertaken,  at
    page 5 of her report.  He has a full scale IQ score of 69 which  places
    him in the extremely low range  of  ability.   He  demonstrates  global
    cognitive difficulty across verbal and performance tasks.  His language
    development and word knowledge ability is a  significant  weakness  for
    him.

14. She is able to make a number of recommendations to help  the  appellant
    enhance his cognitive abilities.  She says that he will require a  high
    level of remedial support to achieve his full  potential  in  terms  of
    verbal expression, and  he  would  benefit  from  personalised  English
    language lessons in which the teacher moves at his  pace  and  presents
    him with audio-visual teaching aids by which he might learn on his own.
     He would also benefit from an opportunity to interact with people  and
    things in a more enriched or intellectually stimulating environment  to
    enable  him  gradually  to  overcome  his  difficulty   with   language
    development and word knowledge.

15. Her conclusion is as follows:

       Olufemi's performance in the WAIS-111 assessment has highlighted his
       significant cognitive difficulty in terms of  both  performance  and
       verbal skills.  His cognitive  difficulties  may  negatively  impact
       upon his self-confidence and self-esteem, especially as  it  affects
       his desire to relocate to the UK to be with his wife.  Therefore, he
       will require a high level of support in order for him to  learn  new
       skills to offset his current cognitive deficits.

Whether Judge's assessment of the evidence was legally erroneous

16. The first arguable error of law identified by Judge Gibb relates to the
    Judge's treatment of the medical report of Dr Olowale  dated  11  April
    2016 and the Clinical Psychologist's report of June 2016.

17. As submitted in the Rule 24 response, although  the  Judge  noted  that
    these reports were post-decision, the Judge did  not  exclude  them  on
    that basis.  He acknowledged that the letter of April 2016 referred  to
    the appellant  suffering  from  developmental  dyslexia.   However,  he
    observed that the assessment  by  the  Clinical  Psychologist  did  not
    mention dyslexia.

18. The test which the appellant  was  required  to  pass  was  a  test  in
    speaking and listening, not in  reading  and  writing.   Moreover,  the
    lengthy report from the Clinical Psychologist made no  mention  of  the
    appellant suffering from dyslexia, as the Judge noted.  Accordingly, it
    was open to the Judge to treat the brief medical report  as  not  being
    sufficiently persuasive as to establish on the balance of probabilities
    that the appellant had a disability which prevented  him  from  meeting
    the English language requirement.

19. It was also open for the Judge  to  reach  a  similar  conclusion  with
    regard to the report of the Clinical Psychologist.   She  did  not,  in
    terms, express the opinion that the appellant was  unable  to  pass  an
    English language test in speaking and listening at a minimum  level  of
    A1 CEFR, due to a mental disability.  It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
    interpret her report as stating that he would improve  his  ability  to
    communicate in the English language medium if he  had  the  benefit  of
    personalised English lessons and interaction with other people speaking
    English.  It was open to the Judge to conclude, as he did in  paragraph
    [18], that there was no evidence to suggest that the appellant  "cannot
    take the test".

20. In short, the Judge gave adequate reasons, in paragraphs  [17]-[19]  of
    his  decision,  for  holding  that,  on  the  available  evidence,  the
    appellant had not shown that he had any disability which prevented  him
    from passing an English language test in speaking and  listening  at  a
    minimum of level A1 of the CEFR.





Whether Judge's assessment of  proportionality  under  Article  8  ECHR  was
legally erroneous

21. The Judge reasonably drew a distinction between  the  appellant  having
    difficulty in passing the test, and having a disability which prevented
    him from doing so.   It  is  this  consideration  which  underpins  the
    crucial finding in his Article 8 assessment that the appellant  has  to
    make an effort to pass the relevant test and then reapply to  join  the
    sponsor as her spouse.

22. The Judge's reasoning under Article 8 was as follows in paragraph [19]:

         Under Article 8 I have to assess whether the refusal  would  result
         in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the  applicant  or  his
         family.  The fact that  a  refusal  may  result  in  the  continued
         separation  of  family  members  does  not  of  itself   constitute
         exceptional circumstances.  Compelling circumstances would need  to
         be identified. (SS CONGO 2015 EWCA Civ  387).  The  appellant  knew
         that he has  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
         Immigration Rules.  The relationship  was  therefore  formed  under
         conditions of known precariousness.  Article 8 does not  confer  an
         automatic right of entry and imposes no general obligation  of  the
         state for facilitate the choice made by a married couple to  reside
         in  it.  (SS  CONGO).  Public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
         Immigration control is now enshrined in the statute.   The  parties
         have lived apart for some time.  The sponsor has been visiting  the
         appellant, which can no doubt continue.  The appellant has to  make
         effort in order to pass a relevant test and  reapply  to  join  the
         sponsor as her spouse.  I find that having  conducted  a  balancing
         exercise,  the  refusal  to   grant   leave   to   enter   is   not
         disproportionate and there is therefore no breach of Article 8.  In
         coming to this conclusion I have taken into  account  the  step-by-
         step approach in the case of RAZGAR, and the test laid out  in  the
         case of HUANG.

23. The Judge recognised that the sponsor  was  sad  and  upset  about  the
    refusal decision: see paragraph [6].  He  noted  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor's father that she had learning disabilities and was  under  the
    treatment of a Consultant Cardiologist: see paragraph [10].  He  noted,
    at paragraph [14], that the sponsor's mother  was  the  sponsor's  sole
    carer, and the sponsor's father had said in evidence  that  she  missed
    her  husband  and  cried  at  night.   He  expressly  acknowledged  her
    vulnerability at paragraph [16] of his decision.  For the reasons given
    by him in paragraph [19], it was open to him to find that  the  refusal
    would nonetheless not result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    the appellant or the sponsor.

24. In Agyarko, the Court said (at paragraph 57): "The critical issue  will
    generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength of  the  public
    interest and the removal of a person in a case before it, the Article 8
    claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh  it.   In  general,  in  cases
    concerned with precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling
    claim is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control." Although the  Court  is  discussing  expulsion,  rather  than
    exclusion, the analysis holds true for a  case  such  as  this,  as  is
    illuminated in the discussion of the application of the Razgar test  in
    Muse & Others v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10.

25. I do not consider that the Judge' analysis  is  in  conflict  with  the
    guidance given by the Supreme Court in Agyarko.  The Supreme Court does
    not expressly disapprove SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.   Mr  Tarlow
    agrees with Judge Gibb that "compelling circumstances" as  a  threshold
    test has  gone.   However,  the  Judge  did  not  deploy  the  test  of
    compelling circumstances as  a  justification  for  not  balancing  the
    strength of the public interest in  maintaining  the  refusal  decision
    against the consequential impact upon  private  and  family  life.   He
    conducted the  proportionality  assessment  within  the  correct  legal
    framework, and his assessment was adequately reasoned, having regard to
    his sustainable finding that  the  appellant  was  not  prevented  from
    meeting the English language requirement, and  hence  the  interference
    was only temporary; and, in the meantime, the status quo was preserved,
    with family life being maintained through  visits  by  the  sponsor  to
    Nigeria.

Whether the Judge made a mistake of fact for  which  the  appellant  is  not
responsible

26. The new evidence sought to be adduced to show that  the  Judge  made  a
    mistake  of  fact  includes:  (a)  the  same  report  of  the  Clinical
    Psychologist, apart from the substitution of a new  conclusion;  (b)  a
    letter dated 30 October 2016 from Mrs Akande; (c) a further letter from
    Mrs Akande dated 13 February 2017 and (d) a letter  dated  15  February
    2017 from Femi David, Pastor at the Redeemed Christian Church of God in
    Newport, Gwent.

27. In the letter of 30 October 2016, Mrs Akande thanks the University  for
    the report on the appellant's  cognitive  status,  and  says  that  she
    wishes to express "our increased concerns"  on  his  consistently  poor
    performance in preparation for an IELTS test.  She  asks  the  Clinical
    Psychologist to confirm whether,  based  on  her  expert  opinion,  the
    appellant can pass the proposed examination.

28. In the report signed on 10 February  2017,  the  Clinical  Psychologist
    substitutes the following conclusion for her original one:

         Olufemi's performance in the WAIS-111 assessment has highlighted  a
         significant cognitive difficulty in terms of both  performance  and
         verbal skills.   Olufemi  will  not  be  able  to  pass  his  IELTS
         examination because of his cognitive difficulties (my emphasis).

29. In her letter of 13 February 2017, Mrs Akande advises the appellant  to
    withdraw from his English language tuition classes following "the  test
    result" and advice received from the University of Ibadan.

30. In a letter dated 15 February 2017, the Pastor says that over the  last
    15 months, the sponsor's emotional wellbeing appears to have  worsened.
    She has on many occasions broken down and cried profusely in the middle
    of church services.  According to her, this is because of her husband's
    inability to reunite with her since the marriage.  She now  displays  a
    high level of mental health problems, such as severe  depression,  mood
    swings and other challenging behaviours.  He strongly believes it to be
    in the best interest of the sponsor to be reunited with her husband  in
    the United Kingdom at the earliest possible time, so as  to  ameliorate
    her mental health needs and to enhance her overall wellbeing.

31. Ms Owoyinfa also reported that the sponsor was now pregnant,  following
    a visit to Nigeria in May 2017.

32. In MM (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) a  Presidential
    panel gave the following guidance:

      i) Where there is a defect or impropriety of a  procedural  nature  in
         the proceedings at first instance, this may amount  to  a  material
         error of law requiring the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
         be set aside.

     ii) A successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration  of  some
         failing on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.  Thus an  error  of
         law may be found to  have  occurred  in  circumstances  where  some
         material evidence, through no fault of the First-tier Tribunal, was
         not considered, with resulting unfairness (E &  R  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

33. The following passages in MM are particularly pertinent  to  the  issue
    raised                 by                 Ms                  Owoyinfa:



        19.   Of unmistakable  importance  also,  in  the  context  of  this
           appeal, is the decision of the Court of Appeal in E &  R  -  v  -
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49.
           As  appears  from  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  judgment  of
           Carnwarth LJ, one of the two central issues raised in this appeal
           concerned cases decided by the first instance Tribunal  (in  that
           instance, the Adjudicator) where it is demonstrated that -

           '... an important part of its reasoning was based  on  ignorance
           or mistake as to the facts ....'

           Drawing particularly on the speech of Lord Slynn  in  R  -  v  -
           Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte A [1999] 2 AC 330
           (at pages 333 - 336), Carnwath LJ stated:

           '[63]  In our view, the  CICB  case  points  to  the  way  to  a
           separate ground of review, based on the  principle  of  fairness
           ... the unfairness arose from the combination of five factors:

           (i)    An erroneous impression created by a mistake  as  to,  or
               ignorance of, a relevant fact (the availability  of  reliable
               evidence to support her case);

           (ii)   The  fact  was  'established,'  in  the  sense  that,  if
               attention had been drawn to the point, the  correct  position
               could  have  been  shown  by  objective   and   uncontentious
               evidence;

           (iii)  The Claimant could not fairly be held responsible for the
               error;

           (iv)   Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,  or  the
               police, to do the Claimant's work of proving  her  case,  all
               the participants  had  shared  interest  in  co-operating  to
               achieve the correct result.

           (v)    The mistaken impression played a  material  part  in  the
               reasoning.'

           ...

        20.   The principles relating to  the  impact  upon  proceedings  of
           unfairness arising from error of fact were  reconsidered  by  the
           Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD in  which  decision  the
           Court of Appeal conducted a  detailed  review  of  categories  of
           error  of  law  frequently  encountered.   Brooke  LJ  said   the
           following:

           'Part 6.Error of law: unfairness resulting from a mistake of fact



            28.     The  next  matter  we  must  address  relates   to   the
               circumstances in which an appellate body like the IAT,  whose
               primary role during the relevant  period  was  restricted  to
               identifying and correcting errors of law, could entertain  an
               argument to the effect that the outcome in  the  lower  court
               was unfair as a result of a mistake of fact,  and  that  this
               constituted an error of law which entitled it to interfere...

             30.   At para 64 Carnwath LJ  said  that  there  was  a  common
              feature of all these cases,  even  where  the  procedure  was
              adversarial, in that the Secretary of State or the particular
              statutory authority had  a  shared  interest  with  both  the
              particular appellant and with any tribunal or other decision-
              maker that might be involved in the  case  in  ensuring  that
              decisions were taken on  the  best  information  and  on  the
              correct factual basis.  At para 66 he identified  asylum  law
              as representing a statutory  context  in  which  the  parties
              shared an interest  in  co-operating  to  achieve  a  correct
              result.  He went on to suggest that the ordinary requirements
              for a finding of unfairness which amounted to an error of law
              were that:

           (i)    there must have been a mistake as to  an  existing  fact,
               including a mistake as to the availability of evidence  on  a
               particular matter;

           (ii)   it must be possible to categorise the  relevant  fact  or
               evidence  as  'established'  in  the  sense   that   it   was
               uncontentious and objectively verifiable;

           (iii)  the appellant  (or  his  advisors)  must  not  have  been
               responsible for the mistake;

           (iv)   the mistake must have played a material (not  necessarily
               decisive) part in the tribunal's reasoning.'

                   ...




             32. The reference to  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles  is  a
               reference to that part of  the  judgment  of  Denning  LJ  in
               [1954] 1 WLR 1489 when he said (at p 1491) that  where  there
               had been a trial or hearing on the merits,  the  decision  of
               the judge could only  be  overturned  by  resort  to  further
               evidence if it could be shown that:

              (1)  the new evidence could not with reasonable diligence have
                    been obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);

              (2)  the new evidence must be such that, if  given,  it  would
                    probably have had an important influence on the  result
                    of the case (though it need not be decisive);

              (3)      the new evidence was apparently credible although it
              need not be incontrovertible.

           33.    By way of a final summary of the position.  Carnwarth  LJ
              said in E and R at para 91 that an appeal on  a  question  of
              law might now be made on the basis  of  unfairness  resulting
              from "misunderstanding or ignorance  of  an  established  and
              relevant fact" and that the admission of new evidence on such
              an appeal was subject to Ladd v  Marshall  principles,  which
              might be departed from in exceptional circumstances where the
              interests of justice required.'

34. In the light of the foregoing, I do not consider that the new  evidence
    can be relied upon to assert that the Judge  made  a  mistake  of  fact
    about the appellant's ability to meet the English language requirement;
    or that the appellant is not responsible for  the  alleged  mistake  of
    fact.

35. Dealing first with the expert evidence, it was open to the appellant or
    his legal representatives to obtain the expert evidence now  sought  to
    be relied upon before the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  rather
    than after the hearing.  Moreover, the latest report  does  not  fulfil
    the requirement of being uncontentious evidence.  The conclusion of the
    expert in the new report is controversial, precisely  because  she  has
    substituted a different conclusion from the one  previously  expressed,
    without acknowledging the fact that she has changed her conclusion.

36. The sponsor was not pregnant at the time before the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and so there can be no  procedural  unfairness  in
    the Judge not taking into account her subsequent pregnancy.  Similarly,
    there is no procedural unfairness in the Judge not taking into  account
    an  asserted  deterioration  in  the  mental  state  of  the   sponsor,
    consequential upon her husband's inability  to  join  her  in  the  UK.
    Furthermore,  since  the  deterioration  in  the  sponsor's   emotional
    wellbeing is said by the Pastor to  have  occurred  over  the  past  15
    months, I infer that the deterioration was apparent to  the  Pastor  at
    the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. So his evidence
    does not meet the requirement of being new evidence that could not with
    reasonable diligence have been obtained for use at the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

37. For the above reasons, the new evidence sought to be relied upon by way
    of appeal for the Upper Tribunal does not show that an  important  part
    of the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal was based upon a mistake as
    to existing facts, or that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unfair through "misunderstanding or ignorance  of  an  established  and
    relevant fact".

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 13 August 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

