
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01677/2018
                                                               HU/01679/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2019                              |On 30 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                     MR CHRISTOPHER [F] - 1st Appellant
                             JN - 2nd Appellant
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Kamal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Ghana. The first  Appellant  who  I
    shall refer to as the Appellant was born on 13th May 2000 and is now 18
    years of age. The 2nd Appellant, JN, who is his brother was born  on  5
    June 2009 and is now 9 years old. They appeal  against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross on  10
    December 2018 in which the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against decisions of the  Respondent  dated  21  November  2017.  Those
    decisions  were  to  refuse  the  Appellants'  applications  for  entry
    clearance to join their mother  Mrs  [CM],  a  British  citizen,  ("the
    sponsor") under paragraph 297(i)(e)  of  the  immigration  rules.  This
    paragraph sets out the requirements to be met  by  any  person  seeking
    entry clearance to join a parent who is  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom. Subparagraph (e) provides  that  the  parent  whom  the
    child is seeking to join must have  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    child's upbringing.

The Appellants' Case

 2. The sponsor travelled to the United Kingdom  in  2011  since  when  the
    Appellants had been living with their grandmother in Ghana. Due to  the
    grandmother's age and health conditions she was unable to  continue  to
    provide care for them. The whereabouts of the  Appellant's  father  was
    unknown after he travelled to Libya. The  sponsor  had  been  regularly
    sending money to Ghana for the support of the Appellants and  had  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant's upbringing. It was in the children's
    best interests that they come to the United Kingdom to be looked  after
    by their mother.

 3. The Respondent initially refused the application  because  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants were related to the  sponsor  as  claimed
    but that issue has now been resolved in the  Appellants'  favour.  Cash
    transfer receipts showed that the sponsor had  been  regularly  sending
    money to Ghana but there were three  beneficiaries  on  those  receipts
    neither of which were the grandmother with whom the Appellants had said
    they were residing. Even if she was the beneficiary the Respondent took
    the view that sole responsibility extended beyond financial support and
    there was no satisfactory evidence that the sponsor was responsible for
    making the important decisions relating to the  Appellants'  upbringing
    such as those relating to their personal care, education and health.

The Proceedings

 4. In January 2014 the Appellants had made a similar application for entry
    clearance under paragraph 297 which was refused by the  Respondent  and
    their onward appeal was dismissed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Jones QC  sitting  at  Richmond  on  15  May  2015.  His  decision  was
    overturned on appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen  sitting  at  Field
    House on 16 October 2015. Although Article  8  was  not  argued  before
    Judge Jones the issue was of sufficient importance  that  it  ought  to
    have been addressed by the Judge. Judge Allen indicated  there  was  no
    reason why the matter should not simply be returned to Judge  Jones  QC
    for him to complete his  determination  by  considering  the  claim  in
    respect of Article 8.

 5. In fact, that appears not to have happened. Instead the Appellants made
    a further application for entry clearance on 5 September  2017  and  it
    was the refusal of that application on 21 November 2017 which gave rise
    to these proceedings. The deadline for appealing this  second  decision
    of the Respondent was 19 December 2017 but the notice of appeal was  in
    fact lodged three days late on 22 December 2017. Form IAFT-4  completed
    by the Appellant's solicitors gave the Appellants address  as  care  of
    the solicitors' address who were Nasim and Co in East  Ham  London  E6.
    They continue to act for the Appellants. Neither the sponsor's  address
    nor the Appellants' address in Ghana was given on the notice of appeal.

 6. Due to the lateness of the lodging of the notice of appeal  the  matter
    was referred to the Tribunal Caseworker to decide whether  time  should
    be extended to enable the appeal to  proceed.  In  extending  time  the
    Caseworker noted that the delay  was  not  significant  and  that  both
    Appellants were minors (at  that  time).  Even  though  no  reason  was
    provided for the delay, time was extended.

 7. The Tribunal issued the caseworker's decision on 7 February 2018 to the
    Appellants care of their solicitors and to the  solicitors  themselves.
    On 27 June 2018 the Tribunal sent notice of hearing to  the  Appellants
    again care of their solicitors and to  the  solicitors  indicating  the
    appeal would be heard on Thursday, 29 November 2018 at Hatton Cross.

The Decision at First Instance

 8. In consequence the matter came before Judge Hussain when there  was  no
    representation by either party.  The  Judge  noted  the  basis  of  the
    application and the Respondent's grounds for refusal but stated at  [9]
    of  his  determination:  "At  the  hearing,  the  Appellants  were  not
    represented  either  by  their  sponsor  or  through  their   nominated
    solicitors. I note that on 27 June 2018, a notice of hearing  was  sent
    to Nasim and Co solicitors. There has been  no  explanation  for  their
    absence from the hearing. In the circumstances, I resolved to determine
    this appeal on the evidence before the Tribunal".

 9. Judge Hussain concluded that the  Appellants  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon them. It was significant that the sponsor had  not
    attended the hearing which would have been crucial for the Tribunal  to
    assess the level of interest she had retained in the Appellants and how
    she had supervised their upbringing. There was no written  evidence  to
    show that the sponsor had otherwise exercised  parental  responsibility
    over the children. This last comment is a reference to  the  fact  that
    although there were grounds of appeal running to 5 pages which had been
    lodged in December 2017, there were no witness statements  either  from
    the Appellants or their sponsor and there were not even copies  of  the
    documents referred to in the refusal  letter  such  as  payment  slips.
    Judge Hussain dismissed the appeal and a copy of his decision was  sent
    out by the Tribunal to the solicitors on 31 January 2019.

The Onward Appeal

10. The Appellants appealed against this decision  arguing  that  they  had
    requested an oral hearing on form IAFT-4 but had only  received  notice
    of pending appeal and the Respondent's bundle in March 2018.  They  had
    not received the notice of hearing dated 27 June 2018  referred  to  in
    Judge Hussain's determination. If they had received it both the sponsor
    and the Appellant's representatives would have attended. They  had  not
    filed a bundle of evidence as they were unaware  of  the  date  of  the
    hearing. They only became aware of  the  hearing  after  receiving  the
    determination. No enquiries were made about their  whereabouts  on  the
    day of the hearing. It was crucial that the sponsor should  attend  the
    hearing in order to give evidence, but she was not aware and thus could
    not attend. It was in the interests of justice and the  best  interests
    of the children that the determination be set  aside,  and  the  appeal
    listed for rehearing.

11. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grimmett  on  26  February  2019.  In
    granting permission to appeal  she  wrote:  "it  appears  that  neither
    Appellant received the  notice  of  hearing  and  therefore  failed  to
    attend. I grant permission to appeal". I pause to  note  here  that  it
    would of course have been impossible for the Appellants to  attend  the
    hearing as they were then, and are still, in Ghana, but I  assume  that
    the Judge intended to refer to the non-attendance of the sponsor.

12. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission pursuant to  rule  24
    on 29 March 2019. The Respondent's letter recited the  history  of  the
    case stating it was clear that the  representatives  had  received  the
    Home Office bundle in preparation for the hearing, but it  was  unclear
    why the notice of hearing was not received or why after  receiving  the
    bundle the solicitors had not contacted the Tribunal to check when  the
    hearing date was sent. To date no bundle of documents had been received
    by the Respondent from the Appellants to deal with any of  the  matters
    raised in the refusal notice. The  Respondent  therefore  "tentatively"
    opposed  the  Appellant's  appeal.  The  Judge  had  directed   himself
    appropriately.

The Hearing Before Me

13. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was a material error of  law
    in the Judge's  decision  such  that  it  fell  to  be  set  aside  and
    directions for a rehearing be made. If there was not, the  decision  at
    first instance would stand.

14. The  Appellants'  solicitor  submitted  that  the  solicitors  had  not
    received the notice of hearing and  therefore  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hussain should be set aside. For the Respondent it was noted  that  the
    Appellant had never followed up the decision of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Alan who had remitted the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.  They
    had done nothing about their appeal  in  2016  and  had  been  late  in
    lodging their appeal against the 2017 decision. At  the  conclusion  of
    submissions, I indicated that I  would  dismiss  the  appeal  and  give
    written reasons for my decision which I now do.

Findings

15. This case has had an unfortunate history. There is no  explanation  why
    the Appellants made a 2nd application in 2017 rather than pursue  their
    previous appeal in 2015/16. When  they  did  appeal  against  the  2017
    decision the notice of appeal did  not  state  either  the  Appellants'
    address in Ghana or  the  sponsor's  address  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Sponsors are not normally served with  notice  of  proceedings  by  the
    Tribunal but if instead of  giving  the  solicitors'  address  for  the
    Appellants the solicitors had given the sponsor's address some  of  the
    difficulties in this case might have been avoided. There  was  no  good
    reason why the solicitors put their own address down as the address for
    service on the Appellants

16. The solicitors argue that they did not receive the notice of hearing in
    June 2018 notifying them of the hearing date in  November  2018.  There
    are two problems with this argument. The first is that  the  Tribunal's
    correspondence has not been returned undelivered to the Tribunal by the
    Post Office. This includes the decision extending time, the  notice  of
    pending appeal, the notice of hearing and the decision of Judge Hussain
    itself. The solicitors appear to be suggesting that they have  received
    all of these documents except the notice of hearing. Whatever has  gone
    wrong in the solicitors' office, I do not accept  that  they  were  not
    properly served with the notice of hearing nor that the Tribunal failed
    to serve the Appellants at the care of address  given  on  the  IAFT-4.
    Three notices were sent out each time, one each for the two  Appellants
    and one for the solicitors. None have come back undelivered. I  do  not
    consider that any good reason has been given why both the  sponsor  and
    the solicitors failed to attend the hearing before Judge Hussain on  29
    November 2018.

17. The second problem is the lack of engagement on  the  Appellants'  side
    with this appeal. I do not consider that it is  any  argument  for  the
    solicitors to say that the Tribunal should have made enquiries of  them
    on 29th November as to  where  they  were.  That  is  not  a  mandatory
    requirement and in the course of a busy list  it  is  not  possible  to
    investigate matters which should have been  put  beyond  doubt  by  the
    solicitors themselves. I am also concerned at the lack of engagement in
    these proceedings by the  sponsor  who  has  not  filed  and  served  a
    statement setting out her claim to have  sole  responsibility  for  the
    care of the Appellants. There  was  no  response  to  the  Respondent's
    bundle or indeed to the entry clearance managers post appeal review. It
    is not at all  clear  therefore  that  irrespective  of  the  issue  of
    service, this appeal has any merit.

18. I appreciate the point that if a party has not been served there may be
    a right to set aside the Tribunal's decision but in this case the  lack
    of any evidence filed with the Tribunal  prior  to  the  November  2018
    hearing undermines any confidence one might have that these proceedings
    were fully contested. It was open to Judge Hussain to proceed with  the
    hearing on 29th November notwithstanding the absence of the sponsor and
    the solicitors. He  was  entitled  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the
    solicitors had been properly served with a notice of hearing as had the
    Appellants because separate notices of hearing had been  sent  to  them
    care of the solicitors' address. I do not consider therefore that there
    was any material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and
    I dismiss the onward appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order in relation to  the  Appellants  as  there  is  no
public policy reason for so doing. The Appellant is now  an  adult  and  the
2nd Appellant will continue to be referred to by his initials.


Signed this 25 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 25 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

