
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01507/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 4th March 2019                    |On 15th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         Mr jayde munyaradzi muzwuru
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moan, promulgated on 14th December 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 6th December  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Zimbabwe, and was  born  on  10th
    September 1998.  He applied to join his sponsoring parents, Mr  Stheven
    Muzwuru and Mrs Getrude Muzwuru, both of whom had  discretionary  leave
    to remain in the UK, when he was 17 years of age, but  just  five  days
    short of reaching the age of 18 years.  The application appears to have
    been made on the basis of paragraph 297 HC 395.  However, by  the  time
    of the hearing before the judge, it was recognised that the Appellant's
    sponsoring parents did  not  have  "settled"  status  in  the  UK,  and
    therefore the Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules on that
    basis.  This being so, "the appeal proceeded on the basis of Article  8
    only,  namely,  that   the   decision   of   the   Respondent   was   a
    disproportionate interference with the Article 8 right to  respect  for
    family life of the Appellant and Sponsors" (paragraph 4).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, after he was born in 1998,  his  parents
    left Zimbabwe to come to the UK in 2002 and they acquired discretionary
    leave to remain in 2012.  The Appellant was living  with  his  paternal
    grandmother, Ms  Mandoe  during  this  time.   The  Appellant  had  two
    siblings.  Both of these were born in the UK.  They were 7 years and 11
    years of age.  The Sponsors maintained that they could not relocate  to
    Zimbabwe to join the Appellant  because  these  children  have  settled
    status in the UK and  have  always  lived  in  this  country.   At  the
    hearing, the judge accepted that although neither  child  was  British,
    "they are qualifying children" having spent over seven  years  in  this
    country (paragraph 7).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how,  after  the  sponsoring  parents  were  granted
    discretionary leave in 2012, they started to send money  to  their  son
    thereafter, and "there were numerous money transfers", and  there  were
    separate  letters  which  confirmed  "that  the   Sponsors   paid   the
    Appellant's educational fees and medical costs".  The  judge  concluded
    that, "I am satisfied that they have contributed financially for  their
    son albeit there is little evidence of regular  maintenance  for  their
    son since 2002 or 2012" (paragraph 13).

 5. In the end, however, the judge concluded that,

         "Whilst I am satisfied that family life continues to exist  between
         the Sponsors and Appellant, and noting the compassion that  I  feel
         for this family in their wish to be together, when I  look  at  all
         the factors objectively, I am unable to conclude that the  decision
         of the Respondent is disproportionate".

 6. The reason for this was that the decision of the Respondent did  strike
    a fair balance between Article 8 rights with respect to this family and
    the public interest, according to the judge.  This is because

         "That relationship can continue in the same format as it does  now,
         and the desire for the family to have a  direct  relationship  with
         the Appellant by the Appellant being allowed to join  them  in  the
         UK, cannot counterbalance the public interest in  maintaining  firm
         immigration control in denying access to an adult child who is  not
         financially independent and does not meet  the  Immigration  Rules"
         (paragraph 27).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge's  conclusions  with
    respect to whether the Appellant, in an Article  8  appeal  before  the
    Tribunal,  was  "dependent"  or  "independent"  of  his  parents,   was
    inconsistent.  The  judge  had  made  findings  of  dependency  on  the
    sponsoring parents at  no  less  than  four  different  places  in  the
    determination (see paragraphs 13, 15, 22 and 26).  Yet, the  judge  had
    then gone on to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  was  independent  (see
    paragraphs 8 and 27).

 9. On 7th March 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 23rd March 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered.   It  was  asserted
    that, insofar as there was a discrepancy in the judge's findings as  to
    whether or not the Appellant was  dependent  on  his  parents,  or  was
    actually "independent", "this is not material,  and  indeed  may  be  a
    'slip of the pen'".  The fact was that the Appellant could not  qualify
    as a dependent under the Immigration  Rules.   His  Sponsors  were  not
    settled in the UK.  Between 2002 and 2013 they had  not  even  visited.
    The judge was correct to conclude  that  the  current  situation  could
    continue and would not be a disproportionate breach of the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 4th March 2019, Mr Kumar submitted that the
    judge had earlier accepted that the  appeal  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 297 of HC 395, and that the only basis upon which it could be
    determined was on "Article 8 only" (paragraph 4).   Despite  this,  the
    judge felt constrained to apply paragraph 297, to such an  extent  that
    she concluded (at paragraph 27) that the Appellant's appeal fell to  be
    refused because it "does not meet  the  Immigration  Rules"  (paragraph
    27).  It was also not correct that the  parents  had  not  visited  the
    Appellant in Zimbabwe.  They were not able to do  so  during  the  time
    that their immigration status was precarious between 2002 and 2013, but
    subsequent to that there had been flight  itineraries  produced  before
    the judge and the judge accepted that "in time having visited  in  July
    2014" paragraph 12 which  was  the  earliest  opportunity  after  2013.
    Furthermore,  there  were  numerous  money  transfers  that  the  judge
    referred to as well  as  separate  letters,  and  confirmation  of  the
    payment of medical costs and educational fees by the  parents  for  the
    Appellant (paragraph 13).

12. Second, and more importantly, given that the appeal was  under  Article
    8, freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence should have been  applied,  and
    on this basis, once the judge had accepted that, "I am  satisfied  that
    family life continues to exist between the Sponsors and the  Appellant"
    (paragraph 27), that they did not fall to be the case that there was  a
    public  interest  militating  against  such  an  appeal,  because   the
    Appellant was applying on the basis of existing  family  life,  without
    there having been the commission of any immigration offence  by  either
    side.

13.  Finally, the judge had in the end failed to do justice  to  the  claim
    because  of  references  also  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    independent, whereas it had in fact been found that he was dependent on
    his parents.

14. For her part, Ms Aboni accepted that the Appellant was  dependent  upon
    his parents.  However, the position that the Secretary of  State  would
    take is that the  financial  support,  which  the  Appellant  had  been
    receiving, can continue.  She relied upon the Rule  24  response.   The
    judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant,  who  was  staying  with   his
    grandmother, did  not  now  need  the  same  level  of  care  from  his
    grandmother that he previously had.  The judge had observed that, "as a
    healthy 19 year old male, it is unlikely that  he  needs  any  physical
    support" (paragraph 56).

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First and most importantly, this is a case where  the  judge  did  make
    findings of fact on several occasions that the Appellant was  dependent
    on  his  sponsoring  parents  and  that  family  life  existed.    This
    culminated in the final paragraph that, "I  am  satisfied  that  family
    life continues to exist between the Sponsors and Appellant"  (paragraph
    27).  In the circumstances, the suggestion that  family  life  did  not
    actually exist, plainly corrupted the application of Article 8 ECHR and
    the determination of proportionality  in  that  context.   The  judge's
    conclusion, "I have no doubt that all of the family wish  there  to  be
    such a relationship.  However, the public interest does not require the
    authorities to adapt the Rules to  allow  a  relationship  to  develop,
    where it does not currently exist" (paragraph 25),  is  one  which,  is
    open to question.

17. Second, this is because, if the judge did find that,  "I  am  satisfied
    that family life continues to exist" (paragraph 27), then it is  highly
    arguable that the public interest does require the authorities to allow
    a relationship to develop, in  circumstances  where  that  relationship
    could not earlier develop because the  parents  were  in  the  UK  with
    precarious leave, and the Appellant son had to remain in Zimbabwe  with
    his grandmother.  Although the Appellant is an adult now, he was not an
    adult at the time  that  he  made  his  application.   The  application
    deserved to be considered in that context.

18. Third, it is unclear to what extent the  Appellant's  grandmother,  who
    the judge finds has mobility which is deteriorating (paragraph 26)  and
    uses an aid to walk, was looking  after  the  Appellant,  and  to  what
    extent it was the Appellant who has been supporting the grandmother  as
    of late.  Be that as it may,  this  is  a  case  where  Lord  Bingham's
    tabulation in Razgar (at paragraph 17) was most pertinent.

19. First, it is plain that the continued exclusion of the Appellant is  an
    interference by a public authority, namely,  the  Secretary  of  State,
    with the exercise of the Appellant's right to respect  for  his  family
    life.  This family life is qualitatively different with  the  one  that
    the  Appellant  is  enjoying  in  his  country  of  origin,  where  his
    grandmother is not able to any longer look after the  Appellant,  given
    her age and disability, and to provide him with the kind of  care  that
    he would need as a teenager.  On the other hand, he does have the  care
    and support of his own father and his mother in this country,  both  of
    whom are keen and able to look after the Appellant.

20. Second, the interference here does have consequences of such gravity as
    to potentially engage the operation of Article 8 (bearing in mind  that
    this is a low threshold).

21. Third, the interference here is one where the judge had  accepted  that
    family life existed between the sponsoring parents and  the  Appellant,
    to such an extent that there was considerable financial  support  after
    2012 in the payment of the Appellant's medical costs  and  school  fees
    (paragraph 13), which was not possible at a time when their immigration
    status was precarious (paragraph 12), a matter that was confirmed by Ms
    Aboni already before this Tribunal at  this  hearing.   There  is  also
    extensive evidence in the form of WhatsApp chat  logs  from  June  2017
    (paragraph 14).  The evidence before the judge was that  they  had  not
    transferred their responsibility for decision  making  to  anyone  else
    (paragraph 15).  A letter  from  the  paternal  grandmother  dated  5th
    September 2016 confirmed that the Sponsors had made all  the  important
    decisions in the Appellant's life (paragraph  16).   The  grandmother's
    condition has since 2017 been deteriorating  with  severe  hypertension
    and arthritis and she has degenerative disease of her hip and knee  and
    the doctor's opinion was that "she was no longer capable of effectively
    continuing to take care of the Appellant" (paragraph 17).

22. Fourth, the interference is  not  necessary  in  a  democratic  society
    because it is not necessary for the economic wellbeing of  the  country
    or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.   There  is
    no hint whatsoever of any wrongdoing or  illegalities  by  any  of  the
    parties concerned.  In fact, all of the evidence is that the sponsoring
    father and mother have  continuing  legal  custody  of  the  Appellant.
    Fifth, all in all, the  decision  here  is  not  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end that is sought to be achieved.

23.  It  is  well  established  that   the   relevant   question   engaging
    proportionality of an administrative decision that threatens to break a
    family is whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  remain
    separately from his natural parents,  which  in  this  case  means  his
    natural father and mother, who are the persons with a legitimate  legal
    status. On the facts of this case it is not reasonable.

Re-making the Decision

24. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  For the reasons I have given above, this  appeal  is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision stands to be set aside.  I  set  aside
    the decision of the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.
     This appeal is allowed.

26. No anonymity direction is made.

27. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may  be
payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019


