
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01492/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                           |On 1 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 DALLBOR [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Komusanac, Solicitor, Igor & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is an illegal entrant, appeals to the Upper Tribunal
    from the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  NMK  Lawrence
    sitting at Hatton Cross  on  3  October  2017)  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent made on 9 January 2017 to refuse
    to grant him leave to remain on private or family life grounds.

 2. The respondent accepted that he was the father  of  a  boy  born  to  a
    Namibian mother, [EU], in the UK on [ ] 2015. But as none of  them  had
    status  (the  Namibian  mother  being  an  overstayer)  the  respondent
    contended that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to go back  to
    his home country of Serbia with his son or  to  go  to  Namibia  "as  a
    family unit".

 3. At the  hearing  before  Judge  Lawrence,  both  parties  were  legally
    represented. Mr Komusanac applied for an adjournment because [EU],  who
    had provided a witness statement, had given birth to a second child  by
    the appellant on [ ] 2017, and she  was  not  yet  fit  to  attend  the
    hearing to give  oral  evidence.  The  Judge  refused  the  adjournment
    request because Mr Komusanac told him that the appellant was not  in  a
    relationship with [EU], and that they had only been  living  under  the
    same roof since the birth of the second child.

 4. In his subsequent decision, the Judge found that the appellant did  not
    enjoy family life with his children. He held that there was no evidence
    that he had gone to see his first child when that child was living with
    his mother in Wellingborough, or that he had been  providing  financial
    support for the first child. He noted that the appellant was  convicted
    of fraud in 2008, which meant that what he said should be treated  with
    caution. The lack of cogent evidence of  any  visits  or  provision  of
    funds led him to find that the assertions made  by  the  appellant  and
    [EU] were made "for the benefit  of  securing  status  in  the  UK  and
    nothing more".

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 5. On 22 December 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         The central issue in this appeal is whether the  appellant  enjoyed
         family life with his children and whether the refusal of his  human
         rights claim was disproportionate. Although the appellant is not in
         a relationship with the mother of his children, it is arguable that
         the FtJ erred in law by refusing to adjourn the hearing  to  enable
         her to attend ... as she could have given  first-hand  evidence  of
         the claimed relationship, and that the  FtJ  erred  by  failing  to
         consider the travel card evidence which was capable  of  supporting
         his claim to have travelled to Wellingborough to see his child.

The Rule 24 Response

 6. In a Rule 24 Response dated 16 January 2018, a member of the Specialist
    Appeals Team vigorously opposed the appeal, asserting  that  the  Judge
    had directed himself appropriately and that he had given cogent reasons
    for concluding the appellant's removal was proportionate.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, the appellant confirmed (as I suspected - see below) that his case
    was that [EU] had moved with their first child to London to  live  with
    him before she had conceived their second child. He said this  happened
    in April 2016, and that they had lived together in the  same  household
    ever since.

 8. Mr Walker conceded that the Judge had  made  a  factual  error  in  his
    decision which was material to the  outcome,  and  he  agreed  with  Mr
    Komusanac that the decision was thereby fatally flawed.

 9. I gave brief reasons for finding that an error of law was made out, and
    undertook to provide fuller reasons in due course.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. The case presented to the Judge was a confusing one. On the  one  hand,
    it was said that the appellant did not have family life with the mother
    of his two children, but on the other hand she was said  to  be  living
    under the same roof as him and the children. Their prospects  of  being
    able to obtain status in the UK were  much  better  if  they  presented
    themselves as not  being  in  a  relationship  than  if  they  declared
    themselves to be partners who lived in the same household as their  two
    children, neither of whom were qualifying children for the purposes  of
    s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

11. Against this  background,  and  taking  into  account  the  appellant's
    conviction for an offence of dishonesty, it was open to  the  Judge  to
    treat the appellant's evidence with considerable  scepticism.  However,
    with the benefit of hindsight,  his  refusal  to  adjourn  has  led  to
    material unfairness. The Judge made an adverse credibility  finding  on
    the issue of contact without hearing from the mother,  who  would  have
    been able to give first-hand evidence on this issue as well as  on  the
    status of her relationship with the appellant; and her  evidence  could
    have been tested in cross-examination, and compared with that given  by
    the appellant.

12.  As  recorded  in  paragraph  [8]  of  the  decision,  the  appellant's
    explanation in oral evidence for fathering a second child by her,  even
    though they were supposedly not in a relationship, was that  they  were
    living in the same house, "and sex just happened".

13. The Judge assessed the family life claim on the  basis  that  they  had
    allegedly only started living together as a family unit  following  the
    birth of the second child. This may have been what he was told  at  the
    outset, but the appellant's oral evidence indicated that they had begun
    to cohabit before the second child's conception. The  Judge  failed  to
    engage with this aspect  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  and  he  also
    misdirected himself in saying that there was  "no  evidence"  that  the
    appellant had travelled from London to Wellingborough to see  his  son.
    There was evidence before him in the form of travel card evidence.

14. Accordingly, as I ruled orally at the hearing, the  decision  of  Judge
    Lawrence is unsafe and erroneous in law such that it must be set  aside
    and remade.

Future Disposal

15. Having heard from both representatives, I was satisfied that  this  was
    not an appropriate case for retention by the Upper Tribunal,  but  that
    it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing,
    due to the extent  of  judicial  fact-finding  that  was  going  to  be
    required to remake the decision.

16. In the light of the case that the  family  have  been  living  together
    under the same roof since April 2016, one of the issues is likely to be
    whether it is reasonable for the entire family to  relocate  to  either
    Namibia or Serbia. Even if the appellant and  [EU]  are  not  partners,
    they have - on the appellant's case - come together for the sake of the
    children. So this arrangement  could  potentially  continue  elsewhere,
    subject to any significant obstacles to  integration  which  either  of
    them, or the children, may face in the country of return.

Conclusion

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law, such that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a
    de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge  Lawrence.   None  of
    the findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be  preserved.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that the appellant requires anonymity for these proceedings in  the
Upper Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
