
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01487/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2019                   |On 22 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    m d m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Praisoody, Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Australia.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 10
    January 2017 refusing his human rights claim.

2.   The appellant had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2001  and
    remained  at  all  times  with  valid  leave  until  the  making  of  a
    deportation order against  him  on  18  November  2014.   He  had  been
    convicted  in  2013  on  four  counts  of  dishonestly   making   false
    representations and was sentenced to two years'  imprisonment  on  each
    count to run concurrently.

3.   The appellant's human rights claim was based on his  relationship  with
    his children, R who  was  born  in  July  2005  and  whose  mother  had
    previously been married, with E who was born  in  September  2012,  his
    relationship with her mother having broken down in 2013, and  his  wife
    whom he had met in 2015, AM, who was pregnant with their child  at  the
    time of the hearing before the judge.

4.   The judge's decision is lengthy, careful and thorough.  She noted  that
    it was set out at paragraph 398 of HC 395 that  for  a  person  in  the
    position of the appellant  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months but less than four years it must
    be considered whether paragraph 399 or paragraph 399A applies and if it
    does not, the public interest in deportation will  only  be  outweighed
    where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

5.   She noted the relevance of paragraph 399(a) and  (b).   Paragraph  399A
    did not apply because the appellant did not meet out the  criteria  set
    out in that provision.

6.   With regard to his relationship with AM and whether that met the  terms
    either of Exception 2 of section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, or the Exception under paragraph 399(b) of HC 395,
    he concluded that the Exception under paragraph 399(b) could not be met
    as it was only applicable where the appellant's immigration status  was
    not precarious at the time of the relationship was formed, and  it  had
    been precarious at that time.  As regards whether or not the effect  of
    his deportation on her would be unduly harsh, the judge noted  that  AM
    had spent all her life in the United Kingdom and had her career here as
    a vet and owned her own home.  The judge noted that  AM  was  diagnosed
    towards the end of April 2017 with what was believed  to  be  an  optic
    nerve meningioma (tumour of the optic nerve sheet) of  the  right  eye.
    The judge set out the  evidence  in  relation  to  this  including  the
    likelihood of an operation in 2018.

7.   AM had said that it was highly unlikely that she would  obtain  a  visa
    for Australia because it would require the declaration of  pre-existing
    health conditions and this exceeded a  threshold  which  she  said  her
    condition would exceed and she would be unlikely  to  get  a  visa  and
    would not be able to take out medical insurance.   The  judge  accepted
    that at the moment she would be unlikely to able to obtain any sort  of
    visa for Australia or medical insurance to cover her to travel but  was
    not satisfied that she would always be unable to obtain a visa  in  the
    future.  She was satisfied that at the moment AM  would  be  unable  to
    live in Australia.  She noted also the fact that AM was  pregnant  with
    an estimated date of delivery of 30 March 2018 (the hearing took  place
    in August 2017).  The judge was not satisfied that it would  be  unduly
    harsh for AM to face complex surgery, most of  her  pregnancy  and  the
    birth of her baby on her own without the appellant.  She would be  able
    to have support from family and friends in the United Kingdom and would
    not be left destitute.

8.   As regards the children, the  relevant  children  were  R  and  E.   As
    regards E, the judge did not accept that the appellant  at  the  moment
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her.   He  had
    had supervised contact with her every fortnight since April  2017,  and
    the judge set out in  some  detail  the  nature  and  progress  of  the
    contact.  She did not doubt that  he  was  capable  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her and might have it in the near
    future if he remained in the United Kingdom but it had not yet  reached
    that stage.  She did accept that it was in E's best interest  that  the
    appellant remain in the United Kingdom but could not find precisely how
    strongly this was the case because the Family Court had not yet made  a
    final order.

9.    As  regards  the  appellant's  relationship  with  R,  the  judge  was
    satisfied that it was a  close  relationship.   They  were  in  regular
    contact, and she had a letter from R explaining his love for his father
    and the activities that they shared together.  He  repeatedly  said  to
    the appellant and AM that he wanted to live with them and got upset  at
    returning to his mother's.  He had always lived during the school  term
    weekdays with his mother and it did not seem  likely  that  his  mother
    would support a court order and move across the country enabling him to
    live with the appellant.

10.  The judge was satisfied that it was  strongly  in  R's  best  interests
    that the appellant remain in the United Kingdom.   The  respondent  had
    accepted it would be unduly harsh for him to move  to  Australia.   The
    judge noted the appellant's witness statement which  explained  vividly
    the type of activities that he and R did together that they  would  not
    be able to do via Skype.  The judge was not satisfied that it  was  the
    case that R would not be able to visit the appellant in  Australia  but
    visits  were  likely  to  be  infrequent.   R  would  lose  the  active
    involvement of his father in his life.  He was a  positive  role  model
    for his son, having been quite clear with R that his behaviour had been
    unacceptable.

11.  The judge considered that the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals was the  only  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom since he had always had leave until his
    leave was revoked by the deportation order, he spoke  English,  and  it
    was accepted that he was socially and culturally  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom and capable of being financially independent if  he  was
    allowed to work.  There was  nevertheless  a  very  significant  public
    interest in his deportation as a foreign criminal.  The judge noted the
    detail of the offences, but also commented that  she  had  considerable
    evidence since August 2013  that  he  had  reflected  and  learned  the
    necessary lessons, was not at  risk  of  reoffending  and  could  be  a
    valuable member of society.  He had been  restored  to  the  veterinary
    register by a decision of 15 September 2015.

12.  Having considered the authorities the judge concluded that it would  be
    unduly harsh on R for the appellant to be deported as she had found  it
    to be so strongly in his best interests for the appellant to remain  in
    the United Kingdom and that although great weight was to  be  given  to
    the public  interest  in  deportation  even  of  those  who  would  not
    reoffend, in this case there were no additional negative factors to add
    to that public interest.  Effectively R spent half the days he was  not
    at school with the appellant.  She concluded  that  the  loss  of  that
    close relationship with the appellant would come at a critical stage in
    R's life and that the strength of that relationship would not  be  able
    to be maintained at a  distance  and  with  infrequent  visits.   As  a
    consequence she found  that  since  the  appellant  met  the  terms  of
    paragraph 399(a) and Exception 2 of section 117C in respect of  R,  the
    public interest did not require his  deportation  and  his  deportation
    would be disproportionate and a breach of Article 8.

13.  The judge then went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances, on the alternative footing that she was wrong not as  to
    the facts but in her conclusion that the effect on R of the appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh.

14.  She concluded that particular circumstances  of  the  case  when  taken
    together did amount to very compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
    public interest  principally  because  of  the  strength  of  the  best
    interests of the children when taken together.  She gave little  weight
    to the appellant and AM's family life, given that they had entered into
    the relationship knowing that the appellant was  due  to  be  deported,
    though she did give some weight to  that  relationship  and  it  was  a
    relevant  additional  factor  that  the  couple  would  inevitably   be
    separated at a time in AM's life which would be very difficult for her,
    when she would need additional support and care.  The judge  gave  some
    weight to the appellant's private life in  the  United  Kingdom  as  in
    recent years he had been in the United Kingdom with indefinite leave to
    remain although the weight she gave it was limited because he would  be
    able to reintegrate into Australia and form an  adequate  private  life
    there.

15.  The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    this decision, and in a decision dated 31 August  2018  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge King concluded that the  judge  had  erred  with  regard  to  the
    findings of undue harshness in respect of R and also in her conclusions
    as to very compelling circumstances.  Following a  transfer  order  the
    matter came before me on 30 January 2019.

16.  The appellant and EM both adopted their  witness  statements  and  were
    not cross-examined.

17.  Ms Praisoody referred to the expert report of  Tamara  Licht  dated  23
    January 2019.  In the summary at paragraph 1.03  it  was  said  that  R
    presented with mild separation anxiety disorder as a consequence of his
    father facing possible deportation to Australia, and that if his father
    were to be removed his mild separation anxiety disorder was  likely  to
    increase  in  severity  deteriorating   his   overall   socio-emotional
    wellbeing.  It was concluded that there was a high risk of R presenting
    with an anxiety disorder should his father be removed from  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was likely that due to his age  and  considering  that  he
    appeared to depend mostly on his immediate family, any  situation  that
    might distress his family environment would have the potential to  have
    a negative impact on his mental health and  quality  of  life.   R  was
    noted as saying that his mother would not help him  with  his  emotions
    because she was  busy  with  his  brother  and  needed  her  space  and
    therefore his best friend  and  his  father  were  his  main  emotional
    support.  He will be taking his GCSEs next year.  His  father's  impact
    on that was important.  He will be devastated if his father left.

18.  It was relevant also to note paragraph 4.01 where it was noted  by  the
    expert that R's symptoms currently do not meet  the  criteria  for  any
    diagnosis as stated in the diagnostic and statistics manual  of  mental
    disorder, but it should be  noted  from  the  email  at  page  28,  the
    response to the appellant's email, that R could not  be  classified  as
    having a diagnosis according to the guidelines the potential was  there
    for him to develop such a diagnosis if not supported was that that  was
    correct.

19.  AM and the appellant now had a child who had  been  born  on  11  March
    2018.  There were also the  issues  concerning  AM's  health,  and  the
    evidence in respect of that was set  out  at  page  42  of  the  bundle
    onwards.   She  had  undergone  surgery  for   tumour   debulking   and
    decompression of her optic nerve, and had tolerated  the  surgery  well
    and pathology was consistent with a grade 1 meningioma.  She had had  a
    recent MRI on 15 August 2018 which showed an expected  small  residual.
    The MRI was overall stable from 2017.  She had a recent follow-up  with
    ophthalmology which did not show any progression of  her  visual  loss.
    She had been advised to watch clinically for any  visual  deterioration
    and progression of the headaches, and an MRI had been requested in  one
    year's time.  The date of this letter is 13 September 2018.  It can  be
    seen from AM's witness statement there was no-one  in  her  family  who
    could look after the baby or her.  A combination of the baby  and  AM's
    health  problems  amounted,  it  was  argued,   to   very   exceptional
    circumstances under Exception 2.

20.  The appellant had a subsisting relationship with the three children  in
    the United Kingdom who were all British citizens.  Their best interests
    required them to be given more weight.  It was unreasonable to say that
    AM could go with the appellant and be treated  in  Australia.   In  any
    event there was the difficulties of the visa application that had  been
    considered by the First-tier Judge.

21.  As regards R there were two Family  Court  orders  and  there  were  no
    restrictions on the order but there were some restrictions with  regard
    to the arrangements with E as she was very young and needed  more  time
    to get to know her father.  The child arrangement was in  progress  and
    the Family Court would decide in due course.  The  decision  to  remove
    was not proportionate.  The children's best interests and AM's critical
    situation needed to be borne in mind.  She had to  be  treated  in  the
    United Kingdom.

22.  In his submissions Mr Howells relied on KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53
    and NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

23.  It was clear from the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge King there  were
    two specific issues for consideration today.  The first was whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for R to remain in the United Kingdom without the
    appellant and the second was whether the public interest in deportation
    was outweighed  by  very  compelling  circumstances  going  beyond  the
    circumstances described in paragraph 399 and paragraph 399A.

24.  With regard to the former there was now the guidance in  KO  (Nigeria).
    The seriousness and nature of the offending were not to be  taken  into
    account when assessing undue harshness in respect of the child, but  it
    was a high  test  going  beyond  what  would  usually  be  experienced.
    Reliance was placed on what had been said at paragraph 23, where it was
    said that one was looking for a degree of harshness going  beyond  what
    would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the  deportation
    of a parent.  If the consequence was separation of a child  and  parent
    that was not enough to be unduly harsh.  The Supreme Court had approved
    what was said in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), that  "harsh"
    denoted "something severe or bleak" and  the  addition  of  the  adverb
    "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still  higher.   The  term
    "unduly  harsh"  could  not  be  equated  with  simple   undesirability
    (paragraph 35).

25.  Relevant factors might be such matters as a child's health  or  contact
    difficulties.  It is to be noted with regard to R that  there  were  no
    NHS documents so he had not had to seek help  with  any  mental  health
    issues at the time when the appellant was  in  prison  or  subsequently
    when he had been facing deportation.  The report noted that he had said
    he will be devastated and sad if his father departed  but  that  was  a
    typical account of a teenage son who would miss physical  contact  with
    his father if his father were deported.  The report  did  not  indicate
    any significant adverse effect on R.  There was no claim with regard to
    the difficulties that there might be in maintaining contact.

26.  With regard to the baby, M, there was no evidence of any effect on  her
    going beyond what would necessarily be involved.  With regard to E  the
    judge had  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her but even if there was,  there  was  no
    evidence of any impact going beyond what would necessarily be involved.



27.  With regard to the second matter, the decision in NA  was  relevant  to
    this.  At paragraph 19 it was said that an Article 8 claim  had  to  be
    especially strong to succeed on this basis.   There  was  reference  at
    paragraph 33 and 34 to the high public interest.  The  main  additional
    factor in this regard was the appellant's relationship  with  his  wife
    and her health problems.  The circumstances were  clearly  sympathetic.
    It was accepted that she would be unlikely to get an  entry  visa  from
    the Australian authorities.  The  question  was  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom on the appellant's
    deportation.   They  had  entered  into  their  relationship  in   full
    knowledge that he  had  precarious  immigration  status  and  that  was
    relevant to the weight to be attached to the  compelling  circumstances
    issue which could outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation.   The
    judge had not considered it would be unduly harsh on AM  who  would  be
    separated from the  appellant.   Very  compelling  circumstances  going
    beyond paragraph 399 and paragraph 399A had not been  made  out.   This
    was not one of the rare cases.

28.  By way of reply Ms Praisoody argued that with regard  to  the  evidence
    concerning R he had been having all his support from his father and was
    neglected by his mother and said she did not have time for him and  the
    expert report and the response in the email were also very important.

29.  As regards E and the arrangements concerning her, she needed more  time
    to get to know him and he was seeing her in a centre supervised and she
    would not be able to understand why he was deported if he  were.   More
    weight needed to be given to the best interests of the child.  The baby
    and her mother's situation also needed to be considered.  AM  had  been
    very ill.  At the moment the appellant  was  the  only  person  looking
    after her and the baby.  If he were removed there would be  no  support
    from him.  Yes, she would get emotional support from her family but  if
    anything happened to her then the baby would be on her  own  and  those
    were compelling circumstances.  There were three British  children  and
    AM was unwell and that amounted to compelling circumstances if anything
    did.  The judge had noted there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant
    would reoffend and his financial circumstances led to the  offence  and
    he had been reinstated to practice in the  United  Kingdom.   This  was
    relevant  to  the  public  interest.   The  undue  harshness  test  and
    compelling circumstances tests were met.

30.  I reserved my determination.

31.  I have set out  in  some  detail  the  judge's  findings  since  it  is
    important to be clear what the matters  for  consideration  are  today,
    those are the two points as delineated by Mr Howells.

32.  With regard to the first point, that of  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for R to remain in the United Kingdom without his father, I  have
    considered the report of Ms Licht, and it is relevant to  note,  as  Ms
    Praisoody very fairly and  properly  pointed  out,  that  his  symptoms
    currently do not meet the criteria for any diagnosis and  currently  he
    presents with no mental health concerns.  She did consider that R would
    need support  in  order  to  assist  him  with  managing  psychological
    distress that could result from his father's deportation were  that  to
    take place, and that if such support were not offered  to  him  in  the
    eventuality  of  his  father's  deportation  it  was  likely  that  his
    personal, family,  social  and  academic  life  could  become  severely
    affected.  It is also relevant to bear in  mind  her  response  to  the
    appellant's email that though he did not have a diagnosis the potential
    was there for  such  a  diagnosis  to  be  developed  if  he  were  not
    supported.

33.  Clearly R would miss his father considerably  if  he  were  removed  to
    Australia, even bearing in mind the fact that he  does  not  live  with
    them, but sees him, as the judge noted, on effectively  half  the  days
    when he is not at school.  The evidence has to be seen in  the  context
    of the guidance in KO (Nigeria) which is very clear on the  point  that
    what is in issue is a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with  a  deportation  of  a
    parent and that it is a considerably more elevated  threshold  than  an
    uncomfortableness, inconvenience, undesirability or difficulty.

34.  In my view that high threshold is not crossed in this  case.   One  can
    only have sympathy for R and indeed for the appellant if they are to be
    separated by the appellant's deportation. I accept that it  is  in  R's
    best interests for his father to be in the United Kingdom, but his best
    interests are not the determinative factor, nor is sympathy enough  for
    the high threshold to be crossed.  Undoubtedly the consequences  for  R
    would be harsh.  But I do not consider  that  that  high  threshold  of
    undue harshness can properly on the evidence be said to be  crossed  in
    this case.   As  a  consequence  the  test  as  set  out  at  paragraph
    399(ii)(b) is not satisfied.

35.  The other issue is whether  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those set out in paragraphs 399  and  399A  such  as  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation in  this  case.   Here  the
    factors relied on are in particular the health problems of AM  and  the
    difficulties she will experience partly in  that  regard  and  also  in
    coping with the demands of a baby who is some 10 months old. It is also
    the case that she would be  unlikely  to  be  granted  a  visa  by  the
    Australian authorities, due to her health problems.  It is accepted  on
    her behalf that she would have emotional support.  It is also the  case
    that the medical evidence indicates  no  particular  concerns  at  this
    stage other than there will be another MRI scan  a  year  on  from  the
    letter to which I have referred above.  It  is  unduly  speculative  to
    consider what the position would be for the baby were AM to  experience
    severe health problems.  No prognosis has  been  provided  to  indicate
    that that kind of risk exists.  I have to deal with the facts  as  they
    are and not as they might be unless it has been  shown,  which  it  has
    not, that there is a real possibility of them occurring.  The  test  of
    very compelling  circumstances  above  and  beyond  those  set  out  at
    paragraphs 399 and 399A is a very high  test  indeed.   In  considering
    whether that test  is  met  I  bear  in  mind  not  only  the  evidence
    concerning AM but also the best interests of the children to have their
    father in the United Kingdom, including in this E,  whose  relationship
    with the appellant is developing but is not as yet  at  a  point  where
    contact has gone beyond supervised contact at a contact centre.   These
    are all relevant issues to be placed into consideration.  They are  not
    in my view compelling let alone very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A such as to outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  Accordingly the appeal is dismissed on
    that basis also.

36.  In conclusion therefore the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
    10 January 2017 is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed   Date 20 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

