
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01489/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 April 2019                        |On 15 May 2019                     |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                             SURENDRA KUMAR RAI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel instructed by Howe Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Ian  Howard  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  5  December  2018)
    dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse him entry clearance as the adult  dependant  relative
    of a Gurkha veteran.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the appellant requires  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth is  15  March
    1983.  On 11 August 2017 he applied for entry clearance  as  the  adult
    dependant relative of his father, a Gurkha veteran.

 3. On 15 November 2017 an Entry Clearance Officer  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing the application.  It had been considered in  relation  to  the
    Home Secretary's policy as outlined in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section
    2A, paragraph 13.2, as amended on 5 January 2015.   It  had  also  been
    considered under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the  Rules.  His
    parents were present and settled in the  UK  as  the  result  of  being
    issued with settlement entry clearance in New Delhi on 10 May 2016, and
    arriving in the UK on 5 June 2016.  An applicant must be  18  years  of
    age or over, or 13 years of age or under on the  date  of  application.
    He was 34 years 4 months and 27 days old at the date of application.

 4. His mother and father had migrated to the United Kingdom over one  year
    before the date of his application.  Accordingly, the family  unit  had
    been based in the UK since 5  June  2016.   From  the  passport  copies
    presented, it appeared that his parents had visited Nepal  once  for  a
    period of 3 weeks since migrating to the UK.  Accordingly, he had  been
    living apart from his sponsor  as  a  direct  result  of  his  parents'
    migrating to the UK rather than as a result of him being away from  the
    family unit as a consequence of educational or other requirements.  His
    parents had migrated to the UK by choice.  There was no  evidence  that
    any care arrangements had been put in place by his sponsor before  they
    migrated to the UK. In the circumstances, his parents had decided that,
    as an adult, he was able to care for himself.  He was in  good  health,
    educated to  9th  grade  level,  and  there  were  no  obvious  factors
    preventing him from  working  in  Nepal.   He  had  not  mentioned  any
    personal incapacity, and had not declared  any  medical  conditions  or
    disability.  There  was  also  nothing  to  prevent  his  parents  from
    returning and living with their family in Nepal.

 5. Accordingly, the ECO was not satisfied that the  appellant  was  wholly
    financially and/or emotionally dependent upon his sponsor, as  required
    under paragraph 9(5) of Annex K.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Howard.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  from  the  appellant's
    younger brother, Bimal Rai, who had accompanied his parents to  the  UK
    in June 2016.

 7. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his findings at paragraph
    [14] onwards.  He found that the appellant continued  to  live  in  the
    family home where he had lived all his life.  As a consequence, he  had
    lots of friends in the neighbourhood.  Even though both the sponsor and
    Bimal Rai had given evidence that the appellant had been unable to find
    employment, the Judge did not accept this.  At paragraph [21] the Judge
    held: "As  the  appellant  and  Mr  Rai  have  been  candid  enough  to
    acknowledge, it was always the family's intention  that  the  appellant
    would seek leave.  However, I  do  not  accept  his  and  his  father's
    evidence that he is, in effect, unemployable  in  Nepal  and  therefore
    entirely dependent upon money sent from the UK for his maintenance  and
    accommodation.  I am satisfied that the true picture is either that  he
    is in employment, but seeking to hide this fact,  or  deliberately  not
    seeking employment in order to enhance his appeal."

 8. The Judge concluded that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
    Annex K, because (among other things) the appellant was  not  dependent
    upon his father or others settled in the UK.

 9. The Judge turned to consider an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.   At
    paragraph [24], he directed himself, in accordance with Ghising (Family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC),  that  the
    critical question was whether the adult  child  had  formed  their  own
    independent life, or whether  they  remained  part  of  their  parents'
    family unit, together  with  the  practical,  emotional  and  financial
    dependence that usually brings.  The Judge continued:

         "Here the  appellant  was  34  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
         decision.  He was living in Nepal in the family home.  He  received
         some money each month from his family in the UK.   He  claims  that
         this is his only income.

         Can he be said to have formed his own independent life?

         The short answer is 'yes'.  Common sense and  experience  tells  me
         that those in the circumstances of the appellant, whether they have
         employment or not, have progressed  sufficiently  from  the  family
         environment for it to be said  that  they  have  formed  their  own
         independent life.   Apart  from  the  claimed  need  for  financial
         support, something I am far from satisfied about, I cannot envisage
         anything about which this thirty-four year old man would  seek  the
         support and guidance of his mother in order to go about his day-to-
         day life.

         Mr Rai talks about the dangers of  living  in  Nepal.   Objectively
         there is no evidence of such dangers and  subjectively  the  family
         made the decision to settle in the UK leaving the appellant to live
         alone in the  family  home.   This  action  does  not  support  the
         contention [that] there are real dangers inherent in  living  alone
         in Nepal."

10. The Judge said that, in reaching this decision, he had  considered  the
    Court of Appeal guidance on  the  amount  of  weight  to  be  given  to
    circumstances such as these and what has become  become  known  as  the
    historical injustice affected upon Gurkhas and other  British  overseas
    citizens.  He reminded himself that in R (Guring and Others)  -v-  SSHD
    [2013] 1 WLR 2546 Lord Dyson MR said, at page 2566, that  if  a  Gurkha
    should show that, but for  the  historical  injustice,  he  would  have
    settled in the UK at a time when his dependent (now adult child)  would
    have been able to accompany him as a dependent child under the  age  of
    18, that was a strong reason for holding that it  is  proportionate  to
    permit the adult to join the family now.  The Judge continued:

         "However,  given  my  earlier  findings,  this  appellant  has  not
         established that, but for the historic injustice, his father  would
         have settled in the UK at a time when  his  dependent  (now)  adult
         child, the appellant, would have been able to accompany  him  as  a
         dependent child under the age of 18.  I make this  finding  in  the
         knowledge that this appellant chose not to settle in the UK at that
         time, but instead to remain in Nepal.  That being so, he cannot now
         argue the contrary."

11. At paragraph [25], the Judge said  that  for,  each  of  the  foregoing
    reasons, he was not satisfied that  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    Nepal, or those of his father, mother and brother in  the  UK,  engaged
    Article 8.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. On 28 February  2019  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons: "It  is  arguable  that
    the Judge has set out an insufficient analysis of the concept  of  real
    support in the context of considering the  existence  or  otherwise  of
    family life and the extent of that family life taking into account  the
    factors identified  in  the  permission  application  and  the  factors
    referred to in the decision appertaining to this.  It is arguable  that
    the question of employment or otherwise is relevant to the existence of
    the nature and degree of  support  in  contradistinction  to  potential
    employability.  It is arguable that in considering real support all the
    relevant elements fall to be  identified  and  the  appropriate  weight
    attached.  It is arguable that the proportionality  exercise  has  been
    affected."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

13. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Harding,  who  had  not  appeared  below,  developed  the  case
    advanced in the permission application.  On behalf of  the  respondent,
    Mr Lindsay acknowledged that the Judge's finding on historic  injustice
    at the end of paragraph [24] was inconsistent with his earlier  finding
    at paragraph [17].  However, he submitted that the  Judge's  error  was
    not material, as there was no justification for  interfering  with  the
    Judge's finding that Article 8 was not engaged due to  the  absence  of
    existing family life between the appellant and his family in the UK. In
    reply, Mr Harding  submitted  that  the  historic  injustice  principle
    governed all matters, including the determination of whether there  was
    subsisting family life between the settled Gurkha veteran and the adult
    child left behind.

Discussion

14. In the RFRL, the ECO did not dispute the proposition that, but for  the
    historic injustice, the appellant's father would have settled in the UK
    at a time when the appellant would have been able to accompany him as a
    dependent child under the age of 18.  The point taken by  the  ECO  was
    that his parents had chosen to apply for settlement visas the appellant
    was already an adult, in the full knowledge that their  adult  children
    did not automatically qualify for settlement.

15. Following the introduction of the 2009 discretionary  arrangement  (the
    2009 Policy), the appellant's father and mother were eligible to  apply
    for settlement, but neither the appellant nor his younger brother  were
    eligible to apply for entry clearance alongside their parents  as  they
    were both over the age of  18.   From  January  2015,  the  appellant's
    younger brother was eligible to apply for entry clearance alongside his
    parents, as he was still under the age of 30.  Although  the  appellant
    fell outside the scope of Annex K by virtue of his age,  he  was  still
    eligible to apply for entry clearance  with  the  rest  of  his  family
    relying on an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

16. The Judge accepted at paragraph [17] that the intention of the  sponsor
    when making applications for himself, his wife and younger son in 2015,
    was that his elder son (the appellant) would make  an  application  for
    entry clearance in due course to join them in the UK.

17. At the end of paragraph [24], the Judge  makes  two  separate  findings
    which are not logically connected.   The  first  finding  is  that  the
    appellant has not established that, but for the historic injustice, his
    father would have settled in the UK at  the  time  when  the  appellant
    would have been able to accompany him as a dependent  child  under  the
    age of 18.  The Judge has not given adequate reasons for reaching  this
    adverse finding of fact, and, as noted above, the finding runs  counter
    to the position taken in the RFRL.  Accordingly, this  finding  is  not
    sustainable.

18. The second finding is that the appellant chose not to settle in the  UK
    "at that time", but instead to remain in Nepal.  If by "that time", the
    Judge was referring to 2015, when the rest  of  the  family  sought  to
    settle in the UK, his finding is sustainable,  in  that  the  appellant
    could have sought to settle in the UK with  the  rest  of  his  family,
    albeit that his entitlement to settle was weaker than the rest of them,
    in the view of the fact that his age was over 30.

19. If the Judge had reached the fifth question posed  in  Razgar,  then  I
    accept that his proportionality assessment would have been vitiated  by
    the error discussed above. However, the Judge never  progressed  beyond
    the first and second questions  posed  in  Razgar,  which  was  whether
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged.

20. Although the Judge characterised the guidance given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Guring at paragraphs [41] and [42] as being relevant  to  the
    decision as to whether Article 8 was engaged,  the  guidance  which  he
    cited was completely irrelevant to this issue.  The guidance  was  only
    relevant to the issue of proportionality.

21. The authorities do not support Mr Harding's proposition that in  Gurkha
    cases there is a relaxation of the Kugathas criteria.

22. In Patel & Others -v- ECO (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley  LJ  said
    at paragraph [14]: "You can set out to compensate for historical wrong,
    but you cannot reverse the passage of time.  Many of these children are
    now grown up and embarked on  lives  of  their  own.   Where  this  has
    happened, the bonds which constitute family  life  will  no  longer  be
    there, and Art 8. will have no purchase." In the same  passage,  Sedley
    LJ went on to say that the potential relevance of the historic wrong to
    Article 8 claims is not as a mechanism for turning the clock back,  but
    as being relevant to the application of Article 8(2).   Lord  Dyson  MR
    made the same point in the passage from Gurung cited by the Judge.

23. The Court of Appeal in Gurung went on to discuss the appeals of NL  and
    SL at paragraphs [47]-[51].  NL and SL were now 24 and 26 years of age.
     Their father was granted leave to settle in the UK in 2009, and  their
    mother followed him in August 2010.  The claimants remained  in  Nepal.
    They were both students whose course fees are funded by  their  father.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the father  supported  them
    financially, but this was expected in Nepalese  culture.   It  did  not
    therefore suggest a bond over and above that usually to be expected  in
    the relationship between adult parents and their adult  children.   The
    Judge found that there was no real evidence  about  how  the  claimants
    related to their parents and the effect on them of being separated from
    their parents or what emotional sustenance  they  received  from  their
    parents, and on that basis held  that  the  appellants  did  not  enjoy
    family life with their parents.  The Court of Appeal held, at paragraph
    [50], as follows: "We accept the submissions of  Ms  McGahey  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not make any  error  of  law  in  reaching  its
    conclusions.  The  critical  issue  is  whether  there  was  sufficient
    dependence, and in particular sufficient emotional  dependence  by  the
    claimants on their parents to justify the conclusion that they  enjoyed
    family life.   That  was  a  question  of  fact  for  the  Tribunal  to
    determine.  In  our  view,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  entitled  to
    conclude that, although the usual emotional bonds between  parents  and
    their  children  were  present,  the  requisite  degree  of   emotional
    dependence was absent."

24. In R (on the application of) Rai -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  230,  which
    was cited to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, Lindblom  LJ  at  paragraph
    [24} expressly endorsed the application of the Kugathas criteria in the
    context of a Gurkha case.

25. The facts of Rai were that the appellant was born in Nepal on 1 January
    1986, and his father entered the UK with ILR  on  26  June  2010.   His
    mother followed his father to the UK with ILR on 17 February 2012.   On
    2 October 2012 the appellant, then 26  years  old,  applied  for  entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as his father's dependant.

26. Giving the leading judgment of the Court, Lindblom LJ held at [39] that
    the real issue under Article 8(1) was, "whether, as a matter  of  fact,
    the appellant had demonstrated that he  had  a  family  life  with  his
    parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle  in
    the UK and had endured beyond it,  notwithstanding  their  having  left
    Nepal when they did." At paragraph [42], Lindblom  LJ  reiterated  that
    the critical question was whether family life between the appellant and
    his parents had subsisted at the time when they left Nepal to settle in
    the UK, "and was still subsisting at the time of the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision."

27. The Judge did not in  terms  ask  himself  whether  the  appellant  had
    enjoyed family life with his parents before they  left  Nepal  in  June
    2016 to settle in the UK.  However, family life in  the  literal  sense
    clearly ended with the parents' departure, and it was open to the Judge
    to find that the appellant had not discharged  the  burden  of  proving
    that he was emotionally dependent upon his parents at the date  of  the
    hearing.

28. The grounds of appeal do not in any event challenge the Judge's finding
    of an absence of emotional dependency.  It is merely asserted  that  he
    failed to consider the evidence of an emotional connection between  him
    and his elderly parents and his brother with whom  he  lived  prior  to
    their departure.  An emotional connection is not sufficient. There must
    be emotional dependency.  Even if  the  Judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons for his finding of a lack of financial  dependency,  the  Judge
    made  a  sustainable  finding  that  there  was  a  lack  of  emotional
    dependency, which is an essential requirement for Article 8 ECHR  being
    engaged.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson





















