
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01341/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2017                   |On 27th November 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mitchell, Counsel instructed by Acharyas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ] 1981.  He  last
    arrived in the UK on 24th August 2015 when he was given leave to  enter
    until 30th September 2015 as a business  visitor.   On  25th  September
    2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his partner, Y M, and his children, twins born on [ ]
    2015.  That application was  refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's Refusal Letter dated 30th December  2015.   The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on  27th  January  2017.   The
    Judge dismissed the appeal for the reasons given in his Decision  dated
    15th  February  2017.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 29th August 2017 such permission was granted.

 2. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the provisions of Appendix  FM  of
    HC 395 and Article 8  ECHR  because  although  he  found  the  marriage
    between the Appellant and his wife to be genuine  and  subsisting,  the
    decision of the Respondent was proportionate even taking  into  account
    the best interests of the children because the Appellant  could  return
    to Zimbabwe and make an application  for  entry  clearance  from  there
    which would probably be successful and therefore would not  lead  to  a
    lengthy separation between the Appellant and his family.

 3. At the hearing before me, Mr Mitchell argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in coming to this  conclusion.   He  referred  to  his  Skeleton
    Argument and argued inter alia  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  take
    account of the decision in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40  as  explained  in
    Hayat [2011] UKUT 444.  It appeared from the Decision  that  preventing
    the Appellant from circumventing the Immigration Rules by requiring him
    to seek entry clearance as a spouse from Zimbabwe was the main, if  not
    sole, reason given by the Judge for finding the  Respondent's  decision
    proportionate.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there was no such  error  of  law.   The  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately  and  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  his  decision.   He
    considered all the relevant issues and made findings open to him on the
    evidence before him.  He found  that  the  Appellant  had  deliberately
    chosen to circumvent the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  therefore  the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate because, as the Judge found  at
    paragraph 16 of the Decision, any application made by the Appellant for
    entry clearance in Zimbabwe would take no more than 30 days to resolve.

 5. I find a material error of law in the decision of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  The decision in Hayat reads as follows:

         "23. The significance of Chikwamba, however, is to make plain  that
             where the only matter weighing on the Respondent's side of the
             balance is the public policy of requiring a  person  to  apply
             under the Rules from abroad, that  legitimate  objective  will
             usually be outweighed by factors resting  on  the  Appellant's
             side of the balance".

 6. In his Decision, the Judge  made  no  reference  to  the  decisions  in
    Chikwamba and Hayat, and evidently did not take them into account  when
    reaching his conclusion.  This amounts  to  a  material  error  of  law
    because, as Mr Mitchell argued, the Judge's main reason for  dismissing
    the appeal and finding the decision of the Respondent proportionate was
    that there would only be a brief separation between the  Appellant  and
    his family whilst the Appellant sought  entry  clearance  in  Zimbabwe.
    There were factors in favour of the Appellant identified by  the  Judge
    in his Decision such as the best interests of  the  twins  and  if  the
    Judge had taken into account the principle set out in Chikwamba he  may
    well have come to a different decision.

 7. For these reasons I find a material error of law in the decision of the
    Judge which I therefore set aside.  I did not proceed  to  re-make  the
    decision in the appeal but instead remitted the appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for that decision  to  be  re-made  there.   This  is  in
    accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as  further
    judicial  fact-finding  is  necessary  for  a  full  consideration   of
    proportionality.

Notice of Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision in the appeal will be re-made in the First-tier  Tribunal.



Anonymity

 9. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the same reasons as given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 24th November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

