
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01411/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 15 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                   J B C C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin instructed by Indra Sebastian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and was born on 9 July 1965.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29  March  2007  as  the
    holder of a work permit and was granted leave until 12  February  2012.
    The appellant's (then) wife and his son ("JC") were  granted  leave  as
    his  dependants.   On  9  February  2012,  the  appellant  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis  that  he  had  completed  five
    years in the UK as a work permit holder.  However, on 18 May 2012, that
    application was refused.

 4. On 30 June 2012, the appellant claimed asylum but this was  refused  on
    19 July 2012.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a
    decision promulgated on 7 September 2012 DJ JFW  Phillips  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The appellant  was,  as  a
    result, granted limited leave to remain.

 5. The appellant then made an application  for  further  leave  which  was
    refused by the respondent on 29  June  2015  under  the  'partner'  and
    'parent' routes in Appendix FM and under para 276ADE  and  outside  the
    Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Burnett on 16 September 2016.  The sole issue before the
    judge was whether the appellant could succeed in establishing  that  he
    met the requirements of s.117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act  2002")  on  the  basis  that  he  had  a
    "genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship"  with  JC  (who  is  a
    "qualifying child" having lived in the UK for at least seven years) and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect JC to leave the UK.  In which
    case, by virtue of s.117B(6), the public interest did not  require  the
    appellant's removal and his removal would, as a consequence, breach Art
    8 of the ECHR.

 7. Judge Burnett concluded that the appellant did not have a "genuine  and
    subsisting parental  relationship"  with  JC  as  he  did  not  play  a
    "significant" role in JC's life.  As a consequence,  he  dismissed  the
    appeal under Art 8.

 8. The appellant was refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 23 February 2017 and by the  Upper  Tribunal
    itself on 23 March 2017.  That latter refusal of permission was quashed
    by the High Court on a Cart  challenge  on  20  November  2017.   As  a
    result, on 12 December 2017 the Upper Tribunal (V-P  Ockelton)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me on 2 October 2018.

The Issues

10. It was accepted by both representatives that  the  sole  issue  in  the
    appeal concerned the application of s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.

11. That provision found in Part  5A  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  provides  as
    follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect a child to leave the
                  United Kingdom."

12. It was  accepted  by  both  representatives  that  the  application  of
    s.117B(6) to the appellant's case was determinative of the appeal.   If
    it is applied, then his removal would be disproportionate and a  breach
    of Art 8.  By contrast, if  it  did  not  apply  then  the  appellant's
    removal was proportionate and not a breach of Art 8.

13. Mr Martin, who represented the appellant submitted that the  judge  had
    erred in law by requiring the appellant to have a "significant role" in
    JC's life in order to establish that he had a "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with JC.

14. Mr Martin accepted that, as a result of a split between  the  appellant
    and his wife, they no longer live together.  JC lived with  his  mother
    in Croydon and the appellant lived in Hereford where  he  worked.   The
    appellant paid his wife's rent and had regular contact with  JC.   That
    contact was by visits, via texts and he frequently spoke to his son  on
    the phone.  Mr Martin submitted that this was sufficient to establish a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with JC  and  the  judge
    had been wrong in law to reach a contrary conclusion.

15. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had been entitled to find at  paras
    56-69 that the appellant's "role" was not sufficient  to  amount  to  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship".   He  relied  upon  the
    judge's findings including that the appellant had not  seen  JC  for  a
    period of over two months include over the latter's birthday; that  the
    appellant lacked some knowledge of JC's  education  and  hobbies;  that
    there was a paucity of photographs  and  that  the  appellant  was  not
    referred to in a document from JC  entitled  "My  Story".   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge was entitled to find  that  there  was  not  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  between  the  appellant
    and JC.

Discussion

16. A number of matters are accepted in this appeal.

17. First, the facts were not substantially disputed before the  judge  and
    are no longer in dispute.  Secondly, it is accepted that the outcome of
    this appeal turns upon whether s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002  applies.
    JC is a "qualifying child" as he has lived in the UK for a  "continuous
    period of seven  years  or  more"  (see  s.117D(1)).   Further,  it  is
    accepted that it would "not be reasonable to expect" JC  to  leave  the
    UK.  The only issue in dispute is, therefore, whether the appellant has
    a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with JC.

18. In reaching his decision, the judge set out at some length  an  extract
    from the judgment in the case of R (RK v  SSHD)  (s.117B(6);  "parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 0031 (IAC).  That is a  judgment  of  my
    own.  In that case, there was a challenge to the Secretary  of  State's
    conclusion that s.117B(6) did not apply to the applicant  who  was  the
    grandmother of the "qualifying child".  The  issue  in  that  case  was
    whether a "third party" who was caring for a child  could  be  said  to
    have a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with that  child.
    In that judgment, I concluded  that  it  would  be  unusual  where  the
    existing biological parent continued to act as a child's parents that a
    third party could be said to have a "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" and that would only arise  where  the  individual  "steps
    into the shoes of the parent".

19. Both Mr Martin and Mr Howell accepted that RK had limited relevance  to
    this appeal.  Mr Martin  submitted  that  it  concerned  the  issue  of
    whether someone could establish, for the first time,  the  relationship
    rather than, as in this case, whether the appellant who had established
    such a relationship had, indeed, lost it.  Mr Howells accepted that  RK
    was strictly not relevant as it was concerned with a  third  party  who
    was a non-biological parent and whether such  an  individual  could  be
    said to have established the required relationship.

20. I agree: RK  is  of  limited  assistance  in  determining  whether  the
    appellant has a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with JC.
     This is not a case of a 'third party'/non-parent claiming  to  have  a
    "parental  relationship"  who  already  has  two  other  parents.   The
    appellant is JC's parent - it is the nature of that relationship  which
    is in issue.

21. It is axiomatic that there  is  no  absolute  touch-stone  as  to  what
    comprises a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship".  The nature
    of relationships between parents and their children arise in a  variety
    of contexts; they exist in many 'shapes and sizes'.   Clearly,  if  the
    parents and child live as a family unit in a home, then there  will  be
    little  doubt  that  there  exists  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationships"  between  those  parents  and  the  child.   But,   such
    arrangements are not necessary to establish such a relationship.  It is
    a matter of common  experience  that,  following  the  breakdown  of  a
    marriage or relationship between parents, even when  living  separately
    the non-residential parent may well continue to  have  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship"  with   their   child.    Continued
    involvement in their life, emotionally and/or financially, as a  parent
    is also most likely to  fall  within  the  rubric  of  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship".  The assessment  must,  necessarily,
    be fact-specific.  Regard must be had to all the circumstances.

22. I was not  referred  to  any  legislative  material  dealing  with  the
    background leading  to  the  enactment  of  s.117B(6)  which  would  be
    relevant to its intended meaning.  I  was,  however,  referred  to  the
    relevant Home Office Guidance, albeit in the context of Appendix FM and
    para EX.1.  The most recent is dated 22 February 2018 and is  found  in
    the "Family Migration: Appendix FM s.1.0b - Family Life (as  a  Partner
    or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes".  That is as follows:

         "Is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?

         Where the application is being considered under paragraph  EX.1.(a)
         in respect of the 10-year partner or parent  routes,  the  decision
         maker must first decide whether the applicant has  a  "genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship" with the child.

         The  phrase  'parental  relationship'  goes   beyond   the   strict
         definition of parent set out in  paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, to encompass situations in which the applicant is playing  a
         genuinely  parental  role  in  a  child's  life,  whether  that  is
         recognised as a matter of law or not.

         The applicant must have a subsisting role in  personally  providing
         at least some element of direct parental care to the  child.   This
         will be particularly relevant where the child is the child  of  the
         applicant's partner or where the parent  is  not  living  with  the
         child.  This means that an applicant living with a child  of  their
         partner and taking a step-parent role in  the  child's  life  could
         have a "genuine and subsisting parental  relationship"  with  them,
         even if they had not formally adopted the child and  if  the  other
         biological parent played some part in the child's life.

         In considering whether the applicant has a "genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship" the  following  factors  are  likely  to  be
         relevant:

         Does the applicant have a parental relationship with the child

           . what is the relationship - biological,  adopted,  step  child,
             legal guardian?  Are they the child's primary carer?

           . is the applicant willing and able to look after the child?

           . are they physically able to care for the child?

         Is it a genuine and subsisting relationship?

           . does the child live with the person?

           . if not, where does the  applicant  live  in  relation  to  the
             child?

           . how regularly do they see one another?

           . are there any relevant court orders governing  access  to  the
             child?

           . is there any evidence provided within the  application  as  to
             the views of the child, other family members or social workers
             or other relevant professionals?

           . to what extent is the applicant making an active  contribution
             to the child's life?

         Factors which might prompt closer scrutiny include:

           .  the person has little or no contact with the child or contact
             is irregular

           . any contact is only recent in nature

           . support is only financial in nature; there is  no  contact  or
             emotional support

           . the child is largely independent of the person

         We would not generally expect that more than two people could be in
         a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the  child.
         Other people who spend time  with  or  reside  with  the  child  in
         addition to their parents, such as a grandparent, aunt or uncle  or
         other family member, or a close friend of  the  family,  would  not
         generally be considered to have a parental  relationship  with  the
         child for the purposes of  this  guidance.   Where  there  are  two
         parents, unless evidence is provided to the contrary, it should  be
         assumed that one or  both  could  provide  parental  care  for  the
         child."

23. I note that the guidance states that the individual must be "personally
    providing at least some element of direct parental care to the  child".
    That, however, does not seem to me to be a  necessary  requirement  for
    there to be a "parental relationship".  Certainly, that is the case  if
    the phrase "direct parental care" is intended to convey  a  requirement
    that the parent 'look after' the child on a face-to-face basis for some
    period of time.  It seems to me that a  "parental  relationship"  could
    exist even in the absence of such "direct  care"  where  a  parent  has
    contact with his or her child, even on  a  supervised  basis,  but  the
    child never stays with or is not 'looked after'  by  that  parent.   It
    seems to me that that may, nevertheless, be a "parental  relationship".
    Indeed, it may well be the experience of a significant number  of  non-
    residential parents (following divorce or separation  of  the  parents)
    whom it  would  be  quite  wrong  to  stay  do  not  have  a  "parental
    relationship" with their child.

24. Nevertheless, the factors set out in the guidance are, as a  matter  of
    generality,  helpful  in  reaching  any  assessment  as  to  whether  a
    particular  relationship  is  a  "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship".

25. In the course of the hearing, I drew the representative's attention  to
    a decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 1967.  In that case the Court of  Appeal  was  concerned  with  the
    meaning of the phrase "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" in
    the deportation context under para 399 of the Immigration Rules  as  it
    was then worded.  That, in effect, contained the wording  of  s.117B(6)
    so as to prevent the deportation of an individual who  had  a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with a British citizen  child  or
    one who had lived in the UK for at least seven years if it  would  "not
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK"  providing  "there
    [was] no other family member who [was] able to care for  the  child  in
    the UK".  That latter wording is, of course, not present  in  s.117B(6)
    in the non-deportation context.  Indeed, para 399 has subsequently been
    amended by HC 532  with  effect  from  28  July  2014,  to  reflect  in
    substance the provisions in s.117C(5) that in the  deportation  context
    the effect on a "qualifying child" must be that  it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" if the individual was deported.

26. Nevertheless, in VC (Sri Lanka), the Court of  Appeal  recognised  that
    the relationship between a parent and child may  become  so  devoid  of
    content that it is no longer a "genuine and  subsisting"  relationship.
    At [42], McFarlane LJ (as he then was) (and with whom Bean  and  Moylan
    LJJ agreed) said this:

         "On the basis of the Court  of  Appeal's  analysis  of  the  family
         history, [VC] had played only a minimal role in  the  care  of  his
         children and, even when living at the family  home,  he  had  on  a
         regular basis rendered himself unable to  act  as  a  parent  as  a
         result of heavy drinking and abusive behaviour.  By the time of the
         Secretary of State's decision to deport  him,  any  vestiges  of  a
         'parental relationship' with the children had long fallen away  and
         had reduced to their genetic relationship  coupled  with  the  most
         limited level  of  direct  contact  which  was  intended  to  cease
         altogether on adoption.  [Counsel for the Secretary  of  State]  is
         correct to  stress  that  the  words  'genuine',  'subsisting'  and
         'parental' within paragraph 399(a).  Each of those words denotes  a
         separate and essential element of the quality of relationship  that
         is required to establish a  'very  compelling  justification'  [per
         Elias LJ  in  AJ  (Zimbabwe)]  that  might  mark  the  parent/child
         relationship in the instant case as being out of the ordinary."

27. It is important to notice  that  the  "most  limited  level  of  direct
    contact" referred to by McFarlane LJ, was as  a  result  of  the  court
    order six hours contact each year.

28. On its facts, therefore, VC (Sri Lanka) was a case which  fell  at  one
    extreme on a spectrum of involvement in a child's life.  It was a  case
    where, in effect, the individual's involvement with the child  was  not
    far short of de minimis.  It is no support for the proposition  that  a
    parent must have a "significant" role  in  order  for  there  to  be  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship".

29. One further point about VC (Sri Lanka).  At [43], McFarlane LJ went  on
    to state that, in order for para 399(a) to apply:

         "[t]he 'single' parent must have a 'subsisting' role in  personally
         providing at least some element of  direct  parental  care  to  the
         child."

30. The basis for that view was derived from the wording of para  399(a)  -
    to which I have already referred above - that "there is no other family
    member who is able to  care  for  the  child  in  the  UK".   That  led
    McFarlane LJ to conclude that para 399(a) was concerned with "depriving
    a child of a parent whose role included some direct care".  He went  on
    in [43] to observe:

         "To hold otherwise, and to accept  [Counsel  for  VC's]  submission
         that her client comes within the exception simply  because  he  has
         some limited, non-caring contact with his child would  enable  very
         many foreign criminals to be included in this exception."

31. The wording relied upon by McFarlane LJ is not reproduced in  s.117B(6)
    and the context is not that of deportation.  If Parliament  had  wished
    to constrain the application of s.117B(6) in this way,  it  could  have
    done so but it did not.  There is nothing inherent in  the  wording  of
    s.117B(6) that would imply that a "parental  relationship"  could  only
    exist if "direct care" was  provided  by  the  individual.   I  do  not
    consider that such a requirement is a necessary element of  a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" in s.117B(6) as I have  explained
    above.

32. It is not entirely clear from the papers, and Judge  Burnett  does  not
    provide any elucidation, when the appellant first  went  to  work  away
    from London.  In his determination in 2012, DJ  JFW  Phillips  accepted
    that they had all lived together in Croydon for the first two years  of
    his stay in the UK.  That would mean until sometime in 2009.  Certainly
    by the time  of  Judge  Phillips'  decision,  the  evidence  was  that,
    although the marriage was subsisting,  the  appellant  lived  away  and
    spent time periodically and regularly with his family in Croydon.   The
    evidence was that he went back to Croydon every  three  months  staying
    for one week at a time.

33. By the time of the hearing before Judge Burnett, the  evidence  was  as
    follows:

         "56. I have considered carefully the role that the appellant  plays
             in the care of his son and what decisions he makes.

         57.  I note that there are a few photographs of the appellant  with
             his son (JC) (Two in the bundle).  I would state that  in  the
             life of a 14 year old boy it amounts to very little and for  a
             young man who has been in the United Kingdom since 2007.

         58.  I  note  and  have  taken  account  of  the  letter  from  the
             appellant's son.  He did not attend the appeal hearing of  his
             father (the appellant).  JC states  however  that  his  father
             regularly contacts him and visits him once a month and  during
             the half term holidays.  He also  states  that  the  appellant
             buys him clothes and anything he needs.   There  is  a  longer
             "letter" from JC entitled "My Story".  There is  no  reference
             in that document to the appellant at all.

         59.  I note that there  is  also  a  very  brief  letter  from  the
             appellant's wife, BC.  The letter stated  that  the  appellant
             pays her rent and has contact with JC regularly.  I note  that
             there is evidence of money transfers.

         60.  The Appellant states in his statement that he contacts his son
             regularly via text and he speaks to his son frequently on  the
             phone.

         61.  In answer to questions at the hearing the appellant stated  he
             last saw his son on 5th July.  The appeal hearing was on  16th
             September.  That is a  period  of  over  2  months  since  the
             appellant last saw his son.  The appellant stated he  did  not
             see his son on his birthday as he had to work and  look  after
             the shop.

         62.  In answer to questions from me the appellant  stated  his  son
             was at school and hence couldn't attend  the  appeal  hearing.
             He stated he was 14 years old and in year  9  at  school.   He
             stated that his son will take his GCSE exams after  Christmas.
             He could not tell me which subjects his son was going to  take
             exams in.  He stated that  his  son's  hobbies  were  cricket,
             swimming and badminton.   I  have  contrasted  this  with  the
             document "My  Story".   In  that  document  JC  describes  his
             passion for singing  and  the  "countless  occasions"  he  has
             performed.  There is mention in the document of badminton  but
             not of swimming.

         63.  I have taken into account the appellant's lack of  credibility
             when he gave evidence in 2012 regarding his asylum  claim.   I
             have taken into account the observations of FtTJ  CM  Phillips
             [allowing the appeals on the appellant's wife and JC under Art
             8 in 2016] about the immigration history which I have set  out
             above.

         64.  I do not consider that the appellant plays a significant  role
             in the life of his son.  There is little evidence presented to
             me to show that between 2012 and September 2016, the appellant
             played a parental role in his son's life.

         65.  It also does not appear the appellant gives any real  care  as
             such to JC.  I find he visits him infrequently although I note
             the statements to the contrary.  The appellant's son was  born
             on 5th August 2002.  He was 14 years old on 5th  August  2016.
             The appellant stated at the appeal that he  last  visited  his
             son in July.  A birthday is a significant  event  and  yet  it
             appears that the appellant has made little effort to  be  with
             his son near or on that day.

         66.  I note also that JC mentioned a matter which he described as a
             significant event in his life when he was chosen as one of the
             10 to serve at  "The  Good  Shepherd  Mass"  at  St.  George's
             Cathedral.  There was no mention of this by the appellant  and
             no photographs of the event.  The photographs that  have  been
             produced show just two photographs of the appellant  with  his
             son.

         67.  I also consider  that  the  appellant's  son  is  entering  an
             important point in his life as he  prepares  for  his  GCSE's.
             The appellant seems to know little about his son's choices and
             education.

         68.  I have taken into account that there is  evidence  to  support
             the suggestion that the appellant provides financially for his
             son." (my emphasis)

34. At para 69 Judge Burnett reached the following  conclusion  adverse  to
    the appellant:

         "69. I find that the appellant has not  discharged  the  burden  of
             proof upon him to show that he has a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with his son.  The  role  the  appellant
             plays in his son's life is not a significant one and  it  does
             not appear he makes any decisions  in  respect  of  his  son's
             life.  He may visit him infrequently and  provide  financially
             but in my judgment this is not sufficient to support a finding
             that he has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship."
             (my emphasis)

35. I accept Mr Martin's submission that the judge misdirected  himself  in
    assessing  whether  there  was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship" between the appellant and JC.  There is nothing  implicit
    in the notion of a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  that
    the individual (the parent) must  play  a  "significant  role"  in  the
    child's life.  The assessment is holistic  and  fact-sensitive.   Judge
    Burnett, in my judgment, misdirected  himself  by  requiring  that  the
    appellant play a "significant role" in JC's life.

36. Here, the evidence from the appellant, JC and his mother was  that  the
    appellant did have a "genuine and subsisting" role in JC's  life.   The
    appellant's evidence was that he saw  JC  during  school  holidays  for
    about one week at a time and on six to seven other occasions throughout
    the year, for example birthdays and special occasions.  The appellant's
    evidence was also that he had a "good relationship" with JC and that:

         "We text each other every day, he will text morning and evening  to
         say  morning  and  good  night.    We   are   in   frequent   touch
         electronically.  We also speak on the  phone  frequently  as  well,
         more often on Sunday.  I see him as and when I can."

37. In his evidence, JC said that the appellant  has  "regular  contact  []
    with me".  He said that the appellant came to see him once a month  and
    during half-term holidays.  The appellant spent about  four  days  with
    him on average and then left to go back to his place where  he  worked.
    During those stays, JC said:

         "I spend time with him where I enjoy myself and really have fun and
         excite going to different  places  of  interest  and  helps  in  my
         History subject.  I also feel happy when he is around".

38. JC went on to say that the appellant buys him clothes whenever there is
    a need and he also buys him any other school requirements.

39. The appellant's wife confirmed that the appellant paid her  rent  where
    she and JC lived.   She  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had  "regular
    contacts" with JC by phone and met him once a  month  and  during  half
    term holidays.

40. The evidence was, therefore, that the appellant was providing  a  'roof
    over the head' of son, JC and providing financial  support  -  each  of
    which are some indication of a 'parental  relationship'  even  if  they
    would not alone suffice.

41. In my judgment there is only one reasonable view that could be taken of
    this evidence, none of which was rejected by the  judge,  and  that  is
    that the appellant has a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"
    with JC.  He is a non-residential parent, but he keeps contact with  JC
    (through visits and otherwise) because he is his father and he provides
    both emotional and financial support for JC.  He carries out that  role
    because he is JC's father.

42. That the appellant missed seeing JC on his last birthday, when  he  had
    an explanation that he had to work and look after the shop in Hereford,
    and that he does not have knowledge about all  of  JC's  education  and
    hobbies and was not mentioned in JC's "My Story", does not detract from
    the evidence (which is not challenged) in relation to  the  appellant's
    continued active involvement as a parent  in  the  life  of  JC  albeit
    tempered by the fact that they live, in effect, on  opposite  sides  of
    the country.

Decision

43. In my judgment, Judge Burnett erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant had  not  established  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" with JC.  On that basis,  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.   It  cannot
    stand and I set it aside.

44. I remake the decision and find, on a balance of probabilities, that  on
    the evidence the appellant has established a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with JC.

45. It was accepted before me by both representatives that if that was  the
    fact then s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002  applied  and  the  appellant's
    removal was not in the public interest and his appeal should be allowed
    under Art 8.

46. I, therefore, substitute a decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             10 October 2018





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, it is appropriate to make  a  full  fee  award
for any fee paid or payable.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             10 October 2018


