
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01688/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 18th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                    S E E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Chikwe, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by S E E against the decision of  Judge  Shanahan  to
    dismiss her appeal against refusal of  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom made on grounds of long residence  in  the
    UK under paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  extend  the
    anonymity direction that was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom,  with  entry  clearance
    for study, on 8th November 2004.  That period of leave expired on  31st
    October 2007.  She then made two further applications to  remain  as  a
    student which were refused.  On the 10th December 2010,  she  made  yet
    another application for leave to remain as a  student.   That  too  was
    refused but this was reversed on appeal  on  the  30th  December  2010.
    Further leave to remain was then granted  until  25th  June  2012.   It
    seems that at some point thereafter she returned to  Nigeria  and  came
    back to the United Kingdom having in the meantime  been  granted  entry
    clearance and leave to remain until  11th  December  2012.   A  further
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds was refused  on
    the 14th February 2013. Her appeal against that refusal was allowed  on
    the 28th October 2013 following which she was granted further leave  to
    remain until the 23rd June  2016.   She  then  made  another  visit  to
    Nigeria.  Whilst away, her leave to remain was  curtailed  with  effect
    from 30th October 2015. She was accordingly refused leave to enter when
    she returned to the United Kingdom on 28th January  2016.  She  however
    made  a  claim  for  asylum  and  was  accordingly  granted   temporary
    admission.  That claim for asylum was refused on  24th  February  2016.
    She appealed that refusal until her rights of appeal were exhausted  on
    21st November 2016.  The application that is the subject of this appeal
    (based upon 10 years' continuous lawful residence under paragraph 276B)
    was made on 14th December 2016.

 3. Given the gap between the curtailment of her leave  to  remain  on  the
    30th October 2015 and being granted temporary admission  following  her
    asylum claim on 30th January 2016, it  is  unclear  how  the  Appellant
    could have succeeded under paragraph 276B  even  had  she  brought  her
    application within time (see paragraph 4, below). It may therefore have
    been somewhat generous for the decisionmaker to concede  that  she  had
    resided lawfully in the United Kingdom  until  had  she  exhausted  her
    right of appeal against  refusal  of  her  asylum  claim  on  the  21st
    November 2016. Be that as it may, the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal
    proceeded on the basis of that concession  (see  paragraph  37  of  the
    decision).

 4. The original application for leave to remain under paragraph  276B  was
    refused on two bases: (1) the application was made more  than  fourteen
    days after it was assumed she had ceased to be in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully (see above) and (2) she had not satisfied the English language
    requirement. Judge Shanahan made an express finding that the  Appellant
    effectively satisfied the English language requirement  (see  paragraph
    39 of the decision). The main thrust of Mr Chikwe's  argument  is  that
    the judge fell into error by not treating this finding,  together  with
    the decisionmaker's concession that the Appellant had been lawfully  in
    the United Kingdom for ten years, as a powerful if not decisive  reason
    for allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.
    Before examining the above argument, it is first necessary to return to
    the factual background of this appeal.

 5. The Appellant has a daughter who, for reasons  that  are  not  entirely
    apparent from the judge's decision, has  been  living  in  foster  care
    since 2014.  It was this breakdown in the Appellant's relationship with
    her daughter that  apparently  led  to  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    curtail her leave to remain in the UK with effect from the 30th October
    2015. Whilst there  was  some  dispute  at  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Shanahan as to the extent to which there had  been  indirect  telephone
    contact  between  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter,   the   Appellant
    nevertheless accepted that she had not had direct face-to-face  contact
    with her daughter since 2016; that is to  say,  for  approximately  two
    years at the date of the hearing before Judge Shanahan.

 6. As previously noted, it is Mr Chikwe's principal  submission  that  the
    judge failed to give due weight to the fact that, excepting the  period
    of three weeks during which the application was overdue, the  Appellant
    met the requirement  of  long  residence  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The relationship between the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of  the
    Human  Rights  Convention  can  be  confusing.   The  confusion  arises
    principally from the Secretary of State's attempt to codify  Article  8
    jurisprudence  within  paragraph  276ADE  and  Appendix   FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  It is compounded by the  fact  that  certain  other
    Rules, which are not on the face of  them  intended  to  represent  the
    Secretary  of  State's  view  of  the  operation  of  Article  8,   are
    nevertheless deemed under the Rules to include a claim under Article  8
    and thus to attract a right of appeal under Section 82 of the 2002  Act
    (see Appendix AR). It nevertheless remains the  case  that  a  decision
    taken under the Immigration Rules can only be challenged under  section
    84 on the ground that the decision is unlawful under section 6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1988.  It is within this framework that a  refusal  of
    leave to remain under paragraph 276B falls to be considered.  Paragraph
    276B predates the introduction of paragraph 276 ADE. It was accordingly
    never intended to codify the jurisprudence  relating  to  private  life
    under Article 8. The judge was therefore right to take Appendix FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE as his starting point when considering the appellant's
    right to respect for private and family life rather than, as Mr  Chikwe
    argued, paragraph 276B.

 8. The only requirement under paragraph 276ADE  which  the  Appellant  may
    have been able to meet on the facts of this appeal was  that  contained
    within sub-paragraphs (vi); that is to say, that she would  face  "very
    significant difficulties" to her reintegration in Nigeria.   The  judge
    dealt with this at paragraph 46 of the decision:

         I have considered paragraph 276ADE. The Appellant cannot  meet  the
         age or length of residence requirements under  sub-paragraph  (iii)
         to (v). In relation to subparagraph (vi) I take account of the fact
         the fact that the Appellant has been able to return to Nigeria on a
         number of occasions and most  recently,  as  far  as  the  evidence
         shows, in July 2015 to January 2016. She  is  fully  aware  of  the
         language and customs and has family there. I am satisfied that ther
         are no very significant obstacles to her re-integration if returned
         to Nigeria.

     There has been no criticism of that analysis in this appeal.

 9. The only other basis on which the appellant could have succeeded  under
    the Rules was by  showing  that  she  had  "a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with her daughter for the  purposes  of  Section
    Ex.1 of Appendix  FM.   Unsurprisingly,  given  the  facts,  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant did not have such a relationship with  her
    daughter. Mr Chikwe argues that the Appellant's relationship  with  her
    daughter was a "peripheral issue". He argues  that  the  focus  of  the
    appeal  ought  instead  to  have  been  upon  the  lawfulness  of   the
    curtailment of the Appellant's leave  to  remain  in  October  2015.  I
    disagree.  The  question  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
    daughter was critical to the decision that the judge  was  required  to
    make under Section Ex.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules, as well as to  the
    decision outside the Rules under section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.  The
    lawfulness of the Respondent's  decision  to  curtail  the  Appellant's
    leave to remain in October 2015 due to the failure of that relationship
    was accordingly irrelevant. That decision was not the subject  of  this
    appeal and ought to have been challenged, if at all, by way of Judicial
    Review upon the Appellant's return to the UK in January 2016.

10. I can therefore find no error of law in the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    facts of this appeal and it follows that this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 15th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


