
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01432/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 September 2017                  |On 10 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               Khadija Al Wadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 1 June 2017.  It is not  in
    dispute that the appellant is a citizen of Syria, who at  the  date  of
    the hearing, resident in the  Zaatari  Refugee  Camp  in  Jordan.   She
    applied for entry clearance to join her daughter Aysha Al-Wadi, who was
    referred to in the decision of Judge Buckwell as the  sponsor.   It  is
    accepted  by  both  parties  that  the  appellant   cannot   meet   the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  she   has   insufficient
    documentary evidence in order to comply with the requirements  set  out
    in Appendix FM-SE.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor. He  also  had  a  bundle  of
    material before him which relates  in  part  to  the  conditions  which
    currently exist in the  Zaatari  Camp.   The  judge  concluded,  having
    directed himself as to the law at paragraph 31 and  32,  that  in  this
    case it was not a disproportionate interference with what  he  accepted
    was an existing family life between the appellant and sponsor to refuse
    entry clearance.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on what have  broadly  fallen
    into three grounds that the judge had erred:,

        i) In misapplying the law in that he had impermissibly applied  the
           test of exceptionality contrary to  what  he  should  have  done
           which is to ask whether there were compelling circumstances;




       ii)  In  failing  to   take  into  account  relevant  considerations
           specifically in this case the guidance given in Britcits  v  The
           Secretary of State [2017] Court of Appeal Civ 368 paragraphs  59
           onwards; and,




      iii) In making findings of fact which are perverse in  the  light  of
           the evidence presented, specifically in this case  the  findings
           of 39 that the appellant was able to reside  in  the  camp  with
           appropriate dignity and respect shown to her.

 4. The judge, at paragraph [37] stated:

    "In the absence of any detailed medical report I am unable to find that
    the appellant suffers from ailments to a particular degree of extremity
    which might distinguish her from other  individuals  who  have  medical
    conditions which are the same as those of the Appellant."

 5. Mr Moran submitted that this is indicative that the  judge  incorrectly
    applied a test of exceptionality, that is, that  the  position  of  the
    appellant had to be worse than others in her position.

 6. Mr Clarke  for  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  this  was  not  a
    misdirection and the judge is not applying  a  test  of  exceptionality
    which would not be permitted by the law.  He submitted that  the  judge
    was permissibly making findings that the evidence was  insufficient  to
    meet a particular standard.

 7. In response, Mr Moran submitted that that ignores the  second  part  of
    the sentence.

 8. I agree with Mr Moran  on  this  issue.  The  judge  has  impermissibly
    applied a test of exceptionality. That is notable  not  only  from  the
    sentence quoted but it is also  apparent  that  he  has  done  so  when
    considering the remainder of his decision.

 9. The second issue and second ground of appeal is that the  judge  failed
    to take into account relevant considerations,  specifically  those  set
    out or identified in  paragraph  59,  in  particular  of  the  Britcits
    decision.

10. The submission is that the judge failed to have proper regard  to  what
    is meant by "permanent care".  The difficulty I have with this argument
    is that as Mr Clarke submitted, what is being talked about here is  the
    specific evidence which is required to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which it is  accepted are  not  provided  here.   In
    that sense Mr Clarke does have a point, but I  consider  that  in  this
    case, albeit for good reasons because of course the  Britcits  decision
    had not yet been handed down, that the judge appears  to  have  limited
    himself in consideration of the Article 8 considerations as  whole,  in
    that although focusing as he was bound to do on whether the Rules  were
    met, he did fail, as Mr Moran submitted, to have proper regard  to  the
    purpose of the Rules and the fact that of course once when he is  going
    outside the Rules, one must consider other aspects and factors.

11. Turning to the third ground  of  appeal,  whilst  I  note  Mr  Clarke's
    submissions that the judge did have regard to the evidence of  how  the
    appellant is able to live in the  camp  in  Jordan  and  that  this  is
    detailed in particular at paragraph [14 ]of  the  decision,  equally  I
    consider that there is significant merit in Mr Moran's submission  that
    the judge has not had proper regard to the exact difficulties which are
    identified in that and which the judge accepted and second  that  there
    appears  to  be  no  proper  consideration  of  the  quite  significant
    difficulties which exist in the camp, which  are  again  drawn  out  at
    paragraph 23 of the grounds of appeal.

12. Whilst I note also Mr Clarke's submission that what the judge has  done
    here is within the range of accepted outcomes, in that it would have to
    be perverse for a proportionality finding to be overturned, I  consider
    that in this case the judge has not properly considered or made  proper
    findings of fact which led up to that exercise.

13. It is in my view perverse for a judge to make improper findings of fact
    and then to use those improper findings of fact, which in this case are
    failing to have proper regard to the evidence of the difficulties  that
    the  appellant  has  in  accessing  facilities  in  the  camp  and  the
    difficulties that actually exist in the camp and the fact  that  he  is
    able to say, in the light of all of  this,  that  she  has  appropriate
    dignity, is in my view a  clear  indication  that  the  judge  has  not
    properly engaged with the evidence and had made impermissible  findings
    of fact which vitiate the findings on proportionality.

14. For these reasons I  consider  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

15. In remaking the decision I heard submissions from both representatives.
     Mr Moran relied on his skeleton  argument  submitting  that  what  was
    available in terms of the medical evidence set out at pages 62 to 64 of
    the applicant's bundle, whilst just a diagnosis, was the best  evidence
    available.  Although he accepted it did not fall within  the  terms  of
    Appendix FM-SE, he submitted that this does fall within  the  exception
    set out in SS (Congo) at [53].  He  submitted  that  in  assessing  the
    difficulties that the appellant herself faces, the accepted evidence of
    the sponsor whose credibility was not challenged should be  taken  into
    account as indeed should the evidence of the  situation  in  the  camp,
    again condoned by the documents set out in the  bundle.   He  submitted
    further that this is not a case in which there was any likely change in
    the long term nor indeed were a fresh application to be made, was there
    any realistic chance of a fear  of  the  documentary  requirements  for
    Appendix FM-SE being met given the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case.  He drew my attention to the evidence that the appellant had only
    been able to obtain medical help  when  she  had  been  treated  as  an
    emergency.  Whilst she is receiving  drug  treatment,  there  does  not
    appear to be other treatment in the camp.

16. Mr Moran submitted also that whilst the appellant is apparently able to
    walk ten or fifteen minutes to  get  food  or  to  wash,  she  requires
    someone to assist her to do so due to the dizziness she faces and  that
    she requires assistance during washing and also  getting  to  and  from
    where she eats.  (See paragraph 14 of Judge Buckwell's decision).

17. Mr Moran submitted also that the distress caused to the  appellant  and
    indeed to the sponsor are factors which can be taken into account.

18. Mr Clarke submitted that the starting point in this case was the  Rules
    which could not  be  met  and  that  even  taking  the  slightly  wider
    interpretation of Rules as set out in the BRITCITS case, nonetheless it
    was still clear that the evidential requirements in  terms  of  medical
    evidence could not be met.  He submitted that there was no good  reason
    why the appellant could not get  the  necessary  medical  treatment  or
    references in Jordan.  He submitted that the fact that  she  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules was a significant factor
    in assessing the public interest and that in the facts  of  this  case,
    although the appellant's circumstances were severe, the public interest
    was not  outweighed.   He  submitted  also  that  it  was  evident  the
    appellant was able to visit to seek medical attention.

19. In response, Mr Moran submitted that there was no realistic prospect of
    the sponsor being able to visit as, irrespective of whether  she  would
    be able to travel there using a refugee travel document,  visits  would
    only be short term as she has five dependent children living  with  her
    in the United Kingdom.

20. Although the appeal in this  case  is  against  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance the sole basis on which an appeal can be allowed  is  on  the
    ground that the decision is unlawful pursuant to Section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998, in this case the submission being that it would  be  a
    breach of the appellant's rights pursuant to Article 8.

21. Although the appeal is  not  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is  I
    consider a necessary and important starting point  to  consider  these.
    In this case the relevant provisions are set out in EC-DR. In addition,
    Appendix FM-SE must also be considered given  that  it  is  an  express
    requirement of the Immigration Rules that the  necessary  documentation
    is provided.

22. It is accepted in this case that as the documentation is not  available
    but it is submitted that on the facts  of  this  case  as  established,
    there is a good reason for that.  See SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
    387 at [53].  I am satisfied that is so in this case,  given  that  the
    appellant is in a refugee camp with little or no access to  a  treating
    physician.

23. The findings of fact by Judge Buckwell are  preserved.   These  include
    the fact that he found that the entirety of the appellant's account was
    accepted and he found the sponsor to be a credible witness.  I note  in
    particular what was recorded at paragraphs [14] and [15].

24. It is also of note that the sponsor sends money to pay  for  meals  and
    that the appellant is widowed  and  that  there  are  no  other  family
    members in the same camp.

25. I accept, as did the First-tier Tribunal, that the appellant  enjoys  a
    family life with her daughter on whom she is dependent.  That is in her
    particular circumstances entirely understandable.  It is also a  factor
    to be borne in mind as indeed is the fact that that family  life  could
    not exist in Syria, the country of nationality of the appellant and the
    sponsor and given the current situation there and that there  would  be
    significant difficulties in it existing in Jordan given that  there  is
    no indication that the sponsor who has five children would be  able  to
    relocate there but to do anything other than a visit which, given  that
    she has five children  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  of
    necessity have to be short.

26. Equally, I bear in mind that  the  status  quo  is  that  they  are  in
    separate countries ordinarily that would  be  a  factor  militating  in
    favour of the current situation continuing.  The situation is,  however
    that both the appellant and sponsor were forced from their  country  of
    origin owing  to  the  current  well  documented  situation  in  Syria.
    Further it is not in dispute that the appellant lives in a refugee camp
    where there are as is noted in the evidence, significant  difficulties.
    This is not a situation where the appellant has  a  home  available  to
    her.

27. In addition it has to be borne in mind that it is not disputed that the
    sponsor is able to maintain and accommodate the appellant.

28. I am satisfied  that  there  are  in  addition  to  these  observations
    compassionate matters to be taken into account.  I am satisfied that as
    is stated by both the appellant and sponsor that the current  situation
    causes them significant distress.  That is hardly surprising.

29. I consider that the distress caused to the appellant and to the sponsor
    is exacerbated by the difficulties that the appellant has owing to  her
    infirmity.  Whilst I accept that there has been no medical diagnosis of
    the various ailments in any detailed form, there is some evidence  that
    she suffers from a number of complaints including diabetes, high  blood
    pressure, ischemic heart disease and, it would appear, osteoporosis.  I
    am satisfied that she suffers from these illnesses on  the  balance  of
    probabilities; I am also satisfied by the evidence  that  she  requires
    assistance both to walk owing to the dizziness and her heart  condition
    and that she also requires assistance both to travel to and from places
    where she can eat and to wash herself.

30. I am satisfied also that at present the care  given  to  the  appellant
    other than that in the form of medication is delivered by strangers.  I
    accept that that may be difficult for her even if  by  its  nature  the
    help is intimate and there is no guarantee that it will continue to  be
    offered in the context of a refugee camp.

31. The requirements of EC-DR are not met because of the  lack  of  medical
    evidence.  That much is clear.  I am, however for the reasons set above
    satisfied that the appellant does suffer from numerous illnesses  which
    must be considered as a whole.  Whilst there is no evidence as  to  the
    nature of the care she requires, equally it is  difficult  to  see  how
    such medical evidence could be obtained in any  way.   This  is  not  a
    situation where there is any treating physician or nurse; nor is  there
    any prospect of that arising in the circumstances where  the  appellant
    is in a refugee camp.  It is difficult to see how any evaluation  could
    be carried out even were it possible to obtain the medical report given
    that there is no indication that any doctor would be able to visit  the
    appellant in her camp and conduct the necessary review.

32. It is established law that  where  an  individual  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules there  has  to  be  something  of
    significant and a compelling nature such that the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules which primarily set out the basis  to  be  struck  in
    assessing proportionality in a family life case are overcome.

33. The public interest in this case is significant and very weighty.  That
    much is discussed in the BRITCITS case. That  said,  the  circumstances
    here are very far from the paradigm considered in either  the  BRITCITS
    case or the Immigration Rules; this is not a situation where an elderly
    relative is living in her home or,  in  this  case,  even  in  her  own
    country.

34. In assessing the public interest I bear in mind also the provisions  of
    Section 117A and B of the 2002 Act.  I consider that significant weight
    is to be attached to the maintenance of immigration control and also in
    this case that there is a public interest in the  applicant  not  being
    permitted to enter given that she does not speak English.   That  said,
    it is to be noted that although she  is  not  financially  independent,
    again a matter which weighs against her, she is  nonetheless  supported
    and is not likely to be a burden on taxpayers as she  is  supported  by
    her daughter.  Sub-Sections 4 and 5 are not relevant as  the  applicant
    is  outside  the  United  Kingdom  it  could  not  be  said  that   the
    relationship of mother and daughter or indeed  her  private  life  were
    established and her situation here was precarious.

35. On the basis of the decision in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60  I  consider
    that it is appropriate to draw up a list of the factors for and against
    the appellant.

36. In terms of the factors in favour of the appellant are:-

      a) The family life between her and her daughter.

      b) The fact that it cannot be exercised except in the United Kingdom.

      c) She would be financially supported the United Kingdom.

      d) For the reasons given above her purpose of entry is similar to that
         set out in EC-DR.

      e) She is currently in extremely difficult  situations  owing  to  her
         health and lack of resources.

37. In terms of the factors militating against the appellant, she does  not
    speak English, she is unlikely to be able to work, she  does  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

38. I bear in mind the very strong weight to be attached to the maintenance
    of immigration control and also that that weight  has  been  emphasised
    and accordingly exacts great and significant  weight  as  it  has  been
    endorsed by parliament in Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act.  Nonetheless
    it is correct that there are cases in  which  that  can  be  outweighed
    where there are, as I have found, very compelling circumstances.

39. I am satisfied that on the particular facts of this case,  viewing  the
    factors set out cumulatively  that  it  would,  extraordinarily,  be  a
    disproportionate interference with her right to family life to  exclude
    the appellant from the United Kingdom.  She  is  a  widow;  she  has  a
    number of health complaints; she is not living in her own  country  and
    cannot conceivably return there in the near future; she has no means of
    support but is in fact dependent on the assistance of UNHCR  and  other
    similar agencies whilst living in a refugee camp; the only relative  on
    whom she can rely and with whom she has a protected family life  is  in
    the United Kingdom. The sponsor cannot travel to  be  with  her  mother
    without leaving her five children in the  United  Kingdom.   Whilst  it
    could be argued that refusing entry clearance is maintaining the status
    quo, that is not an accurate reflection of the circumstances where  the
    appellant has had to flee from her home owing to the conflict in Syria.



40. Taking these factors together, and attaching significant and very great
    weight to the public interest, I consider  that,  viewed  as  a  whole,
    there are very compelling circumstances specific  to  this  case,  such
    that I am satisfied that the decision taken was  unlawful  pursuant  in
    terms of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  as  it  constituted  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to respect for
    her family life.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside. I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 9 October 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of �140 as I am satisfied that there has been no real  change  in  the
material adduced from that put to the respondent.

Signed                                  Date:  9 October 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

