
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            NATTHAPHOL BUROMKHOT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Norton-Taylor who in  a  determination  dated  13  March  2017
    dismissed his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, made on 2 June 2015 to refuse his application, under paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules, for entry clearance to join his father Mr
    Thathiron Buromkhot, who is now a British citizen, in Britain.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Thailand  born  on  3  September  1998.
    Judge Norton-Taylor made a clear finding of fact which was that at  the
    date of application and indeed the date  of  decision  the  appellant's
    father was exercising sole responsibility for the  appellant  and  that
    the appellant met the requirements of the rules. However, as  this  was
    an appeal on human rights grounds only, the judge set out in paragraphs
    37 onwards his reasons for dismissing the appeal on those grounds.

3.   He stated  firstly  that  the  appellant  could  not  now  satisfy  any
    provisions of the Rules because he had attained majority on 3 September
    2016.  He then went on to consider the rights of  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR within the framework set out in the  judgment  of
    the House of Lords in Razgar.  He accepted that there was  family  life
    between the appellant and his father although he stated that the  bonds
    were not, in his view, particularly strong as  the  appellant  and  his
    father had lived apart for over eleven years.  He then went on  to  say
    that he did not consider that there was interference with their  family
    life given that the appellant was managing  very  well  by  himself  in
    Thailand and was now an adult. He therefore concluded that the  Article
    8 claim could not succeed.

4.   He did, however,  go one to consider, in the  alternative,   the  issue
    of proportionality stating somewhat obliquely  that  he  was  doing  so
    "(the third and fourth Razgar questions not  being  in  dispute)".   He
    found that despite the fact that he had concluded  that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of the Rules in 2015 the passage of time, which he
    accepted was not the fault of the appellant,  was  not  compelling  and
    found that that weighed in favour of the respondent.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Osborne who stated in the  grant  of  permission  that  the  judge  had
    wrongly applied the Razgar questions and that it was arguable that  the
    judge should have found that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law and had he done so the assessment of proportionality would have
    resulted in a different conclusion.

6.   Mr Wilding stated that he accepted that there was an error  of  law  in
    the determination of the judge and indeed that the  judge  should  have
    allowed the appeal.  He referred to paragraph  27  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which makes it clear that an application for entry  clearance  is
    to be decided in the light of the circumstances existing at the time of
    the application.  The appeal should not have been dismissed on  account
    of the appellant attaining the age of 18 years between receipt  of  his
    application and the date of decision.

7.   Mr Wilding stated further that the Immigration Rules are considered  to
    be human rights compliant.  That being the case that where an appellant
    would succeed under the Rules as indeed Judge Norton-Taylor  had  found
    that the appellant would have done at the date of application then  the
    decision should have been found to be in breach  of  his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

8.   He therefore indicated that it would  be  appropriate  for  me  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and substitute  for
    the decision of the First-tier Judge a decision allowing the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  This I now do.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 21 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
