
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01470/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                         |On 9 October 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             yam bahadur gurung
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. In a decision promulgated on 24 April 2018 I set aside the decision  of
     the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before me to be remade.


  2. For the purposes of this  decision  I  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer as  the  Respondent,  and  to  Mr.  Gurung  as  the  Appellant,
     reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



  3. I heard oral evidence from the Sponsor, Mr. Amar  Bahadur  Gurung,  and
     his wife, Mrs. Sirimaya Gurungseni.   Both  representatives  made  oral
     submissions.  I reserved my decision.

  4. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle, the
     Appellant's bundle (80 pages followed  by  Annex  K),  the  Appellant's
     addendum bundle (93 pages), a letter  from  the  Greenwich  Gurkha  Ex-
     Servicemen Association dated 13  September  2018,  a  letter  from  the
     Sponsor's wife's doctor dated 11 September 2018 plus  attachments,  and
     the skeleton argument.

  5. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Jarvis stated that the one  issue,  as
     far as the Respondent was concerned, was whether there was family  life
     between the Appellant and Sponsor.  He accepted that, were  I  to  find
     that there was family life, and therefore Article 8(1) was engaged, the
     appeal should be allowed.  The Respondent had  not  raised  any  public
     interest issues which would reduce  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
     historic injustice.

Burden of proof

  6. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show that the Respondent's
     decision is a breach of his rights to family  and  private  life  under
     Article 8 ECHR.  The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.


The Respondent's case

  7. The Respondent's case is set out in the notice of decision.  I  do  not
     intend to set out in detail here the part relating to the policy as  it
     was accepted at the error of law hearing that  the  Appellant  did  not
     meet the requirements of the policy, and that the  appeal  was  brought
     under Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  As set out above [5] it
     was agreed that the one issue before me was whether  there  was  family
     life between the Appellant and his parents.

  8. In relation to family  life  under  Article  8,  in  the  decision  the
     Respondent stated that the  Appellant  had  grown  up  in  Nepal.   His
     parents chose to apply for settlement  visas  when  the  Appellant  was
     already an adult in the full  knowledge  that  adult  children  do  not
     automatically  qualify  for  settlement.   There  was  no  bar  to  the
     Appellant's  parents  returning  to   Nepal   either   permanently   or
     temporarily.  He had been living  in  Nepal  without  his  parents  for
     nearly two years and had been able to continue to  live  independently.
     He had a number of other siblings in Nepal who  were  not  applying  to
     settle in the United Kingdom.  Family life could  continue  as  it  may
     have done and without interference by the decision.

  9. The Respondent stated that he was not satisfied that the Appellant  had
     established family life with his parents over and above that between an
     adult child and parents.  This was further evidenced  by  his  parents'
     decision to move to the United Kingdom without him.

 10. The Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM") reviewed the decision on  18  March
     2017 but did not reverse it.  He did not  accept  that  Article  8  was
     engaged.

The Appellant's case

 11. The Appellant's case is set out in the documents referred to above  [4]
     and the oral evidence at the hearing.  I do not intend to set  out  the
     Appellant's case in full here as it is contained in these documents and
     in the Record of Proceedings.  I will refer to the evidence as and when
     necessary in coming to my decision.

Findings and conclusions

 12. I found the Sponsor and his wife to be honest  witnesses  who  answered
     all questions put to  them  and  were  not  evasive.   There  was  some
     confusion regarding their children in the evidence of Mrs.  Gurungseni,
     but their evidence was consistent.  Their evidence is  consistent  with
     the documentary evidence, and with the evidence of  the  Appellant.   I
     find that their evidence can be relied on.

 13. In considering whether there is a family life between the Appellant and
     his parents, I have considered the case of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320,  in
     particular [17], [36] and [39].

 14. Paragraph [17] of Rai states as follows:

     "In Patel and others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ
     17, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph  14  of  his  judgment,  with  which
     Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute  an  extant
     family life falls well short of what constitutes dependency, and a good
     many adult children ... may still have a family life with  parents  who
     are now settled here not by leave or by force of  circumstance  but  by
     long-delayed right"."


 15. In [36] it states that the "concept to which  the  decision-maker  will
     generally need to pay attention is "support" - which means,  as  Sedley
     L.J. put it in Kugathas, "support" which is "real" or  "committed"  or
     "effective"".  The Court of Appeal clarified that there was no need  to
     show any exceptional or compelling circumstances above and beyond  this
     dependence.


 16. Paragraph [39] states:

    "The Upper  Tribunal  judge  referred  repeatedly  to  the  Appellant's
    parents having chosen to settle in  the  United  Kingdom,  leaving  the
    Appellant in the family home in Nepal. Each time he did so, he stressed
    the fact that this was a  decision  they  had  freely  made:  "...  not
    compulsory but ... voluntarily undertaken  ..."  (paragraph  20),  "...
    having made the choice to come to the [United Kingdom]" (paragraph 21),
    "... the willingness of the parents to leave ..." (paragraph  23),  and
    "... their voluntary leaving of Nepal and leaving  the  Appellant  ..."
    (paragraph 26). But that, in my view, was  not  to  confront  the  real
    issue under article 8(1) in this case, which was whether, as  a  matter
    of fact, the Appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life  with
    his parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle
    in the United Kingdom and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding  their
    having left Nepal when they did."

 17. I find that the Appellant was living with his parents prior  to  coming
     to the United Kingdom in March 2015.  However I find that between  2010
     and 2013, the Appellant was living in Dubai  where  he  had  moved  for
     work.  The issue is whether or not family life was re-established  when
     the Appellant returned from Dubai to Nepal in May 2013.

 18. In the Appellant's additional witness statement dated 13 September 2018
     he stated that he went to the UAE in January 2010 where he worked as  a
     security guard.  He found living and working  in  the  UAE  very  hard.
     When he had the chance, he spoke to his parents and told them about his
     life in the UAE.  His mother kept asking for  him  to  return  and  his
     father encouraged him to look for other options.

 19. The Appellant states that he was very unhappy in the UAE, and that when
     his father told him of his struggles taking his mother to  clinics  and
     hospitals, he expressed his desire to return home.  He wanted  to  look
     after his parents.   He  returned  to  his  parents  in  May  2013  and
     immediately took on the responsibility of  taking  his  mother  to  the
     clinics and hospitals.  He would carry her if she got tired during  the
     journeys to hospital.

 20. The Sponsor said in his additional statement dated  12  September  2018
     that the Appellant only went to the UAE because  he  told  him  to  and
     arranged it for him.  He stated that  the  Appellant  kept  complaining
     that his work was very hard and he was struggling.  His  wife's  health
     was deteriorating and he was getting too old to look after her  on  his
     own so he asked his son to return to Nepal.  He said that the Appellant
     was keen to return to Nepal due to the conditions in the UAE.

 21. In her additional statement dated 12  September  2018  the  Appellant's
     mother said that she told the Appellant to come back from  Dubai  "from
     day one", but the Sponsor thought that  letting  the  Appellant  be  in
     Dubai would make  him  independent.   She  said  that  she  missed  the
     Appellant very much.  The Sponsor called the Appellant  back  after  18
     months or so, but he came back in 2013 because his  employer  had  kept
     his passport.

 22. At the hearing the Sponsor said that he  had  asked  the  Appellant  to
     return home but there was some delay as his passport was withheld  from
     him.  In his first witness statement dated 30 October 2017 the  Sponsor
     said that it took the Appellant several months to return to Nepal.   He
     wanted to return earlier but  his  employer  kept  his  passport.   The
     Appellant said in his first witness statement  dated  28  October  2017
     that when he tried to quit work his employer threatened to  report  him
     to the police and did not return the passport.  He was forced  to  work
     for another year.  He was finally released and  returned  home  to  his
     parents [5].

 23. I find that, once the Appellant returned home, he  started  caring  for
     his  mother  who  has  multiple  health  problems  including  diabetes,
     hypertension, osteoarthritis, diabetic retinopathy and cataracts.   The
     Appellant said in his additional statement that he lived under the same
     roof, looking after his parents.  He used to cook and clean for them as
     well as having the responsibility of taking his mother  to  clinic  and
     hospital.  The Sponsor  said  in  his  additional  statement  that  the
     Appellant would take his wife to clinic or hospital [5].  He said  that
     the Appellant would carry her  on  his  back  when  she  was  tired  of
     walking.  The Appellant used to  cook  and  clean  for  them  and  give
     medicine at to his mother.  "In short, Yam  was  looking  after  us  in
     every way."

 24. In her additional  statement  the  Appellant's  mother  said  that  the
     Appellant took her to hospital and clinic, and cleaned and  cooked  for
     them.  All three of them referred to the evening walks which they would
     take on the advice of the doctor.


 25. As stated above, I  found  the  Sponsor  and  his  wife  to  be  honest
     witnesses and accept their evidence.  I find that  when  the  Appellant
     returned from the UAE this was at the behest of his  parents  owing  to
     the health of his  mother,  but  also  owing  to  the  Appellant's  own
     unhappiness in Dubai.  I further  find  that  he  would  have  returned
     earlier were it not for the fact that his passport was withheld by  his
     employer.  It was accepted by  Mr.  Jarvis  at  the  hearing  that  the
     Appellant would have returned earlier were it not for the fact that his
     passport was being withheld.  I further find that his mother wanted the
     Appellant to return almost as soon as he had gone, but that it was  his
     father who thought it might bring the Appellant some independence.

 26. I find that on return to Nepal the Appellant resumed family  life  with
     his parents.  I find that he was living with them as part of  a  family
     unit who all cared for and supported one another.  I  find  that  there
     was a physical reliance, at times quite literally, by  the  Appellant's
     mother on the Appellant.  However, I  find  that  it  was  not  only  a
     physical reliance, but that there was an emotional  connection  between
     the Appellant and his parents.

 27. I find that he was not living independently of  his  parents.   I  find
     that they were living together as a family unit.  I find, following the
     case of Rai, that the support that was given to the  Appellant  by  his
     parents was real, effective and committed, as was the support given  by
     the Appellant to his parents.  I  accept  that  there  is  a  level  of
     cultural expectation on a son to look after his  parents,  but  I  find
     that it was also the Appellant's choice to return to his  parents  from
     Dubai rather than just a cultural expectation that he should return.  I
     find that it was the Sponsor who had arranged for the Appellant  to  go
     to Dubai, and that it was the Appellant's and Sponsor's  will  that  he
     should return as the Sponsor realised  that  he  could  not  cope,  and
     realised that the Appellant was unhappy and wanted to return.   I  find
     that the Appellant did  not  return  reluctantly  merely  in  order  to
     perform his cultural duty, but that he wanted to  return  back  to  his
     parents.  On return, I find that they developed a reciprocal bond,  re-
     establishing family life between them.

 28. I therefore find that family life was resumed between the Appellant and
     his parents when the Appellant returned from Dubai to Nepal in 2013.  I
     find that family life continued until the Sponsor left to come  to  the
     United Kingdom.  I find that it has continued ever since.  I find  that
     there was no intention that family life should  end  when  the  Sponsor
     came to the United Kingdom.  All  three  members  of  the  family  gave
     evidence  in  their  witness  statements  as  to  the  effect  of   the
     separation.  The Appellant stated that he missed  the  company  of  his
     parents for everything that they did together  in  Nepal  ([9]  of  his
     additional statement).  The Sponsor said that he missed him,  and  that
     he was not only him who was emotionally attached to his son,  but  also
     his wife.  The Appellant's mother said that she  missed  him  more  and
     more.  I find that the Appellant speaks  to  his  parents  using  Viber
     sometimes every day, but at least two to three times a week.

 29. I find that the Appellant has not established an independent life since
     the Sponsors came to the United Kingdom.  He is  still  living  in  the
     family  home.   He  lives  there  alone.   I  find  that  he  is  still
     financially dependent on the Sponsor who sends him money  through  Ria.
     I find that he is not employed.

 30. I find that the Appellant and his parents have a  family  life  between
     them which has not been brought to an end by the  Sponsor's  departure.
     I find that this family life  was  re-established  when  the  Appellant
     returned from Dubai to Nepal in 2013.  I find that  the  support,  both
     emotional and financial, that the Sponsor gives  to  the  Appellant  is
     real, committed and effective.

 31. I therefore find that there is family life  sufficient  to  engage  the
     operation of Article 8.  It was accepted by Mr. Jarvis at  the  hearing
     that, were I to find that there was family life between  the  Appellant
     and Sponsor, the appeal  should  be  allowed  in  accordance  with  the
     authorities.


 32. Headnote (4) of Ghising and others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).  states:

     "Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but  for
     the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
     long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the  Article  8
     proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters
     relied on by the Secretary of State/ entry  clearance  officer  consist
     solely of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
     policy."

 33. It was accepted by Mr. Jarvis that the Respondent was  not  relying  on
     any other factors in the Appellant's case  beyond  the  maintenance  of
     effective immigration control.


 34. I have taken into account the factors set out in section  117B  of  the
     2002 Act, insofar as they are relevant.  Section 117B(1) provides  that
     the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
     interest.  However, this is somewhat lessened  in  these  circumstances
     following Ghising.  In relation to sections 117B(2)  and  117B(3),  the
     weight to  be  given  to  the  English-language  skills  and  financial
     independence of the Appellant does not outweigh the weight to be  given
     to the effect of the historic injustice.  Sections 117B(4) to  (6)  are
     not relevant.

 35. The Sponsor was discharged in 1971, 14 years prior to  the  Appellant's
     birth.  In his first witness statement the Sponsor said  that,  had  he
     been given the opportunity to settle in the United  Kingdom,  he  would
     have done so and the Appellant would therefore have been  born  in  the
     United Kingdom.

 36. I find that the Appellant has shown that he had a family life with  his
     parents when they left Nepal.  I find that this family life has endured
     beyond their departure.  I find that the Appellant  is  not  living  an
     independent life.  I find that family life continues  and  I  therefore
     find that, given the historic wrong, and taking into  account  Ghising,
     the balance comes down in favour of the Appellant.  With  reference  to
     Ghising, I find  that  the  Appellant  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
     probabilities that the decision is a breach of his rights, and those of
     the Sponsor, and his mother, to a family life under Article 8.

 37. I have not made an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision


The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, Article 8.


Signed                                  Date 3 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain





