
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01150/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 January 2021                  |On: 09 February 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     EL
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 27 May 1991.  He  entered  the
United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  10  February  2017,  having   previously
attempted unsuccessfully, on several occasions in 2015 and  2016,  to  enter
the UK by way  of  student  visa  applications  (four  times)  and  then  by
travelling through Europe clandestinely and being detained and expelled  and
being made the subject  of  an  order  in  Spain  which  excluded  him  from
entering Europe for three years and excluded him from Spain for six years.

On 5 May 2017 the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
family and private life grounds (as  the  partner  of  a  British  national)
which was refused with an out of country appeal  on  11  January  2018.  The
appellant married his British partner, AD, in the UK on 27 October 2017.  He
made further Article  8  human  rights  submissions  on  the  basis  of  his
marriage, on 2 February 2018. The submissions were rejected  on  9  February
2018, but further to judicial proceedings being lodged and a  consent  order
agreed, the Secretary of State reconsidered the appellant's applications  of
5 May 2017 and 2 February 2018 and refused his human rights  claim  with  an
in-country right of appeal, in a decision dated 3 January 2019.

In the meantime, the appellant made an asylum claim on 15 February  2018  on
the basis that his parents, who were Christian, had thrown him out of  their
house in Albania and threatened to kill him and his wife after  finding  out
that she was Muslim and that he  was  therefore  at  risk  in  Albania.  The
appellant's claim was refused and certified on 19  December  2018,  with  an
out of country right of appeal.

In the decision of 3 January 2019 refusing the appellant's Article  8  human
rights claim, the  respondent  considered  that  the  application  fell  for
refusal under the suitability provisions in section  S-LTR.1.6  of  Appendix
FM on the basis that the appellant's presence in the UK  was  not  conducive
to the public good.  The  respondent  referred,  in  that  respect,  to  the
appellant's  14-  month  prison  sentence  in  May  2016  for  using  forged
documents, which was commuted to a six-year expulsion order for Spain and  a
three year ban for Europe. The respondent accepted that  the  appellant  was
validly  married  to  AD  and  that  the  relationship  was  a  genuine  and
subsisting one,  but  considered  that  he  did  not  meet  the  eligibility
requirements in paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1  to  2.2.  The  respondent  considered
further that EX.1.(b) did not apply as it was not accepted that  there  were
insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  his  wife  being  enjoyed  in
Albania. The respondent noted that the appellant  had  met  his  partner  in
Albania in September 2012 and had maintained a  long  distance  relationship
with her whilst he was in Albania and she was  in  the  UK,  and  considered
that he could continue to do  so  until  he  acquired  the  necessary  entry
clearance to re-enter the UK and join her lawfully. The respondent  did  not
accept that the appellant's parents wanted to kill  him  and  his  wife  but
considered that in any event they could relocate to another part of  Albania
away  from  his  parents.  It  was  considered  that  there  were  no   very
significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Albania   and   no   compelling
circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

The appellant appealed against the  decision  of  3  January  2019  and  his
appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  on  28  June  2019.
Judge Devittie heard from the appellant and his  wife.  He  found  that  the
appellant's overall conduct did not disclose that his  presence  in  the  UK
was not conducive to the public good and accordingly he concluded  that  the
suitability provisions did not apply. The judge found, further,  that  there
were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in  Albania  and  he
allowed the appeal.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
and, following a grant of permission on 18  December  2019,  followed  by  a
hearing on 12 February 2020, I set aside Judge Devittie's  decision  on  the
following basis:


         "9. ... Ms Isherwood made submissions as to the errors  of  law  in
         the judge's findings under the  immigration  rules.  She  submitted
         that the judge had erred in his consideration  of  the  suitability
         provisions as he had based his findings on the appellant's reliance
         upon the case of Mateta & Ors, R v [2013] EWCA Crim  1372,  whereas
         that case was not applicable to the appellant's circumstances as it
         was a criminal case and, with reference to [20]  and  [21]  of  the
         judgment in that case, it was not open to this appellant to rely on
         the defence in Article 31 of the Refugee Convention.  Ms  Isherwood
         submitted further that the judge had erred  in  his  assessment  of
         insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Albania as he
         had failed to take account of the stringent test and high threshold
         confirmed in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1109  with  reference  to
         Agyarko and Ikuga, R (on the applications of) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11  and  in  Kaur,  R  (on  the
         application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
         EWCA Civ 1423. The judge  had  provided  insufficient  reasons  for
         concluding that the factors he took into account at  [13]  amounted
         to insurmountable obstacles and had erred by  accepting  assertions
         made by the appellant and his wife about  difficulties  they  would
         face in Albania which were not supported by any evidence.


         10. Mr Richardson accepted that Mateta & Ors did not apply  to  the
         appellant's circumstances, but  he  submitted  that  there  was  no
         indication  that  the  judge  reached  his  conclusion  on  section
         S.LTR.1.6 on the basis of that case. He accepted that  the  judge's
         decision on suitability was a generous one but  submitted  that  it
         was not outwith the range of reasonable  responses,  in  particular
         given that the respondent, in the  decision  of  19  December  2018
         refusing the appellant's asylum claim, specifically stated at [128]
         that that application did  not  fall  for  refusal  on  grounds  of
         suitability. Mr Richardson accepted that the  judge's  decision  on
         insurmountable obstacles was also a  generous  one,  but  submitted
         that it was one which he was entitled to reach on consideration  of
         all the factors taken cumulatively.


         11. I am unable to agree  with  Mr  Richardson,  that  the  judge's
         findings and conclusions can be justified  as  being  nothing  more
         than generous and I have to concur  with  Ms  Isherwood,  that  the
         judge  erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to  the  issues  of  both
         suitability and insurmountable obstacles.


         12. With regard to  the  suitability  provisions,  Mr  Richardson's
         strongest point is the fact that the provisions were not applied in
         the respondent's decision of 19 December 2018, as is made clear  at
         [128] of the  refusal  letter.  However,  there  was  also  not  as
         detailed a  consideration  of  the  circumstances  leading  to  the
         appellant's expulsion and exclusion in the decision of 19  December
         2018 as there was in the decision of 3 January 2019. In any  event,
         that was not the basis  upon  which  the  judge  decided  that  the
         suitability provisions did not apply. Whilst it  may  be  that  his
         findings at [11] did not rely solely on the principles in Mateta, I
         am in agreement with Ms Isherwood  that  the  submissions  made  in
         reliance on that case clearly formed part of his assessment,  given
         the specific  reference  at  [10].  Mr  Richardson  quite  properly
         accepted that the  principles  in  Mateta  did  not  apply  to  the
         circumstances in this appellant's case and, to the extent that  the
         judge thought that they did, he  erred  in  law.  The  judge  quite
         simply did not give any proper  consideration  to  the  appellant's
         conviction, but stated at [11(ii)] that his  conduct  was  "out  of
         character", without any explanation for such  a  conclusion.  I  am
         therefore in agreement with Ms Isherwood, that the judge's approach
         to the issue of suitability was incorrect and was legally flawed.


         13.  Likewise,  the   judge's   approach   to   the   question   of
         insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in  Albania  was
         legally flawed. The factors relied upon by the judge at [13] of his
         decision  as  amounting  to  insurmountable  obstacles   were   the
         hostility  of  the  appellant's  parents  to  his  wife  and  their
         objection  to  their   marriage,   the   fact   that   his   wife's
         qualifications in law would not be recognised in  Albania  and  the
         assertion that that would make it difficult  for  them  to  survive
         economically, his wife's lack of ties to Albania and the  emotional
         stress  his  wife  was  experiencing.   However,   there   was   no
         consideration by the judge  as  to  why  the  appellant  could  not
         support himself and his wife and no consideration of whether  there
         was any evidence, other than bare assertions, to support the claims
         made. Further, the judge failed to explain how those factors,  even
         taken  cumulatively,  met  the  high  threshold   of   establishing
         insurmountable obstacles. Indeed, there was nothing in the  judge's
         assessment to indicate that he was aware of the high  threshold  to
         be met and the stringent test set out in Agyarko and  confirmed  in
         TZ and Kaur.


         14. For all of these reasons the judge's decision cannot stand  and
         has to be re-made. Mr Richardson requested a  further  hearing  for
         the re-making of the decision, rather than it being re-made on  the
         available evidence. Ms Isherwood agreed  to  that  request  in  the
         interests of fairness. Accordingly, the case will be listed  for  a
         resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal for the decision  to  be  re-
         made on the appellant's Article 8 claim."

The matter then came before me for a resumed hearing, by way  of  skype  for
business.

Hearing and Submissions

The appellant and his wife, AD, gave  oral  evidence  before  me,  remotely,
both adopting their witness statements, subject to  minor  amendments.  AD's
mother was also available to give oral evidence but neither  party  had  any
questions for her. I  was  also  provided  with  two  further,  supplemental
bundles, which were in addition to the evidence previously before the First-
tier Tribunal and which included a psychological report for AD, evidence  of
her work and studies and more recent witness statements.

The appellant explained that he had been  held  in  a  detention  centre  in
Spain before being expelled for six years. He had  only  gone  to  Spain  in
order to travel to the UK as he had  previously  been  unsuccessful  in  his
attempts to travel directly to the UK. He wanted to come to the UK to  study
and to be with his wife, but had been refused a student visa four times  and
did not know what else to do. He travelled to Spain legally,  with  his  own
passport, and then obtained a false Italian identity document in Spain,  but
was caught at the airport trying  to  leave  Spain  with  the  document.  He
bought his own travel ticket to return to Albania. It was before he went  to
Spain that he told his family that his wife was Muslim, when  he  told  them
that they were going to get married. After that, he did not  have  any  more
contact with them and did not go back to them when he returned  to  Albania.
When his wife came to see him in Albania they stayed in an  apartment  which
belonged to her friend's parents and they did not go outside. The  appellant
said that he currently lived in  his  wife's  house  in  the  UK.  They  had
previously been living with her family but his wife had  bought  a  house  a
month ago and they had moved there.  He  was  not  working  but  he  studied
English online. He could speak English, and spoke it with his wife,  but  he
wanted to improve. His wife was a paralegal in a law firm and  was  doing  a
legal practice course. In response to my question, why  he  could  not  have
returned to Albania after his marriage and applied for  entry  clearance  to
return to the UK, the appellant said that he was not safe in Albania as  his
parents had threatened him and also he was not able to  fly  through  Europe
because  of  the  Spanish  expulsion  order.   He   had   entered   the   UK
clandestinely, in a lorry.

The appellant's wife then gave her evidence,  under  cross-examination  from
Ms Cunha. She said that it was in  May  2016,  when  she  was  visiting  her
husband in Albania, that they had told his parents that they wanted  to  get
married and they therefore found out then that she was Muslim.  His  parents
verbally abused her and attacked her and so they both packed up  their  bags
and left. She came back to the UK. That was the time when he tried  to  come
to the UK through Spain but was expelled. After that, she put  her  life  on
hold and decided to find another country where they could be  together.  She
left her job and her family and got a flat in Germany  and  waited  for  him
there, but he did not manage to get there.  After  some  time  she  went  to
Albania to see him, but they could not stay there as it was a small  country
and they feared his family and feared that something would happen.  She  was
not Albanian herself, but was from Kosovo. They thought  about  her  husband
going back to Albania and applying for entry clearance but it was  not  safe
there and they did not think that he would be granted a visa as he had  been
refused four times previously. Their priority was to be  together  and  they
did not know what else to do. It did not matter which country they were  in,
but they just wanted to be with each other.

Both parties made submissions,  relying  on  skeleton  arguments  previously
submitted - in the respondent's case, from Mr Howells on 13 July 2020.

Ms Cunha submitted that the suitability provisions were properly applied  as
there was a clear  intention  by  the  appellant  to  frustrate  immigration
control and that  had  to  outweigh  the  public  interest.  There  were  no
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Albania. Although  the
decision was harsh, it was not unjustifiably harsh. The appellant had  never
sought the protection of the police in Albania and that was an option  still
open to him. There was no evidence to suggest that he would be subjected  to
physical harassment from his family if he returned there. He  should  return
to Albania and apply for entry clearance to join  his  wife.  The  expulsion
order was due to expire in a year and he would be able to re-apply  at  that
time. There was no breach of Article 8.

Mr Slatter relied upon the case of Mahmood (paras. S-LTR.1.6. &  S-LTR.4.2.;
Scope) [2020] UKUT 376 in submitting  that  the  suitability  provisions  in
paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  did  not  apply.  Alternatively,  in  accordance  with
Balajigari v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA  Civ
673, the respondent could not pass the first stage of the relevant test  and
the expulsion order in May 2016 did not provide a  basis  for  finding  that
the suitability provisions applied. Mr Slatter relied upon the  guidance  in
Lal v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
1925 in submitting that there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life
continuing in Albania as it would lead to very serious hardship,  especially
for the appellant's wife, and in particular because  of  her  mental  health
condition, as set out in the psychological report, and her ties  to  the  UK
in the form of her work and family. The public  interest  in  requiring  the
appellant to go back  to  Albania  and  re-apply  for  entry  clearance  was
outweighed by the fact that he  met  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
rules and by a multitude of other factors such as the  global  pandemic  and
the uncertainty he would face. The decision was  therefore  disproportionate
and in breach of Article 8.

At the conclusion of the hearing I advised  the  parties  that  I  would  be
allowing the appeal. The following are my reasons for doing so.

Discussion and Findings

I start by saying that, having heard oral evidence from the  witnesses,  and
in  particular  the  appellant's  wife,  I  entirely  understand  why  Judge
Devittie allowed the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  endorse  his
findings and  conclusions.  In  re-making  the  decision,  therefore,  I  am
particularly careful not to make the same errors of law as I  identified  in
setting aside his decision and I  endeavour  to  give  as  full  reasons  as
possible for making the decision that I do.

Turning first of all to the suitability provisions in  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6,
I find there to be a number of reasons why that provision ought not to  have
been applied in the appellant's case. I agree with Mr Slatter that,  further
to the findings in the case of Mahmood, S-LTR.1.6 was not applicable in  the
appellant's case. In that case, the Upper Tribunal said:

    "74.         We agree that the absence of  a  suitability  requirement
    addressing the previous use of false representations or  a  failure  to
    disclose any material fact, as provided for by paragraph 322(2) of  the
    Rules, when Appendix FM was inserted into the Rules was consistent with
    Parliament's then intention. We therefore agree that the  insertion  of
    paragraph S-LTR.4.2. which mirrors, in part, paragraph  322(2)  was  to
    address  a  failure  of   the   suitability   requirements   previously
    established under Section S-LTR in not  permitting  the  respondent  to
    adversely rely upon the  previous  use  of  false  representations  and
    related concerns. In such circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    scope of paragraph S-LTR.1.6. is not sufficiently wide to  capture  the
    use of false representations in an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    before the respondent or in a previous application for leave  to  enter
    or remain.

    75.         We conclude the paragraph S-LTR.1.6., a mandatory ground of
    refusal, does not cover the use of false representations or  a  failure
    to disclose material facts in an application for leave to remain or  in
    a previous application for immigration status."

 I accept that the circumstances in the  appellant's  case  were  different,
that his case involved the use of a false document  with  the  intention  to
frustrate immigration control. However, it seems to me that  the  principles
in Mahmood can equally be applied to the appellant's case, given that  there
was  no  question  of  false  documentation  being  used  in   the   present
application  for  leave  to  remain.   Further   matters   undermining   the
applicability of the suitability provision in S-LTR.1.6  are the  fact  that
it relates to a matter occurring five years ago,  in  another  country,  and
where the three year ban from Europe expired nearly two years  ago  and  the
exclusion from Spain is due to expire next year.  Furthermore,  irrespective
of my observations at [12] of my error  of  law  decision,  it  is  of  some
significance that only two weeks prior to the decision of  3  January  2019,
the respondent expressly stated in her  decision  refusing  the  appellant's
asylum claim on 19 December 2018, at [128], that the suitability  provisions
did not apply. In light of all these considerations it does not seem  to  me
that the respondent can properly be justified in saying that  the  appellant
is a person whose presence in the UK is not conducive  to  the  public  good
solely by reason of his acquisition of a false identity card in  Spain  five
years ago, particularly when considering the overall picture and the  nature
of his motivation for his actions.

It is the  case  that  the  appellant  previously  sought  to  obtain  entry
clearance to the UK through legitimate  channels,  as  a  student,  but  was
refused  four  times.  Having  heard  the  appellant's  evidence   and   the
particularly compelling evidence of AD, I accept that the genuine  intention
was for the appellant to study in the UK, for them to return to  Albania  to
get married and for him to then apply for entry clearance as  a  spouse  and
for them to return to the UK together. I entirely  accept  AD's  account  of
their decision to get married earlier when he was  refused  a  student  visa
and of the reaction of his family when they told him they were to marry  and
that she was a Muslim. It is clear that AD suffered  emotionally  from  that
experience, that she feared remaining in Albania and that she  struggled  to
cope with the separation from her husband and the failure of their plans  to
be together in the UK. It was on that basis that the  appellant  decided  to
attempt his journey to the UK through Spain, using a false Italian  identity
document. Whilst such actions cannot in  any  way  be  condoned,  I  do  not
consider the circumstances as  a  whole,  including  the  observations  made
above, are such as to justify an exclusion from the UK and  the  application
of the suitability provisions. For all of these reasons I do not  find  that
S-LTR.1.6 was properly applied to the appellant.

As such, it is open to  the  appellant  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules under Appendix FM, applying the exception in  EX.1(b).  It
is not in dispute that the  other  eligibility  requirements,  such  as  the
financial requirements, are met and the only obstacle to  meeting  the  full
requirements  of  the  rules,  therefore,  is  the  appellant's  immigration
status. I  therefore  turn  to  the  relevant  question  of  "insurmountable
obstacles", in accordance with EX.2,  and  have  regard  to  the  very  high
threshold to be met in that regard, as set out in Agyarko and Ikuga,  R  (on
the applications of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]
UKSC 11 and referred to in the case of  Lal,  as  entailing  'very  serious
hardship'.

Despite the high threshold, I find that the test is met in this case  for  a
number of reasons, some of which  I  have  already  referred  to  above.  As
already stated, I entirely accept the  very  credible  evidence  of  AD  who
provided a compelling account  of  her  experiences  at  the  hands  of  the
appellant's family when they discovered that she was not  of  the  Christian
faith. Whether or not objectively well-founded, I  accept  that  she  has  a
genuine,  subjective  fear  of  living  in  Albania,  a  country  which  she
described as being so small that she would remain  in  fear  of  his  family
finding them wherever they were  and  punishing  them.  I  accept  that  the
appellant is also in fear of his family. When taken together with  the  fact
that AD is not an Albanian citizen and has never lived there or  spent  more
than a few days there when visiting the appellant, that  she  is  a  British
citizen and that her immediate family all live in the UK,  that  she  is  in
the middle of her law studies and has a good job working in a law firm as  a
paralegal and is successfully pursuing a legal career in this  country,  and
that she is in a vulnerable mental and emotional state, it seems to me  that
there is sufficient basis for establishing that very serious hardship  would
result from the couple having to move to Albania in order to maintain  their
family life.

I have had regard to the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  challenging
the First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  on  the  issue  of  'insurmountable
obstacles' and, in anticipation of any such challenge to my own findings,  I
would refer to the additional evidence that  is  before  me  which  was  not
before Judge Devittie or was not referred to in his  decision.  With  regard
to the question of evidence of the hostility of the appellant's  family  and
why that would prevent the couple from living elsewhere in Albania, I  refer
to my findings above and to the evidence of  AD  which,  as  I  have  stated
previously, was compelling. I have evidence of AD's studies  and  employment
in the legal profession in the UK. Clearly AD would not be  able  to  follow
her chosen profession  if  she  were  to  relocate  to  Albania,  given  the
different  legal  system  there.  I  also  now  have  the   benefit   of   a
psychological report,  dated  16  June  2020,  in  the  first  supplementary
bundle, to which I accord due weight. The report followed an  assessment  of
AD undertaken by Sarah Kasule, a specialist psychological therapist,  on  27
May 2020, and refers to the trauma suffered by  AD  following  the  incident
when she was attacked and threatened by the appellant's family. Ms  Kasule's
opinion, at paragraph 13.1 of her report, was that  AD  was  suffering  from
PTSD and that her mental illness may  worsen  if  she  had  to  relocate  to
Albania and to leave behind  the  security  of  her  environment,  work  and
family in the UK.

It is also  of  relevance  that  Ms  Kasule  had  concerns  about  AD  being
separated from the appellant and at paragraph 7.4 she opined that  AD  would
be at a relatively high risk of suicide if the appellant  was  removed  from
the UK, as he was her  protective  factor  preventing  her  from  committing
suicide. That of course is of particular relevance to the  question  of  the
appellant returning to Albania to apply for entry  clearance  to  return  to
the UK as a spouse. In the current climate, with the uncertainty and  delays
caused by the coronavirus, requiring the appellant to do so may well  result
in a lengthy separation from AD. AD's evidence was that she and her  husband
had thought  about  regularising  his  stay  here  by  him  making  such  an
application, but they were fearful  that  after  his  previous  unsuccessful
attempts to join her, and the outstanding exclusion  order  from  Spain,  he
would not be able to return here. It seems to me that that  is  a  realistic
concern.

For all of  these  reasons,  considering  the  passage  of  time  since  the
appellant's immigration offences and the nature of his offences, the  impact
of return to Albania or separation on AD's life and  in  particular  on  her
mental health, the fear of the appellant's  family,  the  current  situation
regarding coronavirus and all other matters referred to  above,  I  conclude
that the high threshold of demonstrating insurmountable obstacles to  family
life continuing in Albania has been met and that  the  appellant  meets  the
requirements of EX.1 of the immigration rules. I find further that  refusing
the  appellant's   application   would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
consequences for him and in  particular  for  his  wife  AD  such  that  the
decision is not a proportionate one and would be in breach of Article 8.  In
any event, the requirements of the immigration rules having  been  met,  the
public interest does not  require  the  appellant's  removal,  and  that  is
sufficient in itself for the appeal to be allowed.

DECISION

The original Tribunal was found to  have  made  an  error  of  law  and  the
decision was set aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  again  allowing  the
appellant's appeal.

     Anonymity

     The anonymity order previously made is maintained.




Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 26 January
2021



