
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/01389/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reason Promulgated      |
|On 4 November 2020                 |On 10 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Ms A Bhachu of counsel, instructed by SKR Legal
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a national of India with date of birth  given  as
    20.5.75, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 30.7.19  (Judge  Juss),
    dismissing appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    11.1.19, to refuse his application made on 29.5.18 for Leave to  Remain
    in the UK on the basis of family and private life under Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules on  Article  8  ECHR  human
    rights  grounds.  The  application  was  made  on  the  basis  of   the
    appellant's claimed parental relationship in the UK with his  daughter,
    PK.

 2. The respondent refused the application because the appellant failed  to
    provide evidence that he had a child in the UK, so that  he  failed  to
    meet the parent eligibility relationship requirement.  He  also  failed
    the immigration status requirement as he has never had leave  to  enter
    or remain in the UK so that his immigration status  has  been  unlawful
    throughout the period of 15 years he claims to have been in the UK.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged  the  burden  of  proof  to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
    requirements of s117B(6) or that there were  exceptional  circumstances
    rendering the decision unjustifiably harsh and disproportionate.

 4. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  argued  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge treated his finding that the  appellant  does
    not play an active role in his daughter's upbringing as dispositive  of
    the question whether he has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    her. The judge's assessment of the  child's  best  interests  was  also
    challenged.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  refused  permission  to  appeal  on  20.9.19.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jackson granted permission, considering it arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal "failing to  make  any  clear  findings  as  to
    whether the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    his daughter in accordance with SR (subsisting parental relationship  -
    section 117B(6)) Pakistan [2018]  UKUT  00334  (IAC),  wherein  it  was
    confirmed that a person may  still  be  able  to  establish  this  even
    without being able  to  demonstrate  an  active  role  in  the  child's
    upbringing (which appears to be the focus of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasoning)."

 6. Judge Jackson granted permission on all grounds, though she noted  that
    the second ground had less merit given the lack of evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to the child's best interests.

 7. I have carefully considered the  submissions  made  to  me  during  the
    remote hearing, together with the evidence that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at the appeal hearing, in light of the impugned  decision
    and the grounds of appeal as drafted.

 8. The day before the  remote  hearing,  the  appellant's  representatives
    attempted to adduce further evidence of contact between  the  appellant
    and his daughter, without making any application under  Rule  15  (2A),
    contrary to the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal. However,  that
    evidence was not before the First-tier Tribunal at the  appeal  hearing
    and I cannot take it into account in considering whether the First-tier
    Tribunal erred in the making of the decision.

 9. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Bates very properly conceded
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed  for  error  of
    law and did not resist the appeal. For the reasons  set  out  below,  I
    agree with the submissions of both representatives that the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of 'genuine and subsisting parental relationship'
    in consideration of s117B(6) was materially flawed.

10. The appellant relied on the following alleged facts. He claims to  have
    entered the UK in May 2003 on a visit visa, but this is disputed by the
    respondent; there is no evidence of him ever being given leave to enter
    or remain. He claims to have met and established a relationship with MK
    in 2001 and their child PK was born in 2010. The relationship allegedly
    broke down and contact was prevented by the child's  mother  until  the
    Family Court Child  Arrangement  Order  was  made  in  July  2017.  DNA
    confirms the appellant's biological relationship with the child and the
    birth certificate for the child has now been  amended  to  reflect  the
    appellant's name as the father. The appellant  claimed  to  communicate
    with his child by telephone  and  that  she  comes  from  her  home  in
    Liverpool to stay with him in Birmingham about every 4 weeks.

11. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  and  carefully
    considered the documentary evidence but  reached  the  conclusion  that
    there was no credible evidence to support the claimed  contact  between
    the appellant and his child. There was no evidence of  telephone  calls
    and a witness statement purported to be made by his former partner, who
    did not give evidence, was neither dated nor signed so that  little  if
    any weight could be accorded to it. At [17] of the decision  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant had failed to adduce any evidence  of  the
    child's best interests  being  in  maintaining  contact  with  him.  No
    enquiries had been made of the child.

12. At [18] of the decision, the judge took into account the whole  of  the
    evidence in the round but  concluded  "I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant plays a part in the life of the child."

13. In the following paragraphs, the judge directs himself on  the  current
    relevant case law, accepting that whether  a  person  has  a  'parental
    relationship' with  a  child  necessarily  depends  on  the  individual
    circumstances, including the role played by that person in  caring  for
    and making decisions in relation to the child. The judge had noted that
    the Family Court awarded 'parental responsibility' to the mother alone.
    But  the  judge  also  accepted  that,  whilst   it   is   a   relevant
    consideration, it is not necessary for an individual to have  'parental
    responsibility' in order to have a 'parental relationship'. However, he
    cited R (RK) v SSHD (s117B(6): "parental relationship") [2016] UKUT  31
    (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal held that "what is  important  is  that
    the individual can establish that they have taken on the  role  that  a
    'parent' usually plays in the life of their child."

14. At [20] of the decision, the judge also cited the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967, in the case of
    a parent with limited 'non-caring' contact with a child,  finding  that
    VC's failed because it was not possible on the facts to determine  that
    he had a 'genuine and subsisting parental relationship'.  It  was  also
    noted that biological parentage without more is insufficient and that a
    biological parental relationship wherein that parent does  not  provide
    at least some element of direct parental care  to  the  child  is  also
    insufficient for a genuine parental relationship  to  be  a  subsisting
    one."

15. From [21] onwards, the judge went on to consider paragraph  276ADE  and
    whether there were any exceptional  circumstances  (finding  none).  At
    [26] of the decision, the judge concluded that the public  interest  in
    immigration control was not outweighed  and  the  appellant  could  not
    discharge  the  burden  of  proof  to  demonstrate  that  it  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh to expect him to return to India. Accordingly,  the
    appeal was dismissed.

16. It is clear from the considerations set out between [19]  and  [20]  of
    the decision that although the judge did not cite  SR,  he  did  accept
    that a person unable to demonstrate an active  role  in  their  child's
    upbringing may still be able to establish  a  'genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship' with that child. However, the judge relied on Macfarlaine
    LJ in VC who stated that a biological parent unable to provide at least
    some element of direct parental care to the child fails to  demonstrate
    that their parental relationship is 'subsisting'. It is also clear from
    the preceding assessment of the evidence that the  judge  rejected  the
    claims that the child had ever stayed with him in Birmingham,  or  even
    that appellant maintained telephone contact with his child.

17. On the very limited evidence presented to the First-tier Tribunal,  the
    judge was unable to to find  that  the  appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden on him to prove a 'genuine and subsisting parental relationship'
    with his child.

18. However, when relying on VC, the judge did not take  into  account  the
    more recent decision of the Court of Appeal in AB & AO (Jamaica) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 661, which had been promulgated  in  April  2019,  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing. In that more recent  decision,  the
    Court of Appeal considered VC and SR disagreed with McFarlane LJ and to
    some extend with Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in SR. At [90] to [96] of
    AB & AO, the Court of Appeal stated:

             "90. Returning to the case  of SR  (Pakistan) I  would  also
             respectfully agree with what was said by UTJ Plimmer at  para.
             39:

             "There are likely to be many cases in which both parents  play
             an important role in their child's  life  and  therefore  both
             have subsisting parental relationships with  the  child,  even
             though the child resides with one parent and  not  the  other.
             There are also cases where the nature and  extent  of  contact
             and any break in  contact  is  such  that  although  there  is
             contact, a subsisting parental relationship cannot be said  to
             have been formed. Each case turns on its own facts."

         91.  On the facts of SR  (Pakistan),  at  para.  40,  UTJ  Plimmer
             concluded that SR did have a parental relationship with  the
             child in question and that it was genuine and  subsisting  for
             the purposes of section 117B(6)(a). It may have been a limited
             parental relationship but that did not mean that  it  was  not
             genuine or subsisting. SR and his daughter, A, had  seen  each
             other on a regular fortnightly basis. There were  unsupervised
             sessions that occurred away from a contact centre, in which SR
             provided A with elements of direct  parental  care.  For  that
             period of time SR was not looking after  and  directly  caring
             for A in any  other  capacity  than  as  a  parent.  Although,
             therefore, the Judge was satisfied that SR played  "no  active
             role in any significant decision-making regarding A's  day  to
             day care and  well-being,  he  has  nonetheless  developed  in
             recent months a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
             with her."

         92.  As is apparent from that passage, on the facts of  that  case,
             UTJ Plimmer was satisfied that SR was providing an element  of
             "direct parental care". The issue of law which  arises  before
             this Court now is whether such  an  element  is  an  essential
             requirement of there being a "genuine and subsisting  parental
             relationship" for the purpose of section 117B(6)(a). At paras.
             36-37 UTJ Plimmer considered that such an element is  required
             in this context. For that  proposition  she  relied  upon  the
             judgment of McFarlane LJ in Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department  v  VC  (Sri  Lanka) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1967,  in
             particular at paras. 42-43. In order to  assess  whether  that
             understanding of the law is correct I must therefore go to the
             underlying judgment of McFarlane LJ in the  case  of VC  (Sri
             Lanka)," (emphasis added).

         93.  In that case McFarlane LJ said, at paras. 42-43:

             "42. For the reasons put forward by Mr Cornwell, it was, in my
             view, not possible for the circumstances of this case to  come
             within the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the  Rules.  On
             the basis of the Court of  Appeal's  analysis  of  the  family
             history, [VC] had played only a minimal role in  the  care  of
             his children and, even when living at the family home, he  had
             on a regular basis rendered himself unable to act as a  parent
             as a result of heavy drinking and abusive  behaviour.  By  the
             time of the Secretary of State's decision to deport  him,  any
             vestiges of a 'parental relationship' with  the  children  had
             long fallen away and had reduced to their genetic relationship
             coupled with the most limited level of  direct  contact  which
             was intended to cease altogether on adoption. Mr  Cornwell  is
             correct  to  stress  the  words  'genuine',  'subsisting'  and
             'parental'  within  paragraph  399(a).  Each  of  those  words
             denotes a separate and essential element  in  the  quality  of
             relationship that is required to establish a 'very  compelling
             justification' [per Elias LJ in AJ (Zimbabwe)] that might mark
             the parent/child relationship in the instant case as being out
             of the ordinary.

             43.  Although, as I have explained, [VC's] case falls,  as  it
             were, at the first hurdle in that it was not possible  on  the
             facts as they were at the time of the decision to hold that he
             had a 'genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship',  I  am
             also persuaded that the Appellant  is  correct  in  submitting
             that for paragraph 399(a) to apply the 'parent'  must  have  a
             'subsisting'  role  in  personally  providing  at  least  some
             element of direct parental care to the child.  The  phrase  in
             paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) which required that 'there is no other
             family member who is able to care for the  child  in  the  UK'
             strongly indicates that the focus of the exception established
             in paragraph 399(a) is upon the loss,  by  deportation,  of  a
             parent who is providing, or is able to provide, 'care for  the
             child'. This provision is to be construed on the basis that it
             applies to a category of exceptional cases where the weight of
             public policy in favour of the default position of deportation
             of a foreign criminal will not apply. To hold  otherwise,  and
             to accept Ms Jegarajah's  submission  that  her  client  comes
             within the exception simply because he has some limited,  non-
             caring contact with his child would enable very  many  foreign
             criminals to be included in this exception.""

19. After setting out the provisions, the Court of  Appeal  continued  from
    [94]:

         "94. I respectfully disagree with UTJ Plimmer that  those  passages
             could  simply  be  transplanted  to  the  context  of  section
             117B(6)(a). First, it is clear  that  what  McFarlane  LJ  was
             considering  was  the  different  context  of  deportation  of
             foreign criminals. That explains  the  reference  to  a  "very
             compelling justification" at the end of para. 42 and also  the
             last sentence of para. 43 in his judgment.

         95.   Secondly,  and  even  more  importantly,  the  language   and
             structure of para. 399(a) of the Immigration Rules which  were
             under consideration by McFarlane LJ  in VC  (Sri  Lanka) are
             different  from  the  language  and   structure   of   section
             117B(6)(a).

         96.  In my view, it is clear that the provisions of  para.  399  in
             that case included, as an essential element,  that  there  was
             "no other family member who is able to care for the  child  in
             the UK". That led McFarlane LJ to interpret the provision as a
             whole to require "at least some  element  of  direct  parental
             care to the child." In my view, it would not be right to  give
             the same interpretation to  the  very  different  language  of
             section 117B(6)(a)."

20. It follows that Judge Juss' reliance on VC as authority  was  erroneous
    in law. As Mr Bates also pointed out the view taken  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal was not simply a reframing of the issue but effectively  stating
    that this is how the issue should always have been assessed. The  issue
    as to whether or not there was some form of direct parental care is not
    an  essential  element  of   a   'genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship.'

21. Considered in that light, it is not possible to  salvage  and  preserve
    any of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal considered
    the relevant issue on a flawed legal basis.

22. In passing, I do not accept Ms Bhachu's submission that the finding  at
    [18] of the impugned decision that the appellant did not play a part in
    the life of the child is flawed for lack of reasoning. The  reasons  is
    set out within the same paragraph in the preceding  observations  about
    the limitations of the evidence adduced by the appellant.

23. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

24. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

25. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  so
    that it must be set aside to  be  remade  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside with  no  findings
    preserved.

    The decision in the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Birmingham to be made de novo.  An  interpreter  in  Punjabi
    will be required.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    4 November 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."
Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    4 November 2020





