
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th October 2016                         |On 1st November 2016          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                Sohail Niamat
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25th January  1985.  His
    appeal, against the Respondent's decision to make a  deportation  order
    under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mayall on 26th October 2015.
2.   The Appellant appealed on the ground that there was a conflict  between
    two reported Upper Tribunal decisions and the  judge  had  procedurally
    erred in law in failing to follow  a  reported  decision.  The  judge's
    reliance  on  another  decision  subsequent  to  the  appeal,   without
    affording both parties  an  opportunity  to  make  submissions  on  the
    matter, was such that it amounted to an error of law. In light  of  the
    findings made by the judge the Appellant's deportation would be  unduly
    harsh.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  on  18th
    December 2015 on the following grounds: "Permission is granted in light
    of the conflicting decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Bossade  and  Ms.
    Adebayo on the one hand and KMO on the other  hand.  Whilst  any  judge
    sitting in the Upper Tribunal is not bound by other  decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal whether or not reported, its decision to follow one line
    of  cases  as  opposed  to  another   cannot   resolve   the   conflict
    notwithstanding anything it may say in an attempt to do so,  given  the
    doctrine of binding precedent." The appeal was  adjourned  pending  the
    Court of Appeal decision in KMO.

4.   In the Rule 24 response dated the 24th May 2016, the Respondent  stated
    that there was no reason  given  for  why  this  appeal  was  heard  in
    country. The Secretary of State had certified the claim  under  section
    94B of the 2002 Act. The Secretary  of  State  had  no  record  of  the
    certificate being withdrawn and, notwithstanding what was said  at  the
    hearing, could find no record of this agreement at the CMR.  Therefore,
    the Tribunal may need to consider this point in looking at the error of
    law. If an error of law was found, it was suggested that the appeal  be
    struck out for lack of jurisdiction on the basis that a  concession  on
    jurisdiction, if wrong in law, did not create jurisdiction, Virk &  Ors
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 652.

5.   Secondly, the grant of permission stayed this case until KMO  had  been
    determined by the Court of Appeal. The Secretary of State  stated  that
    she could now point to the extempore judgment of the Court of Appeal in
    MM (Uganda) & Others, which was handed down on 20th April and in  which
    the Court of Appeal held that KMO was  correct.  Therefore,  the  Upper
    Tribunal was invited to  list  this  appeal  for  the  first  available
    hearing date.


Submissions

6.    At  the  start  of  the  appeal  hearing,  Mr  Iqbal  applied  for  an
    adjournment on  the  basis  that,  although  the  Appellant's  previous
    representatives had received the notice of hearing  on  13th  September
    2016, the Appellant could no longer afford to be represented  by  them.
    The Appellant only became aware of this on Thursday 13th October  2016.
    Mr Iqbal had been instructed late in the  day  and  did  not  have  the
    relevant papers. I found that the explanation given for the failure  to
    instruct another representative in time to prepare for the hearing  was
    not a satisfactory one. I gave Mr  Iqbal  a  copy  of  the  papers  and
    adjourned the hearing to 2.30pm.
7.   I refused to grant the adjournment in accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective to deal with cases fairly  and  justly;  avoiding  delay  and
    ensuring that both parties could participate fully in the  proceedings.



8.   Mr Iqbal  came  back  before  me  at  2.30pm  and  did  not  renew  his
    application for an adjournment, having had the opportunity to read  the
    papers in this case. He noted the point made in the Rule 24 response in
    relation to jurisdiction. Mr Clarke, for the Respondent, did  not  seek
    to rely on such a point given that it was clear from paragraph 3 of the
    decision that the point  was  raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, who stated: "There was some dispute as to whether there  was  an
    in country right of appeal in this matter.  Both  parties  informed  me
    that at a CMR it had been decided by the judge that  there  was  an  in
    country right of appeal. I have seen no confirmation of that myself but
    both parties wished me to proceed on the basis that  there  was  an  in
    country right of appeal. I assume that this was on the basis  that  any
    certificate had been withdrawn or was no longer being relied upon."

9.   Therefore, given that the Respondent did not seek to pursue  the  point
    that there was no in country right of appeal, it  was  appropriate  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to assume that the certificate was either
    withdrawn or no longer relied upon. There was no  cross-appeal  by  the
    Respondent on this jurisdictional point and it was not relied on by  Mr
    Clarke. Accordingly, the point raised in the Rule 24 response  was  not
    one on  which  the  Respondent  could  now  rely,  given  the  lack  of
    application for permission to appeal.

10.  In relation to the substantive point, Mr Iqbal was in  some  difficulty
    given that the First-tier Judge had relied upon KMO and  the  Court  of
    Appeal had endorsed the approach in that case. Further, the judge found
    against the Appellant whether he  considered  the  case  under  KMO  or
    Bossade  and  MAB.   Mr  Iqbal  did  not  seek  to  make  any   further
    submissions.

11.  Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds were premised on  the  basis  that
    counsel at the hearing was unable to make submissions on KMO, which was
    promulgated subsequent to the appeal.  However, there was a  concession
    at paragraph 6 of the decision from both parties that  Bossade  was  in
    fact wrongly decided. There was no error on the part of the judge since
    MM (Uganda) had found that there should be a proportionality assessment
    of unduly harsh. The judge had applied that approach  in  his  decision
    and therefore there was no error of law.


Discussion and Conclusions

12.  The judge's decision is very thorough  and  he  deals  with  all  three
    decisions, KMO, MAB and Bossade.  The judge preferred the  approach  in
    KMO, which has now been endorsed by the Court of Appeal, and  therefore
    his assessment of the evidence could not be said  to  be  based  on  an
    error of law.

13.  The judge made findings on whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's daughter to remain in  the  UK  without  her  father,  even
    though he found that it was in her  best  interests  to  maintain  full
    parental  relationship  with  both  parents.  The  judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 95:

         "Given the disdain for his daughter's welfare which  I  have  found
         implicit in the storing of the drugs in the  child's  toy  and  the
         storing of blocks of heroin in the marital home,  that  is  not  as
         powerful a consideration in this case as in  most.   Similarly  the
         fact that the period during which the  father  and  daughter  lived
         together was merely five months is another reason why the  parental
         bond may not be as strong as it would normally be. The daughter has
         had to live for a considerable  period  without  her  father  being
         present, albeit with visits to prison.   The  mother  and  daughter
         have considerable family support from the mother's family."


14.  The judge found that, although it was in the daughter's best  interests
    for her father to remain in the UK, a balance had to be struck  between
    that consideration and the  powerful  public  interest  considerations,
    including the statutory presumption that  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest and the more  serious  the  offence
    the greater the public interest in deportation.

15.  The judge accepted that  the  Appellant's  deportation  was  likely  to
    result in the end of family life which would  be  distressing  for  the
    Appellant's partner and child. He found that  the  family  relationship
    was short lived and undertaken at a time when the parties knew that the
    Appellant had no right to remain. He concluded that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh, if the Appellant  were  deported  to  Pakistan,  for  the
    Appellant's partner and child to remain in the UK.

16.   The  judge's  conclusion  that  this  was  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances was one which was open to him on  the  evidence  and  was
    consistent with the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda).
    There was no error of law in the judge's decision  and  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31st October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31st October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
