
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01873/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2017 and signed                |On 09 October 2017            |
|And sent to Promulgation on                   |                              |
|6th October 2017.                             |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                        KEHINDE EMMANUEL OLORUNFUNMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr R O Ojukotola, a solicitor with S L A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 22nd November 1976.

2.   He made application for leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  partner
    under Appendix FM of a Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395
    (as amended) (the "Immigration Rules").  The appellant's partner  ("the
    sponsor") is Oluwayemisi Sorungbe.   The  appellant's  application  was
    refused  on  7th  July  2015,  because  doubt  was  expressed  at   the
    relationship between  the  appellant  and  sponsor  being  genuine  and
    subsisting and the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant and sponsor intended to  live  together  permanently  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   The judge noted that the parties were married on 4th June  2015.   They
    had known each other since 2000, when they were at college together and
    they re-established contact in about July 2014 and further contact from
    about 31st January 2015, when the  appellant  showed  sympathy  to  the
    sponsor.  She  was  having  difficulties  with  her  miscarriage.   The
    parties had been in regular contact and she was  proposed  to  on  25th
    March 2015, but could not accept because she was still married  to  her
    previous husband.  In paragraph 14 of her decision the judge found that
    the sponsor had been married to her first husband in June 2012, and she
    divorced him on 12th  May  2015.   The  sponsor  reconnected  with  the
    appellant in July 2014, and she returned to Nigeria to see him and  her
    family in November 2014.  The judge noted that the  sponsor  was  going
    through difficulties with her husband in the  United  Kingdom  at  that
    time, but that this did not prevent her from making an application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on 7th February 2015, on the basis that  she
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her then husband  and
    that they intended to live together permanently in the United Kingdom.

4.   The judge noted that the sponsor did not mention  to  the  Home  Office
    that she was going through  difficulties  with  her  husband  when  she
    obtained indefinite leave to remain on 18th February 2015.  She started
    divorce proceedings against her husband some three days later  on  21st
    February 2015, and the divorce was finalised in  May  that  year.   The
    judge said that she was not satisfied that the appellant can  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.   She  had  considerable  doubts  about  the
    genuineness of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor,
    partly because of the short-lived period of their courtship and  partly
    because of the lack of regular communications between the parties,  but
    she went on to express  "considerable  concerns"  about  the  sponsor's
    overall credibility in applying for indefinite leave to remain  on  the
    strength of her marriage with her then husband, even though three  days
    after having been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  she  commenced
    divorce proceedings.

5.   The judge found herself satisfied that the  sponsor  had  obtained  her
    indefinite leave to remain on the strength of false evidence,  in  that
    she failed to tell the Home Office of her intention  to  start  divorce
    proceedings from her then husband.

6.   The appellant obtained and was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge  may  have
    erred in law by failing to consider postdecision visits by the  sponsor
    to the appellant.  In addressing me today, Mr Ojukotola suggested  that
    the judge erred by failing to consider postdecision evidence of contact
    between the parties and dismissed the appeal after  having  taken  into
    account the material evidence.  It  was  immaterial  that  the  sponsor
    submitted  her  divorce  petition  three  days  after   being   granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  The fact of the matter  was  that  at  the
    time of the  application  and  at  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision, the sponsor had indefinite leave to remain.  If the
    respondent has any concerns on how that was  obtained  then  there  are
    legal remedies available to her.  Mr Ojukotola explained to me that the
    marriage was subsisting on 18th February, but an incident  occurred  on
    that evening after the sponsor and her first husband had returned  home
    from the Home Office when her leave had been granted, and as  a  result
    of his behaviour she then decided to present a divorce petition on 21st
    February.  I pointed out that this appeared  to  be  new  evidence.   I
    explained that I had read the papers and could find no evidence at  all
    before the judge to suggest that it was as a result of actions  on  the
    part of her husband after the grant of indefinite leave to remain which
    caused the sponsor to issue a divorce petition on 21st February.

7.   Mr Ojukotola appeared to be in some  difficulty  and  spent  some  time
    looking through his papers.  I  suggested  that  perhaps  it  might  be
    helpful to him if I were to adjourn the hearing to the end of  my  list
    to give him time to collect his papers together  and  to  take  further
    instructions.  He readily agreed.

8.   Later during the morning, having finished my list,  Mr  Ojukotola  told
    me that he was ready to proceed and that he did not require any further
    time.  He produced a letter from King's  College  Hospital  dated  15th
    July 2015, and said that since the sponsor was pregnant at that time it
    is clear that she must have been in a  durable  relationship  with  her
    husband.  He also referred me to the appellant's grounds of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  He said that there the sponsor  explains  how
    the relationship between the appellant and sponsor developed.   In  the
    grounds of appeal she said:-

         "I have known [the appellant] since my college days in  year  2000;
         in Nigeria.  He was a year my senior and a good  friend  before  we
         lost contact due to lack of internet and  telephone  facilities  at
         the time in Nigeria.  I reconnected with him on social media  after
         a long period around July 2014 and on the  31st  January  2015;  he
         started showing more care and affection towards me.  He came to  my
         life when I needed comfort and someone to share my pains  with.   I
         had just lost my pregnancy and my ex husband care  less  about  it.
         [The appellant] was the only listening ears  and  caring  heart  at
         this  crucial  time.   We  communicated  through  phone  calls  and
         WhatsApp often; I could call him at anytime of the day.  He  is  an
         epitome of true love and he is God fearing.  He proposed to  me  on
         the 27th March 2015 but I restrained because  my  divorce  has  not
         come through yet.  However, I led him on because I was certain  the
         divorce would go through.  We got closer and always eager  to  talk
         with him, so it was not difficult saying YES to his proposal  after
         the divorce went through."

9.   I pointed out to Mr Ojukotola  that  the  next  paragraph  appeared  to
    contradict what he had said  and  to  confirm  that  at  the  time  she
    obtained her leave to remain the sponsor had already decided to divorce
    her then husband.  The next paragraph says:-

         "It is noteworthy that I visited Nigeria in November 2014, it was a
         glorious opportunity for re-union and to be with my  widowed-mother
         and siblings after many years.  I also met and opened  up  to  [the
         appellant] about the troubles in my marriage with my ex husband and
         my plan to get a divorce.  However, I told him nothing  can  happen
         until the divorce goes through.  We visited his friends, family and
         had shots at local delicacies (sic)."

10.  The grounds of appeal concluded by saying:-

         "I returned to UK and started consulting on how to be free from the
         terror of my ex husband.  Respite came through the  counselling  of
         Citizen Advice Bureau at  Peckham  and  other  counselling  through
         Telephone Consultations.


         ... our parents and siblings in accordance with our  culture.   And
         on the 4th June 2015, we went to Ikoyi Registry  for  the  wedding.
         Both were low key in honour of my late dad  and  [the  appellant's]
         mom who passed on when he was just three months old."

11.  I explained to Mr Ojukotola that it appeared to be perfectly  plain  on
    the evidence before the judge that at the time the sponsor obtained her
    indefinite leave to remain, she had already made plans to  divorce  her
    husband.  He pointed out that at the time  of  the  hearing  the  judge
    could have found herself satisfied on the evidence that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

12.  In closing, Mr Walker suggested  that  the  judge  had  considered  the
    evidence of post-marriage contact at paragraph 14 and on  the  evidence
    before her was entitled to find as she did.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  The issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules
    as set out in section E-ECP.  Specifically, the Entry Clearance Officer
    doubted the relationship between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  was
    genuine and subsisting and was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  and
    sponsor intended to live together permanently in the United Kingdom.

15.  The judge considered all the evidence and concluded that  she  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the sponsor, or that they intend  to  live
    together permanently in the United Kingdom.  At  paragraph  14  of  the
    decision she said this:-

         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the civil standard  of
         the  balance  of  probabilities  applies.   The  Appellant  was   a
         contemporary of the sponsor at college in  Nigeria  in  2000.   The
         sponsor, who married Lyndon Jones in June 2012 and divorced him  on
         12th May 2015, reconnected with the Appellant in July 2014 and they
         started a relationship from about January 2015.  She  had  returned
         to Nigeria to see him and her family in  November  2014.   She  was
         going through difficulties with her husband in the UK, but this did
         not prevent her from making an application for indefinite leave  to
         remain on 7th February 2015.  She  did  not  mention  to  the  Home
         Office that she was going through  difficulties  with  her  husband
         (and indeed she was  pregnant  with  his  child  before  she  later
         miscarried) and after she obtained ILR on 18th  February  2015  she
         started divorce proceedings some three days later, on 21st February
         2015.  The divorce was finalised in May 2015.   She  then  went  to
         Nigeria on 29th May 2015 for three weeks and married the  Appellant
         on 4th June 2015.  The burden of proof is on the Appellant to  show
         that he can meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  on  the
         balance of probabilities.  I am not satisfied that he can do so.  I
         have considerable doubts about the genuineness of the relationship,
         partly because of the short period of their  courtship  and  partly
         because of the lack of regular communications between  the  parties
         up to the date of the decision in July 2015, which is the only date
         which  I  can  consider  and  to  the  evidence  regarding  ongoing
         communication since that time (including the sponsor's return visit
         to Nigeria in March 2016).  I also have considerable concerns about
         the sponsor's overall credibility when she applied for ILR  on  the
         strength of her marriage with her then husband, even though  a  few
         days later she commenced divorce  proceedings  from  him.   On  the
         balance of probabilities, I am satisfied that she obtained  ILR  on
         the strength of false evidence in that she did not  tell  the  Home
         Office of her intention to start divorce  proceedings  from  Lyndon
         Jones."

16.  It is quite clear from the grounds of appeal that the sponsor  and  her
    then husband were having matrimonial difficulties as early as  November
    2014 because by that time the sponsor had already made plans to divorce
    her husband.

17.  The judge was entitled to  find  that  she  had  considerable  concerns
    about  the  sponsor's  overall  credibility.   Indeed,  before  me  the
    appellant's solicitor continued to insist that the relationship between
    her and her  first  husband  was  genuine  and  subsisting  until  18th
    February 2015, and that even at that date she and her previous  husband
    intended to live together permanently  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Very
    clearly they did not, as demonstrated by what the sponsor said  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

18.  The judge had expressed "considerable" doubts  about  the  relationship
    partly because of the  short  period  of  their  courtship  and  partly
    because of lack  of  regular  communication  but,  even  despite  those
    concerns she went on  to  express  "considerable  concerns"  about  the
    sponsor's overall credibility.  I believe that the judge  was  entitled
    to find as she did.  She did not take into account immaterial facts  or
    give undue and disproportionate weight to an  immaterial  matter.   The
    sponsor's credibility was important, because in order to qualify  under
    E-EPC.2.10 the appellant must prove that he and his partner must intend
    to live together permanently in the UK.  The sponsor is clearly someone
    who is prepared to  tell  untruths  to  get  what  she  wants  and  her
    credibility was wholly relevant.  I find that the making of a  decision
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve a making of  an  error
    of law.  I uphold the decision.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
