
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01592/2019
                                                               HU/01598/2019
                                                               HU/01599/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2020                  |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                             FLOYD GEORGE CURRIE
                              FAY MARIE EDWARDS
                            TYRESE RUSHON CURRIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Singh, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms. R Moffat, Counsel, instructed by Irvine Thanvi
                    Natas Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision  of  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Rai ('the Judge') promulgated on 1 October
       2019 in which  she  allowed  the  appellants'  human  rights  appeals
       against the decision of the  respondent  dated  15  January  2019  to
       refuse their  applications  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
       (article 8) grounds.

    2. The appellant in this matter is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
       State. The respondents are individually named.

    3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer granted permission to  appeal
       on the two grounds advanced by the Secretary of State.

Anonymity

    4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction. The parties  did  not
       seek a direction before me.

Background

    5. The respondents are Jamaican citizens. Mr Floyd Currie ('Mr  Currie')
       and Ms Edwards are in a  long-term  relationship.  Mr  Tyrese  Currie
       ('Tyrese') is their son and is presently aged 20.

    6. Mr Currie was born in 1965.  He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
       visitor on 6 August 2000 and  in  November  2000  he  applied  for  a
       student visa which was granted until 4 September 2002. He  overstayed
       and was served with an IS151A in November 2005. Sixteen days later he
       applied for indefinite leave to remain  on  article  8  grounds.  The
       Secretary of State refused this application some seven  years  later,
       in January 2013. The First-tier Tribunal allowed Mr  Currie's  appeal
       by way of a decision dated 25  April  2013.  Mr  Currie  was  granted
       limited leave to remain from 19 March 2014 to 16 September 2016 along
       with Tyrese, who was dependent upon his father's application.

    7. Mr Currie applied for further leave to remain on  12  September  2016
       and the Secretary of State  refused  the  application  by  way  of  a
       decision dated 15 January 2019  observing  as  to  suitability  under
       Section S-LTR of the Immigration Rules that Mr Currie had  failed  to
       disclose material facts, namely  his  conviction  for  battery  on  3
       January 2014 for which he was  ordered  to  complete  a  twelve-month
       unpaid work requirement of 180 hours. The Secretary of State  further
       observed that Mr. Currie had failed to  disclose  two  cautions.  The
       first for possession of a class B drug on 7  November  2005  and  the
       second for common assault on 19 March 2008. The  Secretary  of  State
       further determined for the purpose  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
       Immigration Rules that there were no very significant obstacles to Mr
       Currie's integration  upon  return  to  Jamaica  and  that  he  could
       continue his family life in that country.

    8. Ms Edwards was born in 1960. She entered the United Kingdom after  Mr
       Currie's entry. An application was made in 2002 for leave  to  remain
       as a student. It was rejected by the Secretary of State as Ms Edwards
       failed to provide her passport. Ms. Edwards was served with an IS151A
       notice in September 2006. In 2014 she applied for leave to remain  on
       article 8 grounds. This application was refused on  10  January  2015
       with no right of appeal. She made a further application for leave  to
       remain on article 8 grounds in September 2015 based upon her  partner
       and son having been granted limited leave to remain in this  country.
       She was granted leave to remain from 13 October 2015 to 18  September
       2016. The Secretary of State  refused  her  application  for  further
       leave to remain on 15 January 2019. It was observed that Ms.  Edwards
       was unable to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
       Rules as there were no very significant obstacles to her  integration
       upon return to Jamaica and she could continue her family life in that
       country.

    9. Tyrese was born in Jamaica  and  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  1
       December 2001, when  aged  18  months.  He  was  dependent  upon  his
       father's application for indefinite leave to remain in 2003  and  his
       circumstances were considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2013.
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morgan determined:

           "I find that the appellant and  his  family  (the  family)  have
           private life in the United Kingdom. The respondent's position is
           that this is not a family life case because the respondent would
           remove the family as a single unit. I accept this submission and
           find that the best interests of the child are to live  with  and
           be brought up by the appellant (the father) and his mother  (the
           partner). I find that the key factor weighing in favour  of  the
           family is the fact that the son is now  13  years  old  and  has
           spent over 11 years in the United Kingdom. He joined his parents
           in the United Kingdom in December 2001.  He  attends  Gladesmore
           Community School in Tottenham and is in year 8. I find that  the
           son is well integrated into the British educational  system  and
           in this respect, I note the  son's  witness  statement  and  the
           certificates from his school. I note the best interests  of  the
           child jurisprudence, see above, and in particular  the  guidance
           that I need to consider the  impact  on  the  son's  educational
           development, progress and opportunities in the broader sense.  I
           find that the son's residence, and the fact that  he  has  spent
           his formative early years in the United Kingdom well  integrated
           within the education system enables, justifies and  necessitates
           a finding that his removal would be disproportionate.

           There are other factors that weigh in the family's favour in the
           balancing exercise that I must undertake in respect  of  article
           8. However, I am not persuaded that these factors would outweigh
           the  respondent's  legitimate  rights  to   exercise   effective
           immigration control. I have given  considerable  weight  to  the
           respondent's legitimate right to  exercise  immigration  control
           however, on the particular facts of this case, I find that  this
           does not outweigh the best interests of the child.  In  summary,
           having considered all of the factors in the round, I  find  that
           expecting   the   appellants   to   return   to    Jamaica    is
           disproportionate because  the  appellant's  son  has  spent  his
           formative early years in the United Kingdom. I further note  and
           accept Miss Physsas's submission that if the son were to make an
           application in his own right under the current Immigration Rules
           dealing with article 8 it is difficult to see how this would not
           be successful.

           In summary I find that the Appellant has satisfied me  that  the
           decision to remove the appellant and his family is so serious  a
           breach of the fundamental right protected by  Article  8  as  to
           cause the United Kingdom to be  in  breach  of  its  obligations
           under the ECHR.  I therefore allow the appeal."

   10. Tyrese's application for further leave to remain was refused  by  the
       Secretary of State  on  15  January  2019.  The  Secretary  of  State
       concluded that  the  application  fell  for  refusal  on  grounds  of
       suitability under Section S-LTR as Tyrese's presence in this  country
       was not conducive to the public good consequent to  his  having  been
       sentenced to a nine-month referral order  on  29  December  2016  for
       robbery. It was also observed that Tyrese had been  sentenced  on  17
       October 2018 for possession of a class B drug. The Secretary of State
       further noted that Tyrese had also accumulated four  police  cautions
       between 2017 and 2018.

Hearing Before the FTT

   11. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on  16  July
       2019. At the hearing she was informed  that  Tyrese  had  received  a
       further conviction for possession of cannabis on 2 May 2019.

   12. Mr Currie's position  before  the  Judge  was  that  his  failure  to
       disclose his previous convictions  was  not  intentional.  The  Judge
       considered this issue, at [50]-[53]:

           "The first appellant's account was that the application form had
           been completed by a lawyer called Mr Rushan.  He  said  that  Mr
           Rushan was his lawyer when he was granted  leave  to  remain  in
           2014. He had not kept in touch with Mr  Rushan  over  the  years
           until he needed to submit this application  dated  12  September
           2016. Mr Rushan read  parts  of  the  form  back  to  the  first
           appellant and he duly signed it. He was specifically asked by Ms
           Khan 'when he completed the application, did you  read  it?'  He
           replied, 'he read bits out to me'. He was  also  asked  'did  he
           read the whole  application  to  you?'  He  replied,  'No,  only
           certain bits.' Then he was asked 'You then signed the form,  did
           you read it first?' and he replied, 'he read it  to  me,  and  I
           signed it.' The appellant was consistent in his evidence that he
           had been read parts of the form  back  by  Mr  Rushan  and  then
           signed it. As he was previous representative, he believed he had
           all the basic factors available to him.

           The first appellant was shown a copy of his application form and
           ask to confirm his signature on the form. With all  due  respect
           to the appellant, I got the impression that he may  not  be  the
           most competent reader as he navigated his way through  the  form
           but may not have disclosed this previously. This impression  was
           consistent with  the  appellant's  account  throughout  that  Mr
           Rushan had completed the form and read parts back to him.

           The second appellant  confirmed  that  the  handwriting  on  the
           application form was not her husband's or son's.  She  confirmed
           it was the solicitor who completed it for  them.   Her  evidence
           was not vigorously challenged by Ms Khan.

           Having had the benefit of seeing  and  hearing  from  the  first
           appellant and the second appellant and considering the character
           references provided, I am  satisfied  that  he  has  provided  a
           credible explanation for why he failed to disclose his  previous
           convictions and cautions which on balance,  was  not  done  with
           intent to deceive or be dishonest."

   13. The Judge noted Tyrese's evidence as to his convictions and cautions,
       at [44]-[48]:

           "It is accepted the appellant came into the  UK  aged  about  18
           months. He has lived in the UK ever since. He has never been  to
           Jamaica and all his ties  are  to  the  UK.  It  was  previously
           considered unreasonable for him to leave the  UK  on  the  basis
           that he has been in the UK for over 14 years at the time and was
           at an important part of his education and as  such  was  granted
           limited leave to remain.

           The third appellant accepted he had received  three  convictions
           and two cautions. He explained that the robbery was  of  someone
           he knew, which occurred after a dispute. The appellant, a  youth
           at the  time,  was  given  a  referral  order.  The  appellant's
           evidence was that he was caught with the cannabis and smoked  it
           as a form of stress relief. He described his main stresses since
           leaving school had been his uncertain immigration status,  which
           meant he could not obtain a national insurance  number  and  has
           not been able to work. This has caused  frustration,  especially
           having seen his mother and father work  long  hours  on  minimum
           pay. He said that he still lived at home with  his  parents  and
           was financially supported by them and friends. He described  his
           passion for boxing and sport and how that keeps him positive and
           out of trouble, but he would like to be able to give back to the
           community and help children here. He also expressed remorse  for
           the robbery. I note he has not been  convicted  of  any  further
           offence involving violence.

           The evidence  of  the  third  appellant  was  not  substantially
           challenged by Ms Khan, she asked the appellant what he had  done
           to address his issues, as his last conviction was for possession
           of cannabis earlier this year. The appellant said he  had  tried
           talking  to  his  mother  about  it,  but  there  was  too  much
           uncertainty and stress in the family.

           I found the appellant consistent and credible in  his  evidence.
           The family live in an area which is well reported  for  violence
           and gang crime, the parents are unfortunately in manual skilled,
           low paying employment, coupled with years  of  uncertainty  over
           their immigration status, is in my  judgment  an  understandable
           context for his offending. He has expressed  a  real  desire  to
           turn his life around and I take that  into  account  with  great
           care, because as an adult now,  any  further  convictions  would
           result in  a  custodial  sentence.  The  appellants  assert  the
           respondent is seeking to deport them through the  back  door  by
           relying on the suitability provisions, but should the  appellant
           find himself convicted in circumstances that put him  in  breach
           of the Rules, it may not be deportation through the  back  door.
           It is accepted the appellant's brother was deported from the  UK
           in February 2016.

           Overall, I am satisfied on balance  that  at  the  time  of  the
           application the appellant was under 18, but that even today aged
           19, he is still both emotionally and  financially  dependent  on
           his parents. I remind myself there is no bright line  and  quite
           often, in cases such as these where the appellant has  not  been
           able to form his own independent life,  the  dependency  on  his
           parents still exists which is more than normal emotional ties as
           per Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31. I therefore find  family
           life still exists between the third appellant and his parents."

   14. The Judge considered as to whether it was undesirable for  Tyrese  to
       remain in the United Kingdom, at [57]-[61]:

           "The respondent refused the third appellant's application  under
           S-LTR.1.6, which is a mandatory refusal. This means the decision
           maker must refuse on suitability grounds, unless  the  appellant
           can challenge the facts on which the decision was made.

           The Court of Appeal have considered the issue of  undesirability
           in the recent case of Balajigari v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673.
           Though that case was in relation  to  refusals  under  paragraph
           322(5) covering  discrepancy  of  earning  cases,  paragraph  S-
           LTR.1.6 under Appendix FM applies in the  same  way.  They  both
           cover suitability issues, and both suggest  the  applicant,  who
           because of  their  conduct,  character,  associations  or  other
           reasons make it undesirable for him to remain in the UK.

           The question is whether the third  appellant's  convictions  and
           cautions  amount  to  sufficiency  reprehensible  conduct  which
           having taken  into  account  all  relevant  circumstances,  both
           positive and negative, make his presence undesirable.

           I have already found that the appellant has two convictions from
           2016-2018 for  robbery  and  possession  of  cannabis  and  four
           cautions between 2017-2018. While these  are  serious  offences,
           the  respondent's  own  guidance  states  that  convictions   in
           themselves do not always warrant exclusion from the  suitability
           requirements - IDI Family Migration: Appendix FM  section  1.0b,
           February 2018.

           I have also found that he has shown a credible desire to conduct
           his life in accordance with the laws of the UK  in  the  future,
           but time will tell if that is the case. I  accept  he  has  been
           hampered in seeking  employment  or  further  education  by  the
           uncertainty of his immigration status which is no fault of  his.
           He has shown remorse and insight into his  offending  such  that
           overall, I am satisfied according to S-LTR1.6  that  it  is  not
           undesirable for the third appellant to remain in the UK."

   15. The Judge concluded at [68]-[71] that though Tyrese did not meet  the
       requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)  the  family  could  succeed  on
       article 8 grounds outside of the Rules:

           "In the appellants favour I consider the exceptional delay  that
           was taken by the respondent in making the  decision  originally.
           It was in the region of  8  years.  This  is  an  unconscionable
           delay. I  have  regard  to  (EB  (Kosovo)  which  sets  out  the
           consequences of such a delay. The  appellants  have  established
           closer personal ties with friends and the community  as  can  be
           seen from the letters of support provided.  The  nature  of  the
           appellant's family life would naturally have  strengthened.  The
           application in the decision before me was made in time  and  has
           taken a further 3 years for the respondent to make  a  decision,
           which if made earlier could have resulted in the third appellant
           continuing with his education  and  obtaining  employment  while
           under the age of 18 rather than have  a  precarious  immigration
           status hanging over him.

           In considering the public interest factors under  s.117  of  the
           2002 Act I note firstly neither the first or third appellant are
           subject  to  s.117C;  neither  are  foreign  criminals  and  the
           respondent is not seeking to deport them. I am still required to
           consider the factors in  s.  117B;  all  the  appellant's  speak
           fluent English and the family do not rely on public  funds.  The
           third appellant would be in a position in  the  near  future  to
           find gainful employment and form an independent life of his own.
           I note the unconscionable delay in  the  respondent  determining
           the appellants application in 2014 and again in 2016, which  has
           contributed to a cycle of frustration on the  third  appellant's
           part as he would have acquired status at an earlier  time  as  a
           qualifying child under s.117B(6). In any event had the first and
           third appellant not fallen for  refusal  under  the  suitability
           provisions in this application, there did not appear to  be  any
           further matters in issue either. The first and second  appellant
           were parents of a child, who had lived continuously  in  the  UK
           for more than 7 years and based on the previous finding  it  was
           unreasonable for him to leave, the position  if  anything  would
           have strengthened. I  find  this  reduces  the  public  interest
           significantly.

           The first and second appellant both continue to enjoy  a  family
           life with the third appellant and have been in the UK for almost
           20 years, some of which has been through a  grant  of  leave  to
           remain in 2014 and 2015. They have worked in the UK and built up
           their family life in valid circumstances, to the extent they now
           have grandchildren in the  UK.  I  have  regard  to  the  phrase
           'little weight' used in Kaur [2017] UKUT 00014  which  does  not
           mean 'no weight'.

           In weighing up the pros and cons, I find  the  balance  tips  in
           favour of the  appellants  and  removal  of  the  appellants  in
           circumstances where they would have met the Rules  but  for  the
           delay  on  the  part  of  the  respondent,   would   result   in
           unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellants,  such  that
           their removal would be a disproportionate interference of  their
           family and private life under Article 8."

Grounds of Appeal

   16. The Secretary of State relies upon two grounds of appeal.  The  first
       asserts that the Judge erred in her consideration as  to  whether  Mr
       Currie's former solicitor had acted  negligently  in  completing  the
       application  and  failing  to  provide  details  as  to  his  earlier
       conviction and caution. The second ground concerns both Mr Currie and
       Tyrese, asserting that the Judge failed to resolve a material  matter
       by failing to take into account the criminality of both  men  in  the
       proportionality balancing exercise.

   17. In granting permission to appeal by a decision dated 16 January  2020
       JFtT Saffer observed:

           "It is arguable that the  Judge  has  materially  erred  in  not
           applying BT (Nepal) [2004] UKIAT 00311  or  Mansur  [2018]  UKUT
           00274  (IAC)  regarding  the  former  Solicitor's  conduct,   or
           adequately considered the First and Third Appellants criminality
           or non-disclosure of offences within the Article 8 assessment."

   18. No Rule 24 response was filed by the appellants.

Decision on Error of Law

   19. At the hearing Mr. Singh candidly accepted that ground 2 was  drafted
       on the basis that the Judge had simply 'failed' to 'take into account
       or factor in the criminality of the first and third  appellants  [Mr.
       Currie and Tyrese] in the  proportionality  balancing  exercise'  and
       consequently it was not possible to advance this  ground  because  it
       was abundantly clear that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  criminal
       convictions and cautions  for  the  purpose  of  the  proportionality
       exercise. He observed that both men were not  foreign  criminals  for
       the purpose of section  117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 and that neither man has been sentenced to a term  of
       imprisonment; the criminal behaviour  primarily  being  addressed  by
       cautions, fines, an unpaid work requirement or a referral order.  Mr.
       Singh accepted that he  could  therefore  not  appropriately  advance
       ground 2 and so the Secretary of State's  challenge  to  the  Judge's
       decision as to Tyrese should be dismissed.

   20. In the circumstances, with no challenge to the Judge's  finding  that
       Tyrese remained dependent upon his parents, so enabling  family  life
       to continue existing between the three appellants, Mr. Singh accepted
       that the challenge at paragraph 1(f) of the grounds of appeal  as  to
       such family life continuing for Ms. Edwards in Jamaica fell  away  as
       her son would remain in this country and separation of mother and son
       would be disproportionate on the findings of fact made by the Judge.

   21. Mr. Singh pursued ground 1 in relation to the  Judge's  consideration
       as to whether Mr. Currie intentionally failed to declare his criminal
       convictions when applying for further leave, but accepted that if the
       decision as to Mr. Currie's appeal were to be set aside I would  have
       to remake the decision in circumstances where the Secretary of  State
       accepted that her appeal against the Judge's decision in relation  to
       Tyrese and Ms. Edwards should be dismissed.

   22. Ground 1 details, in its material parts:

           'At  [49]-[53]  of  the  determination,  the  FTTJ  accepts  the
           appellant's account  that  his  acting  solicitor  at  the  time
           completed the form and did not  raise  this  question  with  the
           appellant. Therefore, absolving the first appellant of any blame
           for  the  failure  to  disclose  his  previous  convictions  and
           accepting that his solicitor was negligent.

           It is submitted that the finding fails to take into account  the
           guidance  provided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal   in   BT   (Former
           Solicitors' alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004]  UKIAT  00311,  the
           head note of which states:

                'If an appeal is based in whole or in  part  on  allegations
                about the conduct of former representatives, there  must  be
                evidence that those allegations have been put to the  former
                representative, and the Tribunal must be  shown  either  the
                response or correspondence indicating that there has been no
                response.'

           It is argued that without this allegation  of  negligence  being
           put to the previous solicitor and the opportunity  for  them  to
           respond, it is not open to the FTTJ to  accept  that  the  first
           appellant had not failed to disclose  this  information  on  his
           application for further leave to remain. It is argued that it is
           the  first  appellant's  responsibility  to  ensure   that   all
           information included in the application form is correct.  It  is
           submitted that he cannot blame his  former  solicitor  for  this
           omission, without evidence to show that this has been put to the
           solicitor and they have had the opportunity to respond.

           Similarly, following the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
           Mansur (Immigration adviser's failings:  article  8)  Bangladesh
           [2018] UKUT 00274 (IAC), there has been no complaint made to the
           regulatory body and no findings made regarding any negligence on
           behalf of the first  appellant's  former  solicitor.  Therefore,
           without this finding by the regulatory body, it is  argued  that
           the FTTJ has erred in accepting that the former solicitor is  to
           blame for the failure of the first  appellant  to  disclose  his
           previous convictions. As the  FTTJ  has  found  that  the  first
           appellant did not  act  dishonestly,  it  is  argued  that  this
           finding materially affected the outcome of  the  proportionality
           balance and ultimately the outcome of the appeal.'

   23. Paragraphs S-LTR.4.1 and 4.3 of Appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules
       are discretionary in nature and provide:

           'S-LTR.4.1.  The  applicant  may  be  refused  on   grounds   of
           suitability  if  any  of  paragraphs  S-LTR.4.2.  to  S-LTR.4.5.
           apply.'

           'S-LTR.4.3.   The   applicant   has   previously   made    false
           representations or failed to disclose  material  facts  for  the
           purpose of obtaining a document from the Secretary of State that
           indicates that he or she has a right to  reside  in  the  United
           Kingdom.'

   24. Ms. Moffat informed me that she had not advanced  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal the argument that Mr. Currie's legal representative had
       been negligent. Rather, Mr. Currie's position was that there had been
       innocent non-disclosure.  I  accept  that  this  may  have  been  the
       position Mr. Currie wished to be advanced before the Judge,  but  the
       evidence presented was that the application form had  been  completed
       by the legal representative and only 'parts' were read  back  to  Mr.
       Currie. The oral evidence of Mr. Currie and Ms. Edwards detailed that
       section 6.1 of the application form, where a  question  is  expressly
       asked as to whether an applicant or any dependent has 'been convicted
       of any criminal offence in the UK or any other country', was not read
       to Mr. Currie and he did not personally tick the  box  detailing  the
       answer 'No'. The same position is adopted for the ticking of the 'No'
       box in relation to the question at section  6.3  as  to  whether  the
       applicant has received a caution in this country. In  substance,  the
       complaint can only be successful if a tribunal accepts that the legal
       representative failed to meet the professional standards expected  of
       a lawyer specialising in immigration law in not reading this  section
       of the form to the applicant, failing to ask  relevant  questions  of
       Mr. Currie and ticking two boxes without clear instruction as to  the
       veracity of the purported answers. Mr. Currie's appeal clearly  falls
       into the category of case where a legal representative must be  given
       the opportunity to respond as serious  allegations  are  made  as  to
       professional care and conduct. No  evidence  was  placed  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal that such allegations had been put to Mr.  Rushan
       and consequent to the oral  evidence  presented  at  the  hearing  no
       request for an adjournment was made on behalf of the family  so  that
       the allegation could be put to him: BT (Nepal)  [2004]  UKIAT  00311.
       The Judge therefore materially erred in accepting the evidence of Mr.
       Currie and Ms.  Edwards  as  to  the  actions  of  his  former  legal
       representative in circumstances where Mr. Rushan had not  been  given
       the opportunity to respond to the  serious  allegation  made  against
       him.

   25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal relating  to  the  appeal  of
       Floyd George Currie is set aside.

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  in  respect  of  Fay
       Marie Edwards and Tyrese Rushon Currie.

   Remaking the decision of Floyd George Currie

   27. Ms. Moffatt did not request that upon a material error of  law  being
       found, the remaking of this matter should proceed to a  further  oral
       hearing, and no rule 15(2A)  application  has  been  made  under  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 seeking to  rely  upon
       correspondence with Mr. Rushan as to  the  allegation  of  inadequate
       professional care and conduct.

   28. I therefore proceed to remake the decision on the evidence  that  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal, and consequent  to  Ms.  Edwards  and
       Tyrese having been successful as to their appeals.

   29. Mr. Currie  contends  that  a  professional  lawyer,  experienced  in
       immigration law, took the step of not  reading  all  sections  of  an
       application  form  to  him,  before  completing  the   form   without
       appropriate instructions. The  question  of  innocent  non-disclosure
       rests upon  the  professional  lawyer  adopting  this  unsatisfactory
       approach. Without Mr.  Rushan  having  been  asked  to  address  this
       allegation as to poor professional care  and  conduct,  the  Tribunal
       cannot appropriately find that he acted in such manner. As Mr. Currie
       does not advance an alternative  as  to  his  non-disclosure  of  his
       convictions  and  cautions,  I   am   satisfied   that   Mr.   Currie
       intentionally  failed  to  disclose  his  previous   conviction   and
       cautions. He is therefore unable to succeed under Appendix FM to  the
       Immigration Rules. Nor can he satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph
       276ADE of the Rules.

   30. Mr. Currie can appropriately rely upon the Judge's finding, following
       a fact-sensitive  consideration,  that  family  life  exists  between
       mother, father and son and that at the present  time  Tyrese  remains
       dependent on his parents: Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] I.N.L.R. 170.  The  uncontested
       findings of fact at [68]-[71] remain applicable  to  Mr.  Currie.  By
       being successful on appeal, mother and son have  established  that  a
       requirement that they leave this  country  and  relocate  to  Jamaica
       would be a disproportionate interference in  their  protected  family
       and private life rights. I am satisfied to the required standard that
       a decision to  remove  Mr.  Currie  in  such  circumstances,  and  to
       separate him from his son who remains dependent upon him, as well  as
       separate him from his partner, would be so serious a  breach  of  his
       protected article 8 rights as  to  amount  to  such  disproportionate
       interference outweighing  the  public  interest  in  his  removal.  I
       therefore find that Mr. Currie succeeds on article 8 grounds, outside
       of the Immigration Rules.

   Notice of Decision

   31. In respect of Fay Marie Edwards and Tyrese Rushon Currie  the  making
       of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
       of a material error of law and the decision allowing their appeals on
       human rights (article 8) grounds is upheld. The Secretary of  State's
       appeal in relation to these two appellants is dismissed.

   32. The First-tier Tribunal erred materially  in  respect  of  Mr.  Floyd
       George Currie for the reasons identified  and  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal in respect of Mr. Currie, dated 1  October  2019,
       is set aside.

   33. Upon remaking the decision, the appeal of  Mr.  Floyd  George  Currie
       against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department dated 19 January 2019 is allowed on human rights  (article
       8) grounds.

   34. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 9 March 2020


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal decided, having  allowed  the  appellant's  appeals,
that no fee award was to made, as the respondent's decision  was  reasonable
at the date of decision.

No representations were made to the contrary on  behalf  of  the  appellants
before me.

No fee award is made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 9 March 2020


