
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03127/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely via Field House       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th February 2021                 |On 2nd March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Rhomaine [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Berry instructed by Wilson Barca LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because minors are  involved  and  the  sensitive  nature  of
their medical conditions.


 1. The application for permission to appeal was filed by the Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless  for  the  purposes  of  this  decision  I  shall
    describe the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malone promulgated on 4th February  2020,  allowing
    the appellant's appeal against the refusal by the Secretary of State on
    4th February 2019 of the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  against  a
    deportation decision under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 4th August 1979,  and  on
    6th October 2006 was convicted and sentenced to 30 months  imprisonment
    for possession with intent to supply a class A drug.  He had previously
    been convicted, on 22nd August 2006, of re-entering the UK in breach of
    a deportation order and sentenced  to  10  weeks  in  prison.   He  had
    entered the UK on 18th May 2000, was arrested and  was  served  with  a
    notice as an illegal overstayer in 2004 and was removed to  Jamaica  in
    2006.

 3. The appellant was married in 2002 (now divorced) and had a child namely
    Tr, a British citizen born on 29th August 2001 (now at university).  In
    2003 he began a relationship with Ms M, and they have two children  Ke,
    a British citizen born on 17th November 2005 and Ta, a British citizen,
    born on 25th May 2008.  Ms M and  children  live  with  the  appellant.
    Additionally JJ, the appellant's nephew is British born on  12th  April
    2013 (now nearly 7 years old) and lives with the family as  the  result
    of a Special Guardianship Order made in favour of Ms M.  The mother (Ms
    M's sister) was an alcoholic and is out of the picture.  The  appellant
    and Ms M live in a home she owns with a mortgage, and she runs her  own
    business part-time.  He is not permitted to  work  but  cares  for  the
    children.   These facts were found by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The application for permission to appeal, submitted that the judge  had
    erred in law by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters, made a misdirection in law and  made  findings  which
    were irrational.  In effect the  approach  to  the  assessment  of  the
    impact of deportation on  the  appellant's  children  was  flawed  with
    reference to Section 117C of Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 5. The grounds for permission to appeal filed by the  Secretary  of  State
    set out that the judge relied on the special relationship with  JJ  but
    had given inadequate reasons why Ms M could  not  care  for  the  three
    children.   She worked 16 hours per week at the surgery and  spent  the
    rest of her time trading cosmetic products on eBay.  It was noted  that
    she suffered from rheumatoid arthritis and chronic asthma but there was
    no finding that she would  be  unable  to  spend  more  time  with  the
    children.  The judge placed more onus on her earning power  than  care.
    There was no indication that the appellant played a significant medical
    role.   It was accepted that the judge had directed himself to the high
    threshold test required on undue harshness, but the underlying facts of
    the appeal did not reveal circumstances that came close to the relevant
    test.  The grounds cited SSHD v PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213,
    which identified the issue was whether there was evidence on  which  it
    was properly open to the judge to find  that  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant would result in a degree of harshness going beyond what would
    necessarily be involved for any partner or child of a foreign  criminal
    facing deportation.  The children would face great distress  but  those
    were the likely consequences of any deportation.

 6. The grounds added that the judge had relied  on  the  same  facts  when
    coming to the  conclusions  on  undue  harshness  and  very  compelling
    circumstances.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin.

 8. At the hearing Mr Melvin acknowledged that the case law had  moved  on,
    but he submitted, the facts found in this decision could not fulfil the
    requisite tests.  The judge had made no reference  to  the  independent
    social worker's report.  Mr Melvin observed that Ta was said  to  be  a
    child with autism and yet attended mainstream school.

 9. Mr Berry submitted that there was no question of a misdirection on  the
    law. HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 had clarified the law on the
    test of undue harshness  and  the  judge  had  clearly  identified  the
    correct  standard  and  directed  himself/herself  properly.   On   the
    findings and the assessment of the evidence the threshold  was  clearly
    met with regards undue harshness and additionally, on  very  compelling
    circumstances. The  judge  considered  the  circumstances  of  all  the
    children.

10. At paragraph 60 the judge set out the test in law citing  KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53. When assessing the evidence, the judge  considered  all
    the children, JJ has foetal alcohol syndrome, he regards the  appellant
    as his parent, and he calls him dad.  The judge assessed the  role  the
    appellant played in the context that the partner is self-employed  part
    time.  The  finding  at  paragraph  63  in  relation  to  JJ  was  that
    deportation would have a  particular  impact  on  him  because  he  had
    profound special needs and was  under  a  Special  Guardianship  Order.
    That order was made in the circumstances that the  appellant  would  be
    living with the family.  The alternative is that the child would be  in
    care.

11. The partner has rheumatoid arthritis and Ta is  autistic.   There  were
    particularly tragic circumstances in that Ms M's previous child N  died
    from chronic asthma.  The variety of  problems  was  explained  by  the
    judge in the decision. It was open to the judge to  make  the  findings
    he/she did. Additionally the judge finds the  very  compelling  reasons
    test was met and the assessment of facts was well within the  reasoning
    of the Judge.

    Analysis

12. The Court of Appel in Lowe v SSHD   [2021]  EWCA  62  referred  to  and
    repeated the judgment of Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani  UK  Ltd.
    [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at paragraph 114 as follows:

          "Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by recent cases at
          the highest level, not to interfere  with  findings  of  fact  by
          trial judges, unless compelled to do so. This applies not only to
          findings of primary fact, but also to  the  evaluation  of  those
          facts and to inferences to be drawn from them. The best known  of
          these cases are: Biogen Inc v Medeva plc [1977] RPC1; Piglowska v
          Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360; Datec  Electronics  Holdings  Ltd  v
          United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23 [2007] 1 WLR 1325; Re B
          (A Child) (Care Proceedings: Threshold Criteria) [2013]  UKSC  33
          [2013] 1 WLR 1911 and most recently and comprehensively McGraddie
          v McGraddie [2013] UKSC 58 [2013]  1  WLR  2477.  These  are  all
          decisions either of the House of Lords or of the  Supreme  Court.
          The reasons for this approach are many. They include.
            i) The expertise of a trial judge is in determining what facts
            are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what those
            facts are if they are disputed.
            ii) The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the first and last
            night of the show.
            iii) Duplication of the trial judge's role on appeal is a
            disproportionate use of the limited resources of an appellate
            court and will seldom lead to a different outcome in an
            individual case.
            iv) In making his decisions the trial judge will have regard to
            the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an
            appellate court will only be island hopping.
            v) The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any event, be
            recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts of
            evidence).
            vi) Thus even if it were possible to duplicate the role of the
            trial judge, it cannot in practice be done".

13. The Upper Tribunal cannot  thus  merely  substitute  its  own  decision
    simply where that decision would be different decision. There  must  be
    an error of law.

14. Subsequent to the decision by Judge Malone and the formulation  of  the
    grounds for permission, the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2020]
    EWCA Civ 1176, explained KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, and at  paragraph
    56 [my underlining] and identifies that:

           "the risks of  treating  KO  as  establishing  a  touchstone  of
           whether the degree of  harshness  goes  beyond  "that  which  is
           ordinarily expected  by  the  deportation  of  a  parent".  Lord
           Carnwath does not in fact use that phrase, but  a  reference  to
           "nothing  out  of  the  ordinary"  appears  in  UTJ   Southern's
           decision. I  see  rather  more  force  in  this  submission.  As
           explained above, the test under section  117C  (5)  does  indeed
           require an appellant to establish a degree  of  harshness  going
           beyond a threshold "acceptable" level.  It  is  not  necessarily
           wrong to describe that as an "ordinary" level of harshness,  and
           I note that Lord Carnwath did not jib at UTJ Southern's  use  of
           that term. However, I think the Appellants are  right  to  point
           out that it may be misleading if used incautiously.  There  seem
           to me to be two (related) risks. First, "ordinary" is capable of
           being understood as meaning anything which is  not  exceptional,
           or in any event rare. That is  not  the  correct  approach:  see
           para. 52 above. There is no reason in  principle  why  cases  of
           "undue" harshness may not occur  quite  commonly.  Secondly,  if
           tribunals treat the essential question as being "is  this  level
           of harshness out of the ordinary?" they may be tempted  to  find
           that Exception 2 does not apply simply on  the  basis  that  the
           situation fits  into  some  commonly-encountered  pattern.  That
           would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by  a  parent's
           deportation will depend on an almost infinitely  variable  range
           of circumstances and it is not possible to identify  a  baseline
           of "ordinariness". Simply by  way  of  example,  the  degree  of
           harshness of the impact may be affected by the child's  age;  by
           whether the parent lives  with  them  (NB  that  a  divorced  or
           separated  father  may  still  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with a child who lives with  the  mother);  by  the
           degree of the child's emotional dependence on the parent; by the
           financial consequences of his deportation; by  the  availability
           of emotional and financial support from a remaining  parent  and
           other family members; by the  practicability  of  maintaining  a
           relationship with the deported parent; and of course by all  the
           individual characteristics of the child".

15. The FTT judge  in  this  case  had  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  the
    witnesses' evidence and reached a broad evaluation  decision  based  on
    the relevant facts.  As required by HA(Iraq), the judge considered  the
    particular circumstances of the children individually and jointly,  and
    considered whether for those children, there would be undue  harshness.
    Each child will differ.   The judge, as submitted by Mr Berry,  made  a
    series of relevant and apposite findings on the  children  who  have  a
    variety of difficulties and needs.

16. From paragraph 20 onwards, the judge appropriately set  out  the  legal
    tests  with  reference  to  undue   harshness   and   very   compelling
    circumstances and understood that it was open to him  when  considering
    very compelling circumstances to factor in the findings in relation  to
    undue harshness.   That said, the judge was aware that he was  applying
    Section 117C and the relevant exceptions engaged.   At paragraph 61 the
    judge acknowledged that 'unduly' harsh threshold was a very  high  one.
    A careful reading of the decision shows that  the  judge  proceeded  to
    apply properly those legal tests.

17. None of  the  findings  is  perverse,  indeed  that  was  not  properly
    asserted, and they are made for cogent reasons.  The  failure  to  cite
    the independent social worker report is not material  because  it  only
    supported the findings the judge made  on  the  children.    The  judge
    found and factored  in  that  Ta  was  autistic  and  referred  to  the
    specialist medical reports therein at [45]  -  [47].   Her  asthma  was
    relevant and that included the circumstances of the tragic death of the
    previous child through asthma.  The judge was aware that K was a  child
    with no health issues.   The judge noted that Tr was also very attached
    to the father owing to her troubled upbringing with her mother but  the
    judge identified that she was 18.  The approach was balanced.

18. The judge clearly found that the appellant had a pivotal  role  in  the
    family, that the mother had never looked after all the children  alone,
    has her own health issues and was the major breadwinner   The judge did
    not find in favour of the  appeal  because  the  mother  was  the  sole
    breadwinner (although no doubt this would have a significant impact  on
    the children if the source of income  were  removed)  and  clearly  was
    cognisant of the role that the appellant played as father in supporting
    the children as carer and cook and that he had  long  been  central  to
    their lives.  It was relevant that Ms M owned and paid the mortgage  on
    the family's accommodation.

19. From [48] onwards the judge considered the  circumstances  of  JJ,  now
    seven years old, a child of the  family  with  a  Special  Guardianship
    Order made knowing that the appellant was  part  of  the  family.   The
    judge described his Foetal alcohol syndrome, that he was already behind
    at school and that he spent most of his time with the  appellant.    JJ
    came to the family after the appellant was released from prison [52].

20. At [56] the judge found

           'I am satisfied that Ms M...  and  the  appellant  have  defined
           roles.  Ms M is the "breadwinner", while the  appellant  is  the
           "home maker".  He does  the  housework  and  the  shopping.   He
           prepares and cooked nearly all of the family meals.  Ms M  helps
           when she can, but    he  is  responsible  for  the  laundry  and
           cleaning'.

21.  At  [58]  the  judge,  however,   also   found  that  Ms  M...  had  a
    debilitating illness (which would in turn affect the interests  of  the
    children and their care)  but  was  aware  that  the  relationship  had
    commenced when the status of the appellant was unlawful  and  thus  had
    limited weight but also found at paragraph 59

           'two of the three children living at  home  suffer  from  severe
           disabilities.  Ta is autistic  and  asthmatic.   JJ  has  Foetal
           Alcohol Syndrome and a  'shadow;  over  the  brain.   Both  will
           experience challenging  problems  ahead.   The  absence  of  the
           appellant from their lives would mean a major  change  in  their
           family life...Were the appellant to be deported  he  [JJ]  would
           think he was losing his only parent.  The appellant is also  his
           primary carer and has been for as long as JJ can remember'.

22. It was thus open to the judge, on all  the  findings  which  cannot  be
    described as perverse, to conclude that the separation would indeed  by
    unduly harsh on the children, particularly JJ and  Ta.   That  decision
    was  very  far  indeed  from  the   high   threshold   of   perversity.
    Notwithstanding his findings the  judge  proceeded  to  consider  'very
    compelling circumstances'.

23.  At paragraph 63 the judge encapsulated the problems faced by JJ and at
    paragraph 64 the conclusion was reached that was  he  had  always  been
    cared for by the appellant.

24. Finally at paragraph 70 the judge stated

           'As I have found the appellant's removal would be  unduly  harsh
           for JJ, K and Ta, this appeal must be allowed.  It must also  be
           allowed on the basis that I have found there are very compelling
           circumstances over and above  the  exception  set  out  in  'sub
           paragraphs (4) and (5) of s.117C of the 2002 Act'.

25. As it was written, the conclusions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    entirely open to the judge on both the test of unduly  harsh  and  very
    compelling circumstances.  Even  if  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    'medical' role that the appellant  undertook  this  omission  does  not
    undermine the judgment overall.  Mr Melvin observed that Ta was not  at
    a  special  school  even  though  she  had  autism.   The  longstanding
    educational policy of inclusion means that  frequently,  children  with
    special education needs will attend mainstream school. The findings  of
    the judge therefore cannot be undermined on the basis that the child Ta
    did not attend a special school.  On  the  evidence  the  findings  and
    conclusions were open to the judge.

26. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  cannot  be  described  as
    having materially erred in  law  by  reason  of  misdirection  in  law,
    inadequate findings or irrational  findings.   The  determination  will
    stand.

Anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 8th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
