
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01285/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House by Teams        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 27th May 2021                 |On the 17th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                               YAKHOUBA CONTE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Angela Conte.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Gambia.  He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  respondent  on  8  December  2019
    refusing him entry clearance as the spouse of Mrs Conte who  represents
    him before me today.  The appeal was to be determined without a hearing
    on the basis of the papers before the Tribunal.  Judge Doyle  made  his
    decision on 27 November 2020.  The papers indicate that the appeal  was
    "heard", but it is apparent from both the fee paid and the text of  the
    decision itself that there was no hearing.  Judge Doyle  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The ground of appeal, on the basis  of  which  permission  was
    granted by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was  that  there  was
    arguably a procedural error in that the decision was  made  before  the
    appellant had been properly  informed  that  the  time  for  submitting
    further evidence had ended.

 2. The file does not appear to be complete, and, as Mr Clarke told me, the
    Home Office Presenting Officers Unit  also  does  not  appear  to  have
    complete papers.  The crucial documents so far as I can see in relation
    to the grounds of appeal are a letter sent to Mrs Conte  on  26  August
    2020 by the "IAC Customer Service", reading as follows:

         "Your appeal has not listed for paper  hearing.   When  the  appeal
         listed for paper hearing an IA35 (Paper Submission Notice) will  be
         sent to all parties specify the last date where supported documents
         need to be submitted."

    There follow  three  paragraphs  of  general  advice,  thanks,  and  an
    invitation to "tell us how we did today".

 3. Mrs Conte wrote back to the author of that letter saying that  she  did
    not understand it.  She received the following response  on  27  August
    2020:

         "You can send supported documents at any time of the appeal process
         before the appeal considered by the Immigration Judge."

    The same three paragraphs of  general  advice,  thanks  and  invitation
    follow.

 4. I take it that by "supported" in both letters, "supporting"  is  meant.
    Even with that emendation, which would not necessarily be apparent to a
    Tribunal user, the letters are not expressed in a clear or helpful way.
     It is a pity that this is the mode in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    communicates with appellants and their representatives.  Be that as  it
    may, there is no record on the file that the letter IA35 was ever sent.
     As a result, the appellant's position is  that  the  judge's  decision
    came at a time when  he  and  his  wife  thought  there  was  still  an
    opportunity to put in further submissions; and it does look  as  though
    there is material now on the file which the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not take into account.

 5. In the circumstances, Mr Clarke did not resist the suggestion that  the
    matter be redetermined by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



 6. In order for that to happen, I will direct as indicated at the  end  of
    this decision.

 7. I set aside the decision of Judge Doyle for error of law.  I direct  as
    follows:

      1. Any further material which the appellant wishes to be considered as
         supporting      his      appeal      must      be      sent      to
         customer.service@justice.gov.uk so as to be received no later  than
         two weeks after the date this decision is sent to the parties.

      2. As soon as practicable following the expiry of the time limited  by
         the previous paragraph, the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is to
         be redetermined without a hearing  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
         Doyle.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 2 June 2021
