
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01352/2017
     Hu/01360/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 22nd November 2018                 |On 28th December 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   [n j m]
                                   [n n m]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Dolan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Courtney, promulgated on 4th January 2018, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on 11th December 2017.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are two sibling sisters.  They were born on 4th February
    2008 and 7th May 2010 respectively.  Both  are  citizens  of  Zimbabwe.
    Both applied as dependants of their paternal aunt, a Miss  [NM],  their
    Sponsor, a British citizen, in the United Kingdom.  Their  applications
    were refused on 21st December 2016.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellants' claim is that the  Appellants  initially
    lived with their maternal grandmother,  [DC],  for  approximately  four
    months, before moving to live with their aunt,  [LC],  but  she  is  no
    longer able to look after these  two  girls  under  10  years  of  age,
    because she is a single mother, has her own child, and  has  employment
    concerns of her own.  This is not to mention  the  fact  that  she  had
    never agreed to look after these two children on a long-term  basis  in
    perpetuity.  The basis of the claim  is  that  there  are  serious  and
    compelling circumstances that made their exclusion undesirable from the
    UK pursuant to paragraph 297(i)(a) to (e).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, in looking at paragraph 297(i)(f), which deals  specifically
    with "serious and compelling family or other considerations which  make
    exclusion of the children undesirable, had  regard  to  the  well-known
    decision in Mundeba (Section 55 at  paragraph  297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT
    00088, and concluded that,

         "There must be an enquiry into whether there is evidence of neglect
         or abuse and whether there are unmet needs that should  be  catered
         for.  The assessment  involves  consideration  as  to  whether  the
         combination  of  circumstances   are   sufficiently   serious   and
         compelling to require admission to the UK" (see paragraph 18).

 5. The judge went on to observe that the analysis is one of degree in kind
    and it "sets a high threshold that excludes cases were,  without  more,
    it is simply the wish of the parties to  be  together  however  natural
    their ambition may be" (paragraph 18).  The  judge  had  regard  to  an
    independent social worker's report, who had made home visits to  Harare
    on 16th January 2017 and 20th March 2017, and she had seen the  Sponsor
    present there on her visit to the Appellants, and  had  concluded  that
    there was no doubt that "there is  great  affection  and  love  between
    them" (paragraph 19).  The judge took account of the  claim  that  [LC]
    was unwilling and unable to take care of  the  girls  "on  a  long-term
    basis", but went on to say that, "However, there is no letter from  her
    stating that she no longer wishes to care  for  the  girls"  (paragraph
    23).   The  judge  also  concluded  that,  although  the  Appellant  is
    intending to look for jobs in Namibia and South Africa,  the  fact  was
    that, "At present [LC]'s plans for employment  abroad  are  at  a  very
    early stage, and may never  come  to  fruition.   No  reason  has  been
    advanced as to why she could  not  take  the  girls  with  her  if  she
    relocated" (paragraph 27).  Finally, the judge went  on  to  say  that,
    "There  has  been  no   suggestion   that   the   Appellants'   current
    accommodation is in any way substandard.  They have been  looked  after
    by their maternal aunt who is meeting their basic needs ..." (paragraph
    29).  Accordingly, there was no  evidence  of  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations that  made  exclusion  of  the  children
    undesirable (paragraph 30).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the independent  social  worker's
    report, had set out detailed evidence of enquiries made by  the  social
    worker, and insufficient analysis of the factors set up had been  taken
    into account by  the  judge,  especially  given  the  obligation  under
    Section 55 of the BCIA 2009, before the judge came to the conclusion to
    dismiss  the  appeals.   Moreover,  [LC]'s  own  view  was   that   the
    arrangements to look after children were of "a  temporary  nature"  and
    she could not carry on doing so on a long-term basis.   The  judge  did
    not make a finding on whether or not she accepts the  evidence  of  the
    social worker regarding Miss [LC]'s disallowing of  any  responsibility
    to take care of her nieces in the long term.   Importantly,  the  judge
    also stated that the judge failed to make  a  finding  as  to  "whether
    there is stability in the Appellants' care and  the  impact  that  Miss
    [LC]'s departure from Zimbabwe will have" (Ground 4).

 8. On 2nd October 2018 permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge has attached arguably insufficient  weight  to  the  evidence
    relating to "stability of  care"  and  the  availability  of  emotional
    support".

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 22nd November 2018, Mr  Dolan,  made  clear
    and well measured submissions before me, and stated that, not only  was
    it the case that the judge had failed to attach  proper  weight  to  an
    independent social worker's report as an expert in this case, but  that
    the judge had failed to heed the strictures in Mundeba comprehensively.
     What Mundeba had done  was  to  identify  three  particular  areas  of
    concern which an enquiry should focus on before it could  be  concluded
    that there was, or there was not, serious and compelling  circumstances
    making exclusion desirable, and these  were  "evidence  of  neglect  or
    abuse, unmet needs, and stability.  The  judge  had  only  focused  (at
    paragraph 18) on the evidence of neglect or abuse and the  unmet  needs
    of the Appellants.   There  was  no  mention  at  all  in  any  of  the
    determination that there had been consideration of  the  "stability  of
    arrangements" for the Appellants' care particularly, given  the  avowed
    statement of [LC] that she could not look after the children on a long-
    term basis forever.

10. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  judge  did  take  proper
    account of the social worker's report (which appears at pages 1  to  20
    of the bundle) and she focused upon paragraph 11 in  particular,  which
    is set out in terms in the determination itself (at paragraph 23) where
    it is even recognised that she claimed that "she never signed up to  be
    a full-time carer for these children",  particularly  as  she  was  now
    "enquiring for opportunities for employment in  neighbouring  countries
    like Namibia and South Africa" (paragraph 23).  The judge not only sets
    this out verbatim, but gives a proper consideration (at  paragraph  27)
    where the judge observes that, "At present [LC]'s plans for  employment
    abroad are at a very early stage, and  may  never  come  to  fruition".
    This finding was particularly  important,  given  that  the  sponsoring
    aunt's own evidence in the UK before the judge was that [LC] did have a
    partner who stayed with her, and if this was  so,  then  any  plans  of
    moving to Namibia or South Africa, wold have to involve a consideration
    by [LC] of the  moves  impact  upon  her  partner.   Finally,  although
    "stability" was not expressly mentioned, it was clear that  overall  it
    was taken into account in that the judge makes it clear  (at  paragraph
    29) that "there has been no suggestion  that  the  Appellants'  current
    accommodation is in any way substandard" and that there was no question
    of any unmet need.

11. In reply Mr Dolan submitted that the fact remained that the  judge  had
    not considered "stability" as a specific criterion in  his  own  light,
    which had been expressly set out "in Mundeba", as a matter to be looked
    into.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision of  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

13. Whereas I recognise entirely the argument made by Mr  Dolan,  that  the
    judge does not  in  terms  refer  to  "stability"  of  the  Appellant's
    arrangement in their living with their aunt,  [LC],  the  determination
    has to be read as a whole.  The judge sets out the  legal  position  in
    Mundeba at considerable length  (at  paragraph  18),  recognising  that
    there is "a high threshold" that has to be met.  The judge then goes on
    to consider the  social  worker's  report  immediately  thereafter  (at
    paragraphs 19 to 20).  It is then stated that there is no  letter  from
    [LC] "stating that  she  no  longer  wishes  to  care  for  the  girls"
    (paragraph 23).  Whereas regard is had to the  written  statement  that
    [LC] is not in a position to look after the  children  on  a  long-term
    basis because "she never signed up to being  a  full-time  carer",  the
    judge is of the view that, any designs that [LC] may have of relocating
    to Namibia or South Africa, "are at a very early stage, and  may  never
    come to fruition"  (paragraph  27).   In  any  event,  given  that  the
    children have always been looked after by [LC] in the recent past,  and
    not looked after by the sponsoring aunt in the UK, the  judge  properly
    came to the conclusion that, "No reason has been advanced as to why she
    could not take the girls with her if she relocated" (paragraph 27).

14. These conclusions eventually are all sustained by  a  final  conclusion
    (at paragraph 29), where the judge refers to there being no evidence of
    any substandard accommodation being provided for the children,  or  any
    failing in meeting their basic needs, in circumstances where "there  is
    still regular remittances from the Sponsor", and  "have  a  grandmother
    and an  uncle residing in Zimbabwe", together with an  absence  of  any
    evidence to show that their basic needs are unmet or that they  are  at
    any risk of harm.

15. Accordingly, taken in its entirety, the decision does  not  demonstrate
    that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  stability  of  the
    Appellants' living arrangements and there is no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision does not warrant an error of law such that it falls to  be
    set aside.  The decision shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018

