
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01334/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing|                                  |
|On 19 September 2017                      |On 10 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              mrs bushra arshad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Farani, Javid,
Taylor, Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of  Pakistan  who  arrived  in
    this country on 1 August 2006 with leave to enter as  a  student  which
    was renewed on a number of occasions.  She has a husband who had  leave
    to enter as a dependant and whilst in this country they have had  three
    children.  The oldest is now 8, the second child a little over 2 and  a
    third child was born in August 2016.

 2. The appellant applied for further leave to remain on Article 8  grounds
    which decision was refused on 18 June 2016.  At that time  her  husband
    had an outstanding appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  him  further
    leave and in the course of the  refusal  decision  in  respect  of  her
    application the respondent notified the appellant that she should state
    any further reasons she might have for being allowed to remain pursuant
    to Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  At
    the time of the application her youngest child had not yet  been  born.
    Subsequently, the appellant's position changed in that in January  2016
    her husband was given indefinite leave to remain following a successful
    appeal which he had brought against the respondent's decision to refuse
    his application for leave to  remain.   It  was  after  this  that  the
    couple's third child was born and that child is a British  citizen  and
    has obtained a British passport.   The  reason  why  he  is  a  British
    citizen is because at the time of his birth his father was settled here
    because as noted by that time he had indefinite leave to remain.

 3. The appellant's appeal against the decision which had been made in June
    2015 was  heard  at  Hatton  Cross  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre on 3 October 2016 but in her Decision and Reasons  promulgated
    on 10 November 2016 she dismissed the appeal.  She did so  even  though
    the appellant's circumstances by this time had changed and in  addition
    to having a child who is over 7 years old she was also the mother of  a
    British citizen, that is the youngest child and both of these  children
    were "qualifying children for the purposes of Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  because  within  Section
    117D a qualifying child is defined as a person who is under the age  of
    18, who is either a British citizen or who has lived in the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more.

 4. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require a person's removal where -

             (a)   a  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

 5. When this appeal was first before me on 18 July 2017, I noted that  had
    the judge been able to take into consideration the new position of  the
    appellant  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  the  changes   in   her
    circumstances (that is that she was now the mother of a British  child)
    were significant.  I noted also that there was a  potential  difficulty
    in that by Section 85 of the 2002 Act which came into force in  respect
    of applications made after April 2015 "The Tribunal must not consider a
    new matter unless the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent
    to do so".  I also gave my reasons for finding that the  birth  of  the
    new baby was technically a "new matter" having regard to Section 85(6).



 6. However, I also noted (because I had been  referred  to  it)  that  the
    respondent's guidance published to caseworkers and other employees  set
    out  the  appropriate  course  which  should  be  followed   where   an
    application of this sort  (that  is  to  be  allowed  to  rely  on  new
    evidence) is made and according to this guidance the respondent  should
    normally give permission for these new matters to be considered because
    otherwise a new application would inevitably be made which  would  lead
    to a considerable wasting of both the respondent's time and  ultimately
    the Tribunal's time also.

 7. Regrettably the judge did not in my judgment consider properly  whether
    or not she had jurisdiction to consider new matters and if she did  not
    to have made proper enquiry as to what guidance there was  and  whether
    it was appropriate to consider whether an adjournment should be granted
    so the matter could be properly canvassed before her (see paragraph  17
    of my earlier decision).  Accordingly, for this  reason  I  found  that
    Judge Plumptre's decision had contained a material error  of  law  such
    that it had to be remade.  I was particularly concerned that the  judge
    refused to draw the inference from the fact that the youngest child was
    a British citizen that the father had indefinite leave to remain  which
    I regarded as inexplicable, because as was accepted on  behalf  of  the
    respondent at the previous hearing before me, there was simply no other
    basis upon which the youngest child would or could have  been  entitled
    to British citizenship.

 8. Subsequent to my giving this decision as to error of  law  (but  before
    the decision was promulgated) the respondent notified the Tribunal that
    "In line with our guidance, it is appropriate to give  consent  to  the
    new evidence to be considered by the Tribunal" and so at this  hearing,
    in which I shall be remaking the decision, I am able to take account of
    all of the evidence, and in particular the fact that the  appellant  is
    the mother of a British citizen child.

 9. The question therefore which this Tribunal has to consider in light  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, it being the case that  the  appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  not  only  the
    older child who has been here for  over  seven  years  and  is  thus  a
    qualifying child for these purposes but also the baby who is a  British
    citizen, is whether "it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom".

10. Having regard to the respondent's  policy  in  such  circumstances,  on
    behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke properly concedes  that  he  cannot
    argue that it would be reasonable to expect the British  citizen  child
    to leave the UK and therefore he does not oppose  this  appeal.   There
    was an issue as  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years' lawful residence,
    but in light of the fact that there was a gap of  some  months  in  her
    lawful residence that aspect of the appeal is no longer pursued.

11. Accordingly,  in  light  of  the  concession  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, which in the circumstances of this case was clearly rightly
    made, I have no hesitation in allowing this appeal on  the  basis  that
    the public interest does not require this  appellant's  removal  having
    regard to the provisions of Section 117B(6).  I accordingly re-make the
    decision as follows:

Notice of Decision

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Plumptre   as
containing a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 9 October 2017


