
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01222/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2019                    |On 24th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 m P K E V D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision made by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  27th  October
    2017 to refuse his application for entry clearance to the  UK  to  join
    his mother (the Sponsor) under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31st December 2018.  The Appellant now appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce  on  8th
    May 2019.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.  The
    Judge did not accept that the Appellant's father had  died  as  claimed
    and dismissed the appeal under paragraph 297 (i) (d) [11-25]. The Judge
    went on to consider whether the Appellant  had  demonstrated  that  the
    Sponsor has sole responsibility for him under paragraph 297(i) (e)  and
    dismissed the appeal on that basis too.

Error of Law

 3. Five Grounds of Appeal are put forward.  These were  elaborated  by  Mr
    Lee at the hearing.  Mr Lee made submissions firstly on Grounds 1 and 5
    and, as I consider that these  grounds  have  been  made  out,  I  will
    consider them first.

 4. It is contended in the first ground that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in that she directed herself at paragraph  4  that,  under
    Section 84(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, she could only consider the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the
    time of the decision. Mr Less submitted that this is    a  misdirection
    as it fails to take account of the amended Section 84  introduced  from
    20th October 2014 by the Immigration Act 2014, which  means  that  this
    appeal is grounded on the claim that the  decision  is  unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. He submitted that, contrary  to
    the Judge's direction at paragraph 4, the effect of this  is  that  the
    appeal is no longer limited to consideration of  the  circumstances  at
    the date of the decision.  Mr Lee accepted that he would have  to  show
    that this was a material  misdirection,  but  in  his  submission  this
    misdirection is interconnected with the other grounds.

 5. Whilst I accept that the misstatement of the law at paragraph 4 may not
    necessarily be a material error,  it  appears  from  the  body  of  the
    decision that the judge considered the circumstances at the time of the
    decision rather than at the time of the  hearing.   I  accept  that  at
    paragraph 5 the judge set out that the basis  of  the  application  was
    that the Appellant's biological father is said to  have  died  on  13th
    September 2014 and that he was being looked after by his maternal  aunt
    and maternal grandmother, but that the maternal aunt  had  married  and
    moved away and the grandmother had suffered a decline in her health and
    could not care for the Appellant.

 6. However the Judge failed to  deal  with  these  recent  events  in  the
    substance of the decision.  At paragraphs 26 to 39 the judge considered
    the issue of sole  responsibility  under  paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She accepted at paragraph 30 that  the  Appellant's
    father has not been present in his life for the past  few  years  since
    around the end of 2012  and  that  he  has  essentially  abdicated  any
    responsibility for his child by disappearing or taking no part  in  the
    child's upbringing.  The judge took into account what happened  in  the
    past at [32] where she set out that the Sponsor left her son aged 3  in
    Ghana to come to the UK and saw him in 2007 and 2008 and  did  not  see
    him again until 2016.  The judge accepted the Sponsor's role  with  the
    Appellant's life on an ongoing basis at paragraph 33.  The  judge  went
    on to deal with financial contributions accepting that the  remittances
    thus far in 2016 and  2018  are  sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Sponsor was financially supporting the Appellant.  However, there is no
    engagement with the evidence at paragraphs 50 to 54 of the bundle which
    includes a statement dated  1st  November  2018  from  the  Appellant's
    grandmother who said that since her daughter moved out of Accra she was
    finding it difficult to cope with her grandson; a medical report  dated
    30th November 2018 stating that the grandmother was unable to give  the
    Appellant the necessary assistance; and a letter  dated  10th  November
    2018 from the Appellant's maternal aunt saying that she had married and
    moved out of Accra and was unable to take care  of  the  Appellant  any
    longer.   All  of  this  evidence  showed  the   material   change   of
    circumstances in the period between the decision in  October  2017  and
    the hearing on 11th December 2018.

 7. In my view, reading paragraph 4 along  with  the  reasons  section,  in
    failing to engage with the evidence as to  the  current  circumstances,
    the judge appears to have considered that she was bound to consider the
    circumstances at the date of the decision rather than at  the  date  of
    the hearing.  This is a material error.

 8. It is contended in Ground 5 that the judge's conclusions in relation to
    the Appellant's schooling was not fully considered.  Mr Lee referred to
    paragraph 34 of the decision where the First-tier Tribunal Judge said:-

         "As his mother, I accept that the Sponsor has stayed in touch  with
         her son and no doubt had discussions with him about life, but I was
         not presented with any evidence that  she  took  anything  near  an
         active or assertive role in his life or  decisions  made  for  him,
         including his education.  It struck me that in the letter from  the
         Appellant's housemaster, Justice Blay, that he stated 'through [the
         Appellant], I got in touch with [the Sponsor], his  mother'  giving
         the impression that he was only aware of the  Sponsor  through  the
         Appellant.  The headmaster similarly did not mention his  knowledge
         of the  Sponsor  in  circumstances  where,  had  the  Sponsor  been
         responsible for his educational choices - especially  from  abroad,
         she would surely have made  numerous  contacts  with  the  boarding
         school.  Even if I am wrong about  this  more  minor  feature,  the
         evidence as a whole did not explain what specific  responsibilities
         the Sponsor was taking as regards the Appellant's  upbringing.   It
         showed an ongoing involvement and interest, but nothing more".

 9. In Mr Lee's submission this failed to take account of the  letter  from
    the school at page 48 of the  Appellant's  bundle  where,  as  well  as
    saying that he had  been  in  contact  with  the  Sponsor  through  the
    Appellant, the housemaster went on to say that the Sponsor:-

         "...contacts me most weekends to speak with her son ....  She  also
         discusses with me her son's academic performance and  his  domestic
         life.  She transfers money to me through Western Union  every  term
         to pay for her boy's extra tuition and buy the things he  needs  in
         school for his upkeep and welfare".

    Mr Lee submitted that the judge erred in failing to take  into  account
    relevant evidence.

10. In response Ms Everett contended that in paragraph 34, even  though  it
    appears that the judge seems to have ignored part of  the  letter  from
    the school,  he  put  his  finding  in  the  alternative  and  this  is
    sufficient to mean that the error is not material.  In  her  submission
    when read as a whole paragraph 34 shows that the judge  concluded  that
    the Sponsor had ongoing involvement  with  the  Appellant  but  nothing
    more.  She accepted that it does appear that the judge made  one  slip,
    but, in her submission, as the judge assessed all of  the  evidence  in
    the round and gave careful reasons there is no material error.  In  her
    submission the judge was not impressed with the claim that the  Sponsor
    has an active role with the Appellant.

11. In my view the judge did make a material error at paragraph 34.  In the
    first sentence the judge said that  she  was  not  presented  with  any
    evidence that the Sponsor took anything near  an  active  or  assertive
    role in the Appellant's life or made decisions for  him  including  his
    education.  The judge went on to quote an extract from  the  letter  at
    page 48 of the Appellant's bundle, but failed to address  the  evidence
    from the housemaster that the Appellant contacts him most  weekends  to
    speak with her son and to discuss  his  academic  performance  and  his
    domestic life and transfers money to pay for his extra tuition and  buy
    the things he needs  in  school  for  his  upkeep  and  welfare.   This
    evidence is  contrary  to  the  judge's  assertion  that  she  was  not
    presented with any evidence about the Sponsor's role in the Appellant's
    life or decisions made for him including his education.  I further note
    that the Appellant made a witness statement at pages  1  to  5  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  The Appellant said at paragraph 7 that his  mother
    is responsible for his education, wellbeing and upbringing, that she is
    well-known by his teachers  and  gets  feedback  about  his  behaviour,
    schoolwork and results.  The judge  did  not  consider  this  piece  of
    evidence in reaching the conclusion about the Sponsor's involvement  in
    the Appellant's education.

12. It is contended in the grounds of appeal, as developed by Mr Lee at the
    hearing, that the judge made further errors in the assessment of issues
    under paragraph 297(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules.  It is contended in
    Ground 2 that the judge materially  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
    Sponsor's evidence.  The judge dealt with this at paragraphs 12 -15.  I
    accept that, when it is broken down it appears that the judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding based on only one factor arising  from  the
    Sponsor's oral evidence. The judge did not draw any adverse  inferences
    from the Sponsor's demeanour or manner in giving  evidence  [13].   She
    drew no adverse conclusions from the Sponsor's  delay  in  answering  a
    question about when her ex-brother-in-law had first contacted her [14].
    Further, she failed to find reference to a  first  incident  where  the
    Sponsor's initial response to a question was in the present tense [15].
    In the end the judge  relied  on  one  aspect  of  the  Sponsor's  oral
    evidence which the  judge  considered  damaged  her  credibility  [15].
    However, it is clear from reading paragraphs 16 to 23  that  the  judge
    did not make a conclusive finding that the  Sponsor  was  not  credible
    based only on the one response set out at paragraph 15.  The judge went
    on to consider the death certificate, the evidence  from  the  witness,
    the photographs of the funeral and the evidence about that.  The  judge
    then concluded at paragraph 25 that, taking  a  holistic  view  of  the
    evidence, she did not accept that the Appellant's father  had  died  as
    claimed and that the Appellant could not then satisfy the  requirements
    of paragraph 297(i)(d) of the Rules.  This was a finding  open  to  the
    judge on all of the evidence.

13. It is contended in Ground 3 that the judge failed to  provide  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the witness who was said to  have
    obtained the death certificate in Ghana.  However, the  judge  set  out
    the witness's evidence at paragraph 20.  There is no challenge  to  the
    accuracy of what the judge noted.  The judge concluded that the witness
    gave four separate dates and, whilst she would not have expected her to
    remember the precise date, she could not accept that the witness  would
    not remember the year  she  met  him.  The  judge  found  the  evidence
    inconsistent and did not believe the evidence of the  witness.   In  my
    view this was a conclusion  open  to  the  judge  for  which  she  gave
    adequate reasons.

14. Ground 4 contends that the judge's conclusion about the photographs  of
    the funeral was irrational.  The judge dealt with this at paragraphs 22
    to 24 of the decision where she said that there was nothing linking any
    of the photographs to the deceased, that the Appellant did  not  appear
    in any of the photographs, and that she rejected the explanation as  to
    why he did not appear.  In my view these conclusions were all  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before her.

15. Grounds 2, 3 and 4 all go to the judge's conclusion that she  does  not
    accept that the Appellant's father had died as  claimed  and  that  the
    Appellant can not therefore meet the requirements of  paragraph  276(i)
    (d) of the Rules.  In these circumstances I find that those conclusions
    are safe and should stand.

16. In light of my findings above in relation to Grounds 1  and  5  I  find
    that the judge's findings under paragraph 297(i) (e) of the  Rules  are
    not safe. This is because the  judge  took  an  erroneous  approach  in
    failing to appreciate that the circumstances at the date of the hearing
    were relevant to the determination of the  human  rights  appeal.   The
    judge also erred in failing to take into account all of the contents of
    the letter from the Appellant's school in reaching the  conclusions  at
    paragraph 34 and the totality of  the  evidence  as  to  the  Sponsor's
    current role in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  education.   In  these
    circumstances and for these reasons I  set  aside  the  conclusions  in
    relation to paragraph 297(i) (e).

17. I indicated at the hearing that if I found  an  error  in  relation  to
    297(i) (e) and, if I were able to remake the decision on the  basis  of
    the evidence before me, I would go on to do so.  In my view I am and  I
    go on to remake the decision on the basis of the evidence before me.

Remaking the decision under paragraph 297 (i) (e)

18. Paragraph 297(i) (e) provides that the requirements  to  be  met  by  a
    person seeking indefinite leave to enter the  UK  as  the  child  of  a
    parent present and settled in the UK are that:-

         "(e) one parent is present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  or
             being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
             sole responsibility for the child's upbringing".

19. Guidance as to the approach to this paragraph is set out in the case of
    TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049.  The relevant guidance  is  set  out  at  paragraph  52  of  the
    Tribunal's decision as follows:-

         "52. Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:

             i.   Who has "responsibility" for  a  child's  upbringing  and
             whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter  to
             be decided upon all the evidence.

             ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should
             not to be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the   child.   That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing   may   be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be   shared   between   different   individuals:   which   may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own  country
             whilst the only parent involved in its  life  travels  to  and
             lives in the UK.

             iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in
             the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one
             of them will have sole responsibility.

             v.   If it is said that both are not involved in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

             vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not  just  a
             matter between the parents. So  even  if  there  is  only  one
             parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may not
             have sole responsibility.

             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely  to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.

             viii.    That, however, does not  prevent  the  parent  having
             sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

             ix.  The test is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."

20. The judge's finding that the Appellant's father has not been present in
    his life since around 2012 and has abdicated any responsibility  taking
    no part in his upbringing has not been challenged  [30].   I  therefore
    proceed to analyse the evidence  before  me  to  consider  whether  the
    Sponsor has "continuing control and  direction"  over  the  Appellant's
    upbringing, including making all the important decisions in his life.

21. In his witness statement the Appellant describes ongoing  contact  with
    the Sponsor.  At paragraph 5 the Appellant said that after his  parents
    divorced he moved in with his grandmother and maternal aunt.   He  said
    that he attends boarding school and whenever he is off school he  lives
    with his grandmother.  He described ongoing contact between himself and
    his mother.  He said at paragraph 7 that his  mother  has  always  been
    involved in his life and is responsible for  his  education,  wellbeing
    and upbringing.  At paragraph 10  the  Appellant  said  that  his  aunt
    started a relationship a few years ago with her  now  husband  and  she
    moved out of Accra and was unable to take him with her  and  that  left
    him with his grandmother who is 82  years  old.   At  paragraph  11  he
    describes how his  grandmother  is  weak  and  frail  due  to  numerous
    illnesses including diabetes and bilateral osteoarthritis and that  she
    finds it difficult to take care  of  him  now.   At  paragraph  16  the
    Appellant states that at the time of his application he was in a junior
    secondary school but that on 11th September 2017 he moved to a boarding
    school and that, as they are not allowed to have mobile phones, he  and
    his mother call each other only at weekends out of school term  or  any
    time he gets authorisation from the  housemaster.   He  said  that  his
    mother  calls  the  housemaster's  phone  through   which   they   have
    conversations.  He said that the money sent by the mother  is  budgeted
    according to her instructions and include  cover  for  food,  electric,
    water, phone bills and his daily school allowance.

22. The Sponsor provided a witness statement. She said that she is involved
    in the Appellant's education and upbringing.  She  too  said  that  her
    sister has moved out of Accra with her family, that the Appellant stays
    with his grandmother during holidays or when he is off school, but that
    the grandmother is unwell and is unable to take care of him.

23. The school provided a letter dated 22nd November  2018  which  confirms
    that the Appellant started attending  that  school  on  11th  September
    2017.  As set out above the  letter  states  that  the  Sponsor  is  in
    contact with the housemaster most weekends to speak with  her  son  and
    discusses with him her son's academic performance and his domestic life
    and transfers money to pay for his extra tuition and buy the things  he
    needs in school for his upkeep and welfare.

24. It is clear from the statements of the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  as
    well as the letter from the school  that,  since  September  2017,  the
    Appellant has been spending most of his time  in  school.   It  appears
    from the letter from the school that the Sponsor is the person who  has
    contact with the school and has responsibility for  the  fees  and  his
    academic and domestic life there.

25. I have also  taken  into  account  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's maternal grandmother.  In her letter of 1st  November  2018
    she said that her daughter moved out of Accra and  that  she  finds  it
    difficult to cope with the Appellant as she is not in a  good  position
    to look after him due to her age and health.  She submitted  a  medical
    report dated 30th  November  2018  confirming  that  she  has  diabetic
    mellitus, bilateral osteoarthritis of the knees and congestive  cardiac
    failure and hypertension.  The letter states that these  have  resulted
    in progressive deterioration of her physique over the  past  years  and
    she is unable to give her grandchild the necessary assistance  required
    by a guardian.

26. I also take into account the letter from the Appellant's maternal  aunt
    dated 10th November 2018 confirming the evidence  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor that she is now married and  lives  with  her
    husband and has moved out of Accra and is no longer able  to  help  her
    mother look after the Appellant.

27. I have taken into account the evidence of transfers from  the  Sponsor.
    I note that these show  frequent  transfers  throughout  2018  which  I
    accept are consistent with the evidence from the school  and  from  the
    Appellant and Sponsor that she  has  been  financially  supporting  the
    Appellant.

28. I have taken into account the wording of  paragraph  297(i)  (e)  which
    requires  that  one  parent  must  show  that   she   "has   had   sole
    responsibility for the child's upbringing".  There  is  no  requirement
    that this should have been throughout the child's life, as set  out  in
    paragraph 52 ii of TD the sole responsibility may have been for a short
    duration  in  that  the  present  arrangements  may  have  begun  quite
    recently. In my view the evidence is sufficient to demonstrate  on  the
    balance of probabilities that, since her sister left her mother's home,
    and certainly since the Appellant started boarding school in  September
    2017, the Sponsor has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant's
    upbringing.  In these circumstances the Appellant has demonstrated that
    he meets the requirements of paragraph 297 (i) (e) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

29. This is a human rights appeal and the Immigration Rules  in  this  area
    are broadly compliant with Article 8, accordingly the interference with
    the right to family life of the Appellant and his mother as a result of
    the refusal of entry clearance is not outweighed by the public interest
    in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control.   In   these
    circumstances, as the Appellant has demonstrated that he can  meet  the
    provisions of paragraph 297(i)(e),  it  is  appropriate  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law in the decision under  paragraph  297(i)  (e)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I set that part of the decision aside (paragraphs 26 to  39  of
    the decision).  I maintain the decision under paragraph 297(i)  (d)  of
    the Rules.

31. I remake the decision under paragraph 297(i) (e) and allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
        Date: 17th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I make no fee award  because  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  the  basis  of
evidence submitted after the decision and just prior to the hearing  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed
        Date: 17th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes










