

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01126/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Bradford                                         Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 19 September 2018                                 On 25 September 2018

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 NIGISTI [Z]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Barry, Solicitor, of Chapeltown CAB.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson in  which  the  Judge  allowed  the
        appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  an  Entry  Clearance
        Officer to permit the appellant to join her sponsor, her father, in
        the United Kingdom for settlement and family  reunion  pursuant  to
        paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 8 November 1992.  The
        appellant's sponsor, her father, left Eritrea in  August  2012  and
        obtained limited leave to remain as a refugee. On 12 March 2013  he
        was granted asylum.
     3. The Judge notes the family history between [6 - 17] of the decision
        under challenge.
     4. In a determination of some 30 paragraphs the  Judge  takes  between
        [18 - 25] to set out the text of article 8 ECHR  and  related  case
        law and at [26 - 27] the law relating  to  section  117  B  of  the
        Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Judges of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal are assumed to  know  the  law  and  it  is  arguably
        unnecessary to set out swathes of references and quotes unless they
        are of specific relevance to the issues in the appeal. In this case
        all the Judge needed to do was make  reference  to  article  8  and
        Razgar; and thereafter set out the findings in relation to the five
        stages of the Razgar test.
     5. The Judge states at  [25]  that  those  five  questions  have  been
        considered and that the decision  rests  upon  the  proportionality
        test under Razgar. While that is confirmation of  an  understanding
        of the correct approach, the question that arises is what  findings
        the Judge made in relation to those particular questions.
     6. The answer is found at [28 - 30] in which the Judge writes:


             28.  I found that the sponsor to be  an  honest  and  credible
                  witness, who  is  keen  to  enjoy  family  life  with  his
                  children in the UK. I  consider  that  the  appellant  has
                  shown exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the
                  right to respect for family life contained in article 8 of
                  the European Convention on Human Rights, warrant  a  grant
                  of entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules.


             29.  The appellant wishes to join her father and three younger
                  brothers in the United Kingdom. Their family life has been
                  on hold due to immigration control. I  consider  that  the
                  appellant has a right to live with her father and  younger
                  brothers.


             30.  I therefore find that such interference by the respondent
                  is disproportionate to the legitimate public end sought to
                  be achieved.


     7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the following
        grounds:


             1. The appeal against refusal of entry clearance  was  allowed
                solely on the ground of Article 8 family life.


             2. The Judge notes [6] that the appellant was over the age  of
                18  when  she  made  the  application.   Nowhere   in   the
                determination does the Judge make a reasoned  finding  that
                family life existed between the appellant and the  sponsor,
                an issue the Judge should have resolved before moving on to
                a proportionality analysis.

             3. The Judge purports to make a decision  on  proportionality,
                but there  is  no  meaningful  balancing  exercise  wherein
                account is taken of the public interest in  maintaining  an
                effective immigration control per section 117B(1).

             4. For the reasons identified above the Judge  has  materially
                erred in law.


     8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal, the operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


             3.   In view  of  the  Judge's  acceptance  of  the  sponsor's
                  account,  contained  at  paragraphs  6  to  17   and   not
                  challenged in the grounds pleaded,  it  was  open  to  the
                  Judge to  find  that  exceptional  circumstances  existed.
                  Nonetheless, it is arguable that the Judge made  no  clear
                  findings with regard  to  the  existence  of  family  life
                  between the sponsor and the appellant. It is also arguable
                  that the Judge did  not  move  on  from  his  unchallenged
                  findings  of  fact  to  perform  the  balancing   exercise
                  required in considering article 8 of the ECHR. In view  of
                  the favourable findings of fact, it may well be  that  the
                  outcome of this appeal was  inevitable.  However,  in  the
                  absence of a reasoned balancing exercise, the  grounds  of
                  appeal are arguable and I grant permission on all  grounds
                  pleaded.



Error of law


     9. Paragraph 352D sets out the requirements  for  leave  to  enter  or
        remain as the child of a refugee. They are:


             352D.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave
                  to enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order to  join
                  or remain with the parent who currently has refugee status
                  are that the applicant:


                  (i)  is the child of a parent who  currently  has  refugee
                      status granted under the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
                      United Kingdom; and
                  (ii)     is under the age of 18; and
                  (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried
                      and is not a civil partner, and  has  not  formed  an
                      independent family unit; and
                  (iv)     was part of the family unit of the person granted
                      asylum at the time that  the  person  granted  asylum
                      left the country of their habitual residence in order
                      to seek asylum; and
                  (v)  the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection
                      by virtue of paragraph  334(iii)  or  (iv)  of  these
                      Rules or Article 1F of the Refugee Convention if they
                      were to seek asylum in their own right; and
                  (vi)     if seeking leave to enter, holds a  valid  United
                      Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.


    10. The application for leave under the Immigration Rules  was  refused
        pursuant to paragraph 352 D (i), (ii) and (iv) of 353D. It was  not
        submitted before the Judge the appellant was able to succeed  under
        the Rules and the Judge notes at [7] that it was conceded that  the
        requirements of the Rules could not be  met.  The  Judge  therefore
        assessed the merits of the appeal by reference to  article  8  ECHR
        only.
    11. Whilst it is accepted that the sponsor would like to  enjoy  family
        life with his children and the appellant to live  with  her  father
        and other siblings that was, arguably, only evidence  of  de  facto
        family life. There is a difference between  such  and  family  life
        recognised by article 8 ECHR.
    12. The need to identify the nature of the protected right being relied
        upon is clearly set out in Razgar question  one  which  requires  a
        decision  maker  to  consider  whether  the  decision  will  be  an
        interference with the exercise of a right to respect for private or
        family life. The Judge makes no  finding  on  whether  family  life
        recognised by article 8 exists on the facts between  the  appellant
        and the sponsor and, if the same  is  found,  to  provide  adequate
        reasoning in support of such a finding.
    13. In relation to the proportionality aspect; the grounds of challenge
        are right to refer to the fact that it was necessary for the  Judge
        to make clear findings on the nature of the protected  right  first
        as that is material to the proportionality  of  the  decision.  The
        Judge finds exceptional circumstances exist which is  a  reflection
        of the Judge's views of the situation in which the appellant  finds
        herself; but the finding that such are "inconsistent with the right
        to respect for family life" is not a sustainable finding  in  light
        of the failure of the Judge to find  that  such  family  life  does
        exist as noted above. The other concern, as noted, is  that  whilst
        the Judge sets out a  reference  to  the  public  interest  and  to
        section 117B at [26 - 27] there is no analysis of how the  same  is
        factored  into  the  balancing  exercise,  supported  by   adequate
        reasoning, and  how  each  of  the  competing  factors  are  to  be
        assessed. The Judge notes at [29] that family life has been on hold
        due to immigration control with no identification of what  controls
        the Judge is referring to and whether those controls are lawful.  A
        Contracting State has a  margin  of  appreciation  in  relation  to
        article 8 and if such controls are compliant with article 8  it  is
        not clear how they should be held against the respondent. The Judge
        also finds in this paragraph the applicant has a right to life with
        the father and younger brothers but there is no absolute  right  to
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR. Even if a right exists,  which  is  not
        conceded, article 8(2) establishes that  such  is  not  necessarily
        determinative  in  light  of  the   requirement   to   assess   the
        proportionality of a decision.
    14. A reader having no detailed knowledge of  the  case  is  given  the
        impression that the Judge concluded that this family were going  to
        be allowed to live together and allowed the appeal on  that  basis,
        rather than conducting a properly reasoned assessment  as  outlined
        in the respondent's challenge. If such assessment leads to the same
        conclusion, so be it, but at least  there  will  be  a  sustainable
        decision. If such assessment leads to the  appeal  being  dismissed
        that will, again, at least be a sustainable decision.
    15. In light of the failure  of  the  Judge  to  undertake  the  proper
        assessment  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the   First-Tier
        Tribunal. Substantial findings of fact are required in relation  to
        article  8  ECHR  following  proper  consideration  of  the  Razgar
        questions which has not yet been undertaken. Having considered  the
        Practice Direction in relation to the remitting of appeals  to  the
        First-Tier Tribunal, I consider it to be in  accordance  with  such
        guidance and in the  interests  of  justice  that  this  appeal  is
        remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  North  Shields  or
        Bradford to be heard afresh by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Head-
        Rapson.

Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        Tier Tribunal sitting at North Shields  or  Bradford  to  be  heard
        afresh by another judge of that Tribunal  other  than  Judge  Head-
        Rapson.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 September 2018













