
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
hu/01124/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 October 2018                      |On 1 November 2018                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Salah Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Khan, Universal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent is Mr Ahmed.
     For the purposes of this decision and reasons I refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where  Mr  Ahmed  was  the
    appellant.

Background

 2. Mr Ahmed is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent, dated 4 January 2017, to
    refuse his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the
    spouse of a British citizen and the parent of a British citizen.  In  a
    decision, promulgated  on  17  April  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Jerromes allowed the appellant's  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appeals with permission, granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pickup.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the appellant entered the  UK  in
    October 2009 as a Tier 4 Student with a visa  valid  until  20  October
    2012.  On 18 October 2011 the appellant claims he sat a TOEIC  test  at
    Aston College.  The appellant applied for further leave to remain on 23
    October 2012, submitting the TOEIC certificate and was granted  further
    leave to remain on 16 February 2013  as  a  Tier  4  Student  until  19
    January 2015.  The appellant married his wife on 28  April  2014.   His
    leave was curtailed on 23 June 2014.  The appellant applied  for  leave
    to remain as a spouse on 23 July 2014 and leave was  granted  until  23
    January 2017.  The appellant's eldest daughter was born on 28  December
    2014 and his younger  daughter  was  born  on  5  February  2017.   The
    appellant applied for further leave to remain on 4 January 2017 and the
    refusal of that application was the subject  of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Secretary of State considered  the  appellant's  application  under
    Appendix FM and 276ADE(1)  and  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of
    R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i) as the Secretary  of  State  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had used deception in his previous application  (although  it
    was accepted that the appellant met the eligibility requirements of  R-
    LTRP.1.1(d)(ii)).  Although the Appellant's child is a British  citizen
    (and at the time of the decision the appellant had only  one  daughter)
    the respondent was satisfied  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of R-LTRPT.1.1(a)(ii)(d) for the same reasons.

 5. The Secretary of State took into consideration that the  appellant  had
    claimed to sit a test at Aston College on 18 October 2011 and that ETS,
    having undertaken checks,  concluded  that  the  certificate  that  was
    issued was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test  taker  and
    his scores were cancelled.  The respondent was satisfied on  the  basis
    of this information that the certificate was fraudulently obtained  and
    that the appellant had used deception.  In terms of  private  life  the
    Secretary of State considered that the appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of 276ADE(1)(i) as he did not meet the requirements of  S-
    LTR.1.6  and  further  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  were   very
    significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into   Bangladesh   under
    276ADE(1)(vi).  The Secretary of State concluded  that  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  and  that  a  grant  of   leave   was   not
    appropriate.

First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge considered the appeal and set out the grounds for refusal  at
    [3] and the grounds of appeal at [4].  The judge went on to set out the
    issues at [6] identifying that the key issue was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had employed deception and the judge was of the view this was
    a significant although not a determinative  factor  in  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.  At [7] the judge set out  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and at [8]  the  Article  8  provisions.   The  judge
    recorded in summary the evidence was before her at [9] and the  judge's
    findings of fact are set out from [11] to  [17]  with  her  conclusions
    from [18] to [20].   The  judge  directed  herself,  at  [12],  to  the
    relevant jurisprudence of SM and Qadir v SSHD [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC),
    SSHD v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA and MA (ETS - TOEIC  testing)  [2016]
    UKUT 00450 (IAC) and reminded herself  that  the  question  of  whether
    someone has engaged in fraud  is  intrinsically  fact-sensitive'.   The
    judge set out the evidence from the respondent.   Mr  Whitwell  pointed
    out that Professor French's report came after the decision  in  SM  and
    Qadir. In any event Mr Whitwell did not submit that anything turned  on
    this.

 7. The judge concluded, at [15], that the evidential burden  of  proof  of
    deception is on the respondent as confirmed in  Shehzad  and  Chowdhury
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and that a screenshot of the results  and  the  ETS
    look up tool where tests were categorised as invalid were sufficient to
    discharge this initial burden.  The judge concluded, at [15], that  the
    respondent had therefore discharged the initial  evidential  burden  to
    show that the appellant procured the TOEIC certificate by dishonesty.

 8. The judge went on to consider and conclude at [16] that  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden upon him to raise  an  innocent  explanation.
    The judge went on to consider that the respondent  had  not  discharged
    the legal burden therefore through dishonesty and  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not use a proxy or otherwise  cheat  [17.3].   The  judge
    concluded that the appellant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but that this was not conclusive as the only ground  was  Article
    8.  The judge undertook a best  interests'  assessment  and  considered
    that the appellant's best interests lay in remaining in  the  UK  as  a
    family and concluded that it was not reasonable to expect the  children
    to leave the UK.  In summary, at [20.2], the judge concluded  that  the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  taking   into
    consideration Sections 117B(6) the judge was satisfied  that  both  the
    appellant's  children  were  qualifying  children  and  it   would   be
    unreasonable to expect them to leave the UK.   This must be the  answer
    to the public interest question and the appellant therefore succeeded.

Grounds of Appeal

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds for appeal contend that  although  the
    Tribunal accepted the evidential burden  fell  upon  the  appellant  to
    provide an innocent explanation this had not been adequately  addressed
    and it was not clear why the evidence of the appellant  would  preclude
    the use of a proxy test taker and  the  appellant's  evidence  did  not
    amount to an innocent explanation.  It was further submitted  that  the
    judge had taken into consideration  the  appellant's  English  language
    ability at [16.2] but this was not the test and the  respondent  relied
    on MA Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 including at 57 where it is  acknowledged
    that:

         "Second we acknowledge the suggestion that  the  appellant  had  no
         reason to engage in deception which  have  found  proven.   However
         this has not deflected  us  in  any  way  from  reaching  our  main
         findings and conclusions.  In the abstract of course,  there  is  a
         range of reasons why persons proficient in English  may  engage  in
         TOEIC fraud.  These include, inexhaustively,  lack  of  confidence,
         fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt  for  the
         immigration system.  These reasons  could  conceivably  overlap  in
         individual cases and there is  scope  for  other  explanations  for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere.  We are not required to make  the
         further finding of why the appellant engaged in  deception  and  to
         this we add that this issue was not explored  during  the  hearing.
         We resist any temptation to speculate this discrete matter."

10. It was further contended that the Tribunal had erred in failing to give
    adequate reasons for holding that a person  who  speaks  English  would
    therefore have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception.  In
    addition, it was submitted that maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest and that the appellant does not meet
    the Immigration Rules and accordingly interference was justified and it
    was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal appeared  to  have  elevated
    the children's best  interest  from  a  primary  consideration  to  the
    primary consideration.  It was further asserted that there had been  no
    consideration of whether  it  could  be  proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to return to Bangladesh in  light  of  those  actions  whilst
    leaving the choice to his family  whether  they  wished  to  remain  or
    return.

Submissions

11. As a preliminary  matter,  the  appellant's  representatives  submitted
    their Rule 24 response and skeleton argument.  Although the appellant's
    representative wished to rely on an unreported Upper Tribunal  case  it
    was accepted that the proper application and procedure to do so had not
    been followed and no further reference was made to this unreported case
    and I do not rely on it.

12. Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  judge's  assessment  was  flawed  in
    relation to the innocent explanation and he relied on  paragraph  5  of
    the grounds.  In respect of paragraph [11.8] Mr  Whitwell  pointed  out
    that the appellant and his wife own their home in Romford and he  later
    added to this submission that there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  the
    appellant had ever resided  anywhere  other  than  in  Romford  or  the
    surrounding areas (as opposed to Birmingham where he took the test).

13. At [13.4] he pointed out that Professor French's report  postdates  the
    decision in SM and Qadir.  Mr Whitwell noted that at [14.1(v)]  it  was
    established that this was a case where the appellant's test  was  found
    to be invalid and as noted above that the  judge  had  found  that  the
    initial evidential burden had been discharged by the  respondent.   The
    main challenge therefore was to paragraph [16]  of  the  decision.   Mr
    Whitwell submitted that there was no basis for the  judge's  conclusion
    at [16.1] that the appellant was a credible and truthful  witness.   Mr
    Whitwell pointed out that the tests were taken in Birmingham which  was
    three hours away from where the appellant lived and it  was  not  clear
    why this supported the appellant's credibility.

14. At [16.2(iv)] it was noted that the  appellant  had  tried  to  contact
    Aston College for evidence but they had  not  responded.   Mr  Whitwell
    submitted that this was a factor in favour of the Secretary of  State's
    case not the appellant's.

15. At [16.2(v)] Mr Whitwell submitted that although the  judge  took  into
    consideration that the appellant spoke English to a reasonable standard
    at the hearing, in March 2018, the test was taken on  18  October  2011
    and it was difficult to see how his English language  ability  in  2018
    was relevant.  Although the judge found at [16.3]  that  the  appellant
    had  previously  engaged  "substantively  and  faultlessly"  with   the
    immigration process, Mr Whitwell submitted that this  was  to  put  the
    cart before the horse because if it was found  that  he  had  lodged  a
    proxy test then he would not have had the immigration  status  that  he
    did.  Mr Whitwell submitted of the six points that the judge relied  on
    there were inadequate findings in four of those points.

16. Mr Whitwell had nothing to add  to  paragraph  6  of  the  respondent's
    grounds, relying on MA (Nigeria).  In respect of  paragraph  7  of  the
    grounds and Article 8, if the appellant had used deception he would not
    meet the eligibility criteria of the Rules.  Mr Whitwell pointed to the
    fact that the decision jumps straight to an assessment outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules but he conceded that there were no  grounds  on  that
    before the Upper Tribunal.  However, he submitted the  public  interest
    was heighted by the use  of  a  false  test.   Mr  Whitwell  relied  on
    [20.1(iii]) of the decision where the judge considered  reasonableness.
    Mr Whitwell relied on page  73  of  106  of  the  respondent's  current
    policy, dated 22 February 2018, and he pointed out that the  judge  had
    relied on an earlier version of that policy.  That policy now states as
    follows:

         "If the departure of the non-EEA national parent or carer would not
         result in the child being required to  leave  the  UK  because  the
         child will (or is likely to) remain living here with another parent
         or primary carer, then the question of whether it is reasonable  to
         expect the child  to  leave  the  UK  will  not  arise.   In  these
         circumstances paragraph EX.1(a) does not apply."

17. Mr Whitwell submitted that the effect of a  family  split  should  have
    been considered in terms of the effect on the child and how that  would
    disrupt the family  relationship  (as  discussed  at  page  73  of  the
    respondent's guidance).  However Mr Whitwell conceded that  again  this
    was not in the respondent's grounds.

18. Mr Khan submitted that there was no error and that this was a disguised
    perversity challenge.  Mr Khan relied on his Rule 24 response and noted
    at paragraph 15 that the judge had correctly directed himself as to the
    correct burden under Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and that
    the judge had conceded that the evidence was  sufficient  to  discharge
    the initial burden.  Mr Khan relied on the Court of Appeal decision  in
    SM and Qadir v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
    evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) at [57]  as  upheld
    by the Court of Appeal in Majumder & Qadir v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.

19. The Court of Appeal at paragraph 18 found as follows:

         "18. I have  stated  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  decided  that  the
             Secretary of State had discharged the evidential  burden  that
             lay on the Secretary of State so there was a burden, again  an
             evidential one, and Mr Majumder and Mr  Qadir  of  raising  an
             innocent  explanation.   The  UT  accepted   (at   [69])   the
             submission on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  in
             considering an allegation of dishonesty the  relevant  factors
             included the following: what the person accused  had  to  gain
             from being dishonest; what he had to lose; what is known about
             his character;  and  the  cultural  environment  in  which  he
             operated; how the individual accused of  dishonesty  performed
             under cross-examination, and whether the Tribunal's assessment
             of that person's English language proficiency is  commensurate
             with his or her TOEIC scores; and whether his or her  academic
             achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for
             them to have cheated.  There is no criticism in this court  by
             Mr Kovats of that approach.  (emphasis added)

         19.  After considering the evidence and considering the factors  to
             which I have referred, the UT held that  Messrs  Majumder  and
             Qadir had discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  raising  an
             innocent  explanation  of  the  prima  facie  indications   of
             deceptions on their part in the Secretary of State's evidence.
             Their evidence was found to be plausible and  truthful.  There
             had been no suggestion that any of the documents relied on  by
             Mr Majumder were falsified  or  forged  (see  [74]  to  [77]).
             Although  the  Tribunal  regarded  him  as  an  unsatisfactory
             witness in certain respects, at [87] it  ultimately  concluded
             that he was telling the truth."

20. Mr Khan submitted that although Mr Whitwell  and  the  written  grounds
    criticised the judge's findings, this runs contrary to the factors that
    were identified including by the Secretary of State in SM and Qadir and
    that proficiency in English was one of the factors  to  be  considered.
    Mr Khan submitted that the  judge  had  not  allowed  the  case  merely
    because he had considered the appellant had sufficient English  at  the
    hearing.

21. At  [16.2(v)]  the  judge  also  takes  into  account  whether  it  was
    unnecessary for the appellant to have cheated  and  considered  MA  and
    that there was no motive for the appellant to use a proxy  test  taker.
    Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge was entitled to reach the  finding
    he did that the appellant was  a  credible  and  truthful  witness  and
    submitted that the judge had reached this conclusion after hearing  the
    appellant being cross-examined on his evidence.

22. At [16.3] the judge was correct to take into account that the appellant
    had  previously  substantively  and  faultlessly   engaged   with   the
    immigration process as this was one of the factors set out at paragraph
    18 of Majumder and Qadir in the  Court  of  Appeal.   Mr  Khan  further
    submitted that it was irrelevant  for  Mr  Whitwell  to  refer  to  the
    appellant's property being bought in 2018 when the test was in 2011 and
    it was the appellant's evidence that he had relatives in Birmingham  in
    any event which the judge had accepted.  It was not suggested that this
    was a perverse finding and it was open to the judge.

23. At [16.2(iv)] Mr Khan submitted that this was not a point in favour  of
    the respondent as the appellant was not to  blame  for  the  fact  that
    there had been no response from Aston College and it was for the  judge
    to decide what weight he attached to the evidence.  He  submitted  that
    the judge had conducted a multi-factored assessment as he was bound  to
    do.  The jurisprudence confirms that, in terms of providing an innocent
    explanation  the  appellant  need  only  reach  a  minimal   level   of
    plausibility (see SM and Qadir).   The judge's  findings  were  nowhere
    near the test to show perversity.  Mr Khan also relied on paragraph  19
    of Majumder and Qadir and submitted that this was  also  a  case  where
    there was no suggestion that  any  of  the  documents  relied  on  were
    falsified or forged.

24. Mr Khan took me to page 10 and following of the appellant's bundles and
    his City & Guilds tests which the judge had referred to specifically in
    his findings at [16.2(v)].  These tests were taken on 11 October  2013,
    just over two years after the impugned TOEIC test.  Mr  Khan  submitted
    (and Mr Whitwell did not specifically dispute this) that the  appellant
    had  achieved  first-class  results  and  the  judge  took  this   into
    consideration at [16.2(v)].  Mr Khan submitted  that  paragraph  25  of
    Majumder and Qadir in the Court of Appeal addressed Mr Whitwell's point
    in relation to any error in the judge  taking  into  consideration  the
    appellant's English language ability at the date of the hearing.

25. At 25 of Majumder and Qadir the Court of Appeal  held  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was entitled to conclude that Mr Majumder's college  documents
    were a better gauge of his ability in English than his  performance  at
    the hearing some three years' later.  Mr Khan submitted that the  judge
    had not taken into consideration the appellant's English at the hearing
    as the sole factor when he considered all  the  factors  including  the
    level of the Appellant's  English  two  years  after  the  TOEIC  test.
    Conversely if he had not made any findings in relation to  his  English
    language ability as at the date of the hearing that may well have  been
    an error.  The fact that he had mentioned this factor did not mean that
    the decision was flawed.

26. In relation to ground 2 Mr  Khan  submitted  that  there  was  no  real
    challenge to  the  judge's  best  interests  assessment  and  that  the
    respondent's 2018 guidance in relation  to  family  migration  did  not
    change the law on Section 117B(6) that the judge was entitled  to  find
    at [20.2] that public interest did not require the appellant's removal.
     Mr Khan pointed out that the judge  was  correct  at  [18]  to  direct
    himself of the fact that the appellant met the Rules was not enough and
    that he had to go on and consider Article 8 including Appendix  FM  and
    Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

27. In reply Mr Whitwell argued that he was not submitting that  the  judge
    was wrong to undertake  an  holistic  approach.   However  it  was  his
    submission that four of the six factors of the  factors  he  considered
    were inadequately reasoned.  In relation to the 2017 house  in  Romford
    that might have well been true but it was not suggested in the evidence
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had  ever  lived
    outside of the Romford area.

Error of Law Conclusions

28. The proper approach is  as  set  out  in  the  case  of  SM  and  Qadir
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Shehzad and Another and  confirmed
    in R (on the application of Nawaz) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS: review standard/evidential basis)  [2017]  UKUT  00288
    (IAC).  It was not disputed before me that the burden is  initially  on
    the Secretary of State and if that evidential burden is satisfied it is
    incumbent on the appellant to provide  an  innocent  explanation.   The
    judge followed that correct approach, finding at [15] that the  initial
    burden was discharged.

29. The judge set out all the evidence before her, including the undisputed
    findings of fact at [11] that  the  appellant  speaks  and  understands
    English and that in October 2013 he was awarded an ESOL certificate and
    went on to pass the Life in the UK test in 2014.

30. The judge's findings  at  [16]  are  detailed  and  evidence-based  and
    sufficient to raise an innocent explanation as to his participation  in
    the relevant test.   Although  Mr  Whitwell  disputed  the  finding  at
    [16.2(i)] as to why the appellant would take the test in Birmingham the
    judge  was  entitled  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his
    grandmother and other family lived there  and  he  visited  frequently.
    That was a finding that was available to the judge which cannot be said
    to be irrational and such was not suggested by  Mr  Whitwell.   It  was
    more than adequately reasoned.

31. Equally there was no challenge to the judge's  findings  at  [16.2(ii)]
    that he found that the appellant had attended the test  in  person  and
    that he took two or  three  classes  there  before  he  took  the  test
    although he had not  retained  receipts.   Mr  Whitwell  also  made  no
    submissions  in  relation  to  the  third  finding  of  the  judge   at
    [16.2(iii)] as to what happened on the day of the  test  including  him
    being photographed, his ID checked, the security checks  being  carried
    out, where the exam room was, how full it was, how many students  there
    were, how many desks there were with computers, who was present in  the
    room, etc. The judge had the benefit of hearing  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence on this matter and hearing  the  appellant  cross-examined  on
    that evidence (which the Court of Appeal has indicated  is  a  relevant
    factor).

32. At [16.2(iv)] although Mr Whitwell suggested that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had no response from Aston College was a factor in favour  of
    the Secretary of State, the judge was entitled to find as he  did  that
    he accepted the appellant's evidence that he had tried to  contact  the
    college but had had no response.  In the context of a wider credibility
    assessment such a finding could not be said to be irrational and in the
    context of finding the  appellant  to  be  credible  and  truthful  the
    reasoning is adequate and the finding was available to the judge.

33. At [16.2(v)] the judge found that there was no motive for the appellant
    to use a proxy and properly reminded himself of  the  guidance  in  MA.
    Although the judge noted the appellant's reasonable standard of English
    and that he gave evidence without an interpreter I agree with  Mr  Khan
    that this was not a decisive factor and that if he had  not  noted  his
    current level of English that may have  caused  its  own  difficulties.
    This also had to be considered in the context of the  judge's  findings
    that there was no dispute that the appellant  had  subsequently  passed
    the Life in the UK test  and  had  obtained  ESOL  qualifications  from
    Trinity  College  London  City  &  Guilds,  which  is  a  much  earlier
    verification of the appellant's level of English than at  the  hearing.
    There was no error in the judge taking this into consideration  in  the
    round and the judge reminded himself  that  this  was  not  a  decisive
    factor.  Equally, the judge was entitled, and in fact was required,  to
    take into account the appellant's wider credibility and that he had  no
    other negative immigration history.   Although  Mr  Whitwell  submitted
    this was a cart before the horse argument, I do not agree as there  are
    other elements of an individual's history, including possible  criminal
    and immigration difficulties which could be  a  relevant  factor.   The
    judge was entitled to take into consideration  that  this  was  not  an
    issue in this case.

34. Although the judge granting permission was of  the  view  that  it  was
    arguable that the conclusion, that the Secretary of State had failed to
    demonstrate the appellant was dishonest, was inadequately  reasoned  if
    not rational, as identified above the judge  gave  more  than  adequate
    reasons (and Mr Whitwell confirmed that this was an adequacy  challenge
    rather than one on perversity grounds).  Accordingly the judge made  no
    material error in her approach to the consideration and conclusion that
    the appellant had raised an innocent explanation.  I am satisfied  that
    the judge did consider all of the evidence in  the  appropriate  manner
    and there was no error material or otherwise.

35. Although he produced the respondent's updated guidance as  referred  to
    above, Mr Whitwell did not rely with any force on the second ground  in
    relation to Article 8.  Although the judge might  have  structured  her
    assessment differently, in terms of the  consideration  under  Appendix
    FM, the findings, including  the  finding  that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the British citizen children to  remain  in  the  UK  with
    their parents and that it was not reasonable to expect the  appellant's
    children to leave the UK, are not materially flawed.

36. That is notwithstanding the more recent guidance of  the  Secretary  of
    State which  was  not  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Section 117B(6) and similarly EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  consider
    that where it would not be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, as is always the case where a British child is involved
    "the public interest does not require" the removal of the parent.  That
    was the reasoned conclusion of the Tribunal,  at  [18(iii)],  prior  to
    considering the respondent's policy and the judge considered that there
    had been no deception, o  suggestion  of  criminality  and  no  adverse
    factors 'which tip the balance the other way'. There was  no  error  in
    the judge's adequately reasoned interpretation that where, as  in  this
    case, the children are 'qualifying children,' that is an answer to  the
    public interest question.

37. There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.

Signed                                  Dated:  24 October 2018




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                                  Dated:  24 October 2018




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
