
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/01865/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 August 2019                            |On 8 November 2019            |
|                                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        hanieh sadat seyedin navadeh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse instructed by Nido Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent refusing her human rights claim.

2.   On a hearing on 17 April 2019, I found errors of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision and as a consequence directed that the matter  be  reheard  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

3.   I attach a copy of  my  error  of  law  decision  which  sets  out  the
    background to the case and the reasons why an error of law was found.

4.   At the renewed hearing on 9th  August  2018  the  appellant  put  in  a
    supplementary bundle including a second witness statement.  It had been
    signed by her and she had been told the contents by her  solicitor  and
    they were true and, to the best of her knowledge, correct.  She  relied
    also on  her  previous  witness  statement  and  both  statements  were
    adopted.

5.   In oral evidence she said that she  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    almost all the time since 2006 and had always before or on the date  of
    leave expiring applied for extensions.  Twice there had been delays  of
    more than a few days: over 28 days.

6.   She was asked her why she was out of the United  Kingdom  and  why  she
    was delayed in 2009-10. She said had gone to Iran to  do  research  and
    there were limitations on her Iranian passport so she had to  go  there
    rather than elsewhere and had no time to get a visa.  She did not  need
    a visa to go to Iran.  When she decided to return to the United Kingdom
    she realised she was banned from leaving and it  had  taken  about  two
    months to lift the ban.  She had returned with a valid UK visa.

7.   The degree she was studying for was  a  PhD  in  Chemical  Engineering.
    She was no longer still studying.  She had submitted a  thesis  and  it
    was in the process of major corrections as it  had  been  unsuccessful.
    She had appealed the decision and she had received  the  decision  that
    she should do more lab work or get an MPhil and she had  rejected  both
    options so it was escalated further.

8.   With regard to the second time she was out of the  United  Kingdom,  in
    2015, there had been a delay because she had to apply for ATAS to get a
    CAS.  She had given enough time: twenty days, on 3 September.  The visa
    was due to expire on 9 September but her passport  had  been  about  to
    expire and she had got a new one.  She had submitted all  the  relevant
    documents for a new visa and obtained it on 17 September when  she  had
    left the United Kingdom.

9.   She only got the CAS letter on the 28th day and had had 28 days  before
    the visa expired.  She had chased it.  It was issued on the 28th day so
    she was not able to apply within the 28 days.   There  had  been  other
    delays in booking the appointment and as to whether  it  should  be  in
    Dubai or Turkey which latter she  chose  in  the  end.   There  was  no
    British Embassy in Iran and it had taken time to get an appointment  in
    Turkey and there was delay on the part of the university.

10.  There was correspondence  in  the  bundle  between  pages  82  and  186
    concerning this and showing how she had chased matters.  The claim  was
    one for family and private life.

11.  Mr Lindsay made the point that there was no notice  of  a  family  life
    claim being made and there was no reference to it in the skeleton.

12.  With regard to her life in the United Kingdom the appellant  said  that
    she worked part-time as an advocate in Balba which helped women seeking
    asylum.  She had been in a relationship with her  partner  for  over  a
    year.  He was a British citizen.  She lived with her sister.   She  had
    friends and family in the United Kingdom.  She had  a  disabled  friend
    named Sarah whom she helped.  There  was  a  letter  from  her  in  the
    bundle.  She had friends and colleagues and been living in  the  United
    Kingdom since she was about 21.

13.  When cross-examined the appellant said with reference from  the  letter
    from Sarah that she was disabled and had asylum status.  She said  that
    no-one could help Sarah as she had no family or friends and  government
    support would take a long time.  For between six months and a year  no-
    one would be there for her full-time.

14.  It was put to her that she had  not  mentioned  Sarah  in  her  witness
    statement  and  would  have  done  so  if  the  relationship  was  very
    important.  She said she had met Sarah in November 2016/early 2017  and
    Sarah had not been in her life when  she  had  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.  She had not had a private life ground and  her  claim
    was in respect of her absences.

15.  She was also it was fair to say, with regard to the problem in  getting
    the ATAS that if she had been able to get it in good time she would not
    have had the problem and she agreed that that was the case.  She  would
    have been able to get the CAS as it was in time for  applying  for  the
    visa.

16.  It was put to her that she said she needed twenty working days  to  get
    the ATAS certificate and she was asked where she got  that  information
    from.  She said that she was given  it  by  the  International  Student
    Advisory Service (ISAS) of the University and she  had  given  it  more
    than a month before.  She was asked whether she had ever  checked  with
    ATAS, what their  standard  time  was  for  getting  a  certificate  to
    someone, and she said she checked it with the ISAS and  had  taken  all
    her immigration advice from them.

17.  She was asked whether it was the case that she had contacted ATAS on  4
    August 2015 and she said she did not  remember  the  exact  date.   She
    agreed that  the  letter  submitted  by  the  representatives  she  had
    obtained on 17 September 2015 six weeks later.  She was  asked  whether
    there was any reason why she could not have applied for it earlier  for
    example in June or July.  She said that as she remembered it you  could
    not apply a long time before the visa date expired  so  you  would  not
    apply in June or July.  She had been advised by ISAS to apply in  early
    August.

18.  She was asked whether at that time she had  legal  representatives  for
    her immigration status and  she  said  no  as  they  had  ISAS  at  the
    university and they gave advice on immigration.  It was put to her that
    it was odd advice to tell her it would be  better  to  leave  the  ATAS
    application late as there could be  administrative  delays.   She  said
    that it had not occurred to her and they told her  she  had  more  than
    enough time.  They would usually get back to you  earlier  than  twenty
    days.  She was asked whether it was right that ISAS had told  her  this
    but there was nothing in writing from them.  She said  there  was  not.
    She had booked an appointment with a legal advisor  at  ISAS  and  they
    gave face to face advice.  She had all the emails.  She  had  tried  to
    chase the application with ATAS but had no  direct  contact  number  or
    email address and only ISAS had the contact number so the only  way  to
    chase was through them.  It was the case that before  she  put  in  the
    application to ATAS she could not contact them directly.  She was asked
    whether she had not tried to approach them directly but  had  gone  via
    ISAS and she said you could only submit online  and  track  online  and
    there was no email or  telephone  number.   She  had  looked  at  their
    website, and there was no way to contact them at that time.

19.  She was also asked if there was any reason why if she returned to  Iran
    she could not return to see her sister and  she  said  there  would  be
    difficulties in making an application for a visit  visa.   Her  parents
    had been a few times recently, they had been rejected a few times.

20.  In re-examination the appellant was asked whether she had  ever  worked
    in civil or electrical engineering in Iran and said yes.   She  had  to
    have some experience and she had worked as a tutor at the University of
    Birmingham as well.  It was for experience and she had  worked  in  her
    father's company and other companies he knew.

21.  The next witness was [SN].  She is the  appellant's  sister.   She  had
    read the information in the statement she had given to the  solicitors,
    it was true and she had asked for it to be adopted as her  evidence-in-
    chief.

22.  In oral evidence she said she had been studying since she came  to  the
    United Kingdom, at the University of Birmingham and had  a  Masters  in
    Civil Engineering and had graduated in 2012.  She had a job offer  from
    a French company which was based in the United  Kingdom  and  they  had
    asked her to do the BQS Degree and she had done that, was now qualified
    as a quantity surveyor, and had worked full-time  for  more  than  four
    years.

23.  She could not visit her parents in Iran.  She had  applied  for  asylum
    and she had not been able to go back since 2013.  She had  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain some weeks ago and would get the results  in
    six to eight weeks.  It was very difficult for her to see her  parents.
    She could not go to Iran and they had applied for a visit  visa  a  few
    times and had had a few refusals.  It  was  difficult.   They  had  not
    obtained a visa for her graduation ceremony, so she had not gone.

24.  Mr Lindsay had no questions for the witness.

25.  The next witness was [EM] who referred to the letter of 25  March  2019
    and said the contents were true and  that  was  her  evidence-in-chief.
    She had known the appellant for four years and had been living  in  the
    United Kingdom a long time, more than 40 years.

26.  Mr Lindsay had no questions for the witness.

27.  In his submissions Mr Lindsay said there were two  issues,  first  gaps
    in the appellant's absence and the  exercise  of  discretion  and  also
    Article 8 outside the Rules.   With  regard  to  the  first  point,  Mr
    Lindsay referred to the skeleton argument  put  in  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  It was a narrow issue.  Paragraph 6(ii)(c) referred to  the
    appellant's attempts to obtain an ATAS  certificate  in  2015  and  the
    problems she experienced there.  The  appellant  had  rightly  accepted
    that if it were not for the time problem the gap in lawful leave  would
    not have arisen.  The question for the Tribunal was with regard to that
    delay.  The  relevant  Rules  were  set  out  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    appellant's skeleton.  There was an exceptional circumstances threshold
    and examples were given of what might amount to delays  resulting  from
    unforeseeable causes.  On the evidence the Tribunal was asked  to  find
    that the guidance was correct and was applicable to this case  and  did
    not fall in the appellant's favour.  It was a high threshold.

28.  With regard to the earlier period where there was a gap, if one or  the
    other  remained  a  gap  then  discretion  was  not  exercised  in  the
    appellant's favour.

29.  It was argued that it was  open  to  the  appellant  at  all  times  to
    approach ATAS.  They could have been contacted and there was no bar  on
    her applying for a certificate earlier than she had done.  She said she
    had been advised by ISAS to leave the matter till  late  and  that  was
    very surprising advice on the face of it.  The  appellant  was  clearly
    intelligent and such a person would not leave such matters to the  last
    minute as  delays  could  occur.   The  cause  of  the  delay  was  not
    unforeseeable and  the  high  threshold  had  not  been  crossed.   The
    respondent could not be expected to exercise discretion in her  favour.
    The third bullet point of the guidance was not met.

30.  The appellant said that for  ISAS's  (non-common-sensical)  advice  she
    could have applied earlier.  She had expected it some six  days  before
    the expiry of her leave to remain and  that  was  cutting  things  very
    close.  Whatever ISAS had told her, taking the evidence at its  highest
    it was not beyond her control.

31.  The appellant in the skeleton argument  6(ii)(c)  accepted  that  there
    were delays in obtaining the ATAS certificate, and  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent it was said that the key point was that  it  was  reasonably
    foreseeable that such a body might be subject to  administrative  delay
    and it was not close to the guidance.

32.  With regard to the point  in  the  appellant's  skeleton  at  paragraph
    6(iii), it was the case that on the appellant's evidence at no time was
    it outside her control that the delay arose but she  had  relied  on  a
    third party and did not need to take that advice and it was a matter of
    common sense.  The case fell at that point.

33.  With regard to the exercise of discretion, even on the fuller  evidence
    the  Tribunal  now  had,  it  remained  the  case  that  it  was   done
    appropriately.  The Tribunal would also consider  that  it  had  to  be
    decided on the materials before the Secretary of  State  at  the  time.
    There was further evidence now but they were the  same  issues  and  it
    pointed to a conclusion that the Secretary of  State  was  entitled  to
    conclude as she did and that was not unreasonable.

34.  If the Tribunal were with the appellant then it was  unclear  what  the
    position was and it might be a matter for written submissions.

35.  As regards the second issue, Article 8 private life outside the  Rules,
    reference was made to what the Supreme Court had decided  in  Rhuppiah.
    The appellant had only ever had precarious status and all  her  private
    life must carry little weight as a consequence and that was dispositive
    of the appeal.  The need for firm  and  effective  immigration  control
    outweighed her side of the balance.

36.  With regard to the  oral  evidence,  there  were  the  two  letters  of
    support and these were not matters dealt within the appellant's witness
    statement so they should receive little weight.  It was not the  thrust
    of the basis of her claim to remain in the United Kingdom.  There  were
    the visa refusals and her sister's asylum status, but there was no good
    reason why the appellant could not visit her sister through  the  usual
    channels  once  she  had  indefinite  leave   to   remain.    Otherwise
    communications would be an adequate substitute.

37.  In her submissions  Ms  Hulse  referred  to  page  225  of  the  bundle
    concerning applications made before 28 days.  All applicants were  told
    to submit information not more than 28 days in advance.  Also with  the
    application for example bank statements and if they were earlier  there
    would be some gap in the application and it  could  be  said  the  bank
    statements needed to be fresher.  The implications  of  that  for  this
    case should be noted.

38.  Mr Lindsay had said the appellant began her  application  on  4  August
    and leave expired on 9 September.  There was evidence of her contacting
    ATAS and asking for a date when she would get her certificate.  She was
    told on 3 September as could be seen from the documents at pages 82  to
    197 of the bundle.  Page 84 was particularly important.  It  should  be
    found that the appellant was very careful in  applying  in  good  time.
    When she was told about 3 September it was not unreasonable  to  expect
    that to happen and it was six days before the deadline.  It was sent on
    17 September and arrived eight days after.  There had been a series  of
    delays.  The University of Birmingham had delayed in sending the  ATAS,
    partly as they said she was out of time and only when  they  were  told
    she was out of time because the certificates had not arrived that  they
    had sent the CAS letter and it arrived on 28 September near the end  of
    the time to make an application from abroad and she  had  not  foreseen
    she would need to apply from abroad and she only left on  17  September
    as her leave expired.  She foresaw she would need to apply from outside
    Iran but had not foreseen delay of a week before she had an  interview.
    These were all unforeseen circumstances.  She had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over ten years and had made applications mainly from within
    the United Kingdom.  The ACAS had to be submitted before the  CAS.   On
    the evidence she had been very conscientious and  begun  in  very  good
    time and there was no reason to foresee that because  she  renewed  her
    passport she would need the details about the ATAS certificate.   There
    was no evidence to the contrary.

39.  Reference was made to the covering letter of the  application  and  her
    solicitor's letter at page 23 of the bundle.  This carefully documented
    the problems with getting the ATAS certificate.  Paragraph 13  referred
    to the email exchange about the visa.   So,  all  the  information  was
    before the Secretary of State.  At page 27 there was  the  point  about
    625 days out of the United Kingdom as was common ground, including  the
    long period of 2009 to 2010 which was a consequence of the ban  on  the
    appellant leaving Iran.  The delay  in  2015  had  been  shorter.   The
    university had exacerbated the delay and there were other  factors  and
    it was all documented.  Page 28 referred to the 2015 absence.

40.  With regard to the breaks and continuous absence,  reference  was  made
    to the guidance at page 221 onwards in the bundle.  It was  not  a  six
    months break case.  It would not be reasonable or proportionate to fail
    to consider the exercise of discretion and to fail to grant discretion.
     Delays  did  occur  and  it  was  not  usually  with  the  issuing  of
    examination or other certificates.  A person could not always allow for
    delay  or  mistakes.   It  should  be   considered   whether   it   was
    proportionate or reasonable with the evidence the  Secretary  of  State
    had not to exercise discretion.  A hostile environment was not intended
    and it had been a long time and she had spent a lot of money.  She  had
    had difficulties with getting the application in on time and  it  would
    be very harsh to say it was outside her  control.   If  discretion  had
    been exercised unreasonably it was for the Tribunal to change that.

41.  With regard to the last issue Mr Lindsay referred to  the  decision  in
    Ukus [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) with regard to discretion and when it  was
    reasonable.  This was still good law.  The Secretary of State had  been
    aware of her functions and what was being asked and it  was  noted  and
    all the evidence was considered  and  the  decision  was  open  to  the
    respondent.  It was a lawful decision not to exercise discretion.   The
    Secretary of  State  had  a  margin  of  appreciation  as  the  primary
    decisionmaker.

42.  With regard to the relation of this  to  Article  8,  if  the  Tribunal
    agreed that it was a lawful decision not to  exercise  discretion  that
    had no real weight  in  the  Article  8  balance.   It  questioned  the
    maintenance of a fair and effective  immigration  control  and  if  the
    Tribunal disagreed without the exercise of the  discretion  the  public
    interest would be materially undermined.  If it were a lawful  decision
    there was no real Article 8 claim with any weight.

43.  By way of reply Ms Hulse contended  that  it  was  an  arguably  unduly
    harsh decision and therefore disproportionate and unreasonable.  It was
    totally disproportionate with  regard  to  Article  8.   There  was  an
    interference and it had a very big impact on the appellant who had been
    in  the  United   Kingdom   for   nearly   thirteen   years   acquiring
    qualifications  relevant  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  open  to
    foreigners to apply as there was a shortage and there  was  the  public
    interest which was important to enforce the Immigration  Rules  fairly.
    But it was unreasonable and it was unlawful.  There was a  question  of
    the public interest in continuing foreign students coming to the United
    Kingdom for education.

44.  As regards any adverse factors, there was  nothing  adverse.   She  was
    not guilty of any criminal or immigration  offences.   She  had  worked
    only in accordance with the Rules.  She had developed her private life.
     There was a public interest in the United Kingdom being seen as a fair
    and reasonable country.

45.  Ms Hulse relied on what was set out in the skeleton argument.   It  was
    the case  that  the  appellant's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    precarious if she had  less  than  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    position of a person would always be  precarious  at  any  time  up  to
    obtaining indefinite leave to remain even after ten years of residence.
     The Tribunal was bound to consider the proportionality balance.  There
    was enough evidence to consider what weight there was and  to  find  it
    was  in  the  public  interest.   Circumstances  had  been  beyond  the
    appellant's control.

46.  I directed that both sides put in written submissions on the law as  to
    the  exercise  of  discretion.   The  respondent  was  to  provide  her
    submissions within seven days and  the  appellant  respond  within  the
    seven days thereafter.  However unfortunately  there  was  a  delay  in
    receiving the submissions in particular from the  Secretary  of  State,
    but ultimately both sets of submissions were received.

47.  In his submissions Mr Lindsay argued that the Secretary  of  State  had
    considered whether discretion should be exercised  in  the  appellant's
    favour and decided it should not be.  He  contended  that  it  was  not
    disputed that the Rules and the policy were and are lawful or that  the
    Secretary of State's decision gave proper effect  to  those  Rules  and
    that policy.  He argued that it was clear, as had been  held  in  Ukus,
    that if a decisionmaker in  the  purported  exercise  of  a  discretion
    vested in him noted its function and what was required to be done  when
    fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision on that basis, the
    decision was a lawful one and the Tribunal could not intervene  in  the
    absence of a statutory power in deciding  that  the  discretion  should
    have been exercised differently.

48.  He referred also to what had been said by the Supreme Court in  Agyarko
    concerning the margin of appreciation due to the  Secretary  of  State.
    He argued  that  it  would  tend  to  undermine  the  important  policy
    objective consistency and predictability in the immigration  system  if
    the Tribunal could substitute its own view for that of the Secretary of
    State when she was due to consider the exercise of her discretion.

49.  On behalf of the appellant it was argued that  the  Presenting  Officer
    before the judge had erred in referring the First-tier Judge to section
    39E of the Immigration Rules.  The facts of the  case  were  reiterated
    and it was argued that the appellant  was  fully  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom as a consequence of the amount of  time  she  had  lived
    here lawfully, now in excess of thirteen years.  It was argued that had
    the judge not erroneously failed that the appellant was  excluded  from
    discretion under paragraph 39E, he would not erroneously have failed to
    consider the evidence before him, and would not have upheld the refusal
    of indefinite leave to remain by the respondent on the basis  that  the
    appellant had through no fault of her own and in  circumstances  beyond
    her control been out of the United Kingdom in excess of  the  permitted
    number of days and contrary to the Secretary of State's policy.

Discussion

50.  The issue in respect of which I found there to be an error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision was his failure to give any consideration  to  the
    period in 2015 when the appellant was outside the United  Kingdom.   It
    was a matter considered by the decision-maker, who commented  that  the
    appellant had decided to remain in the United Kingdom whilst trying  to
    resolve the issue regarding the  ATAS  certificate  and  that  she  had
    experienced delays in Iran when attempting to  obtain  entry  clearance
    and wished discretion to be applied to  her  case.   The  Secretary  of
    State applied discretion, taking into account the fact that  she  could
    have left the United Kingdom with valid leave  and  applied  for  entry
    clearance to re-enter but had chosen to overstay in the United  Kingdom
    with no valid leave.

51.  I have set out  above  the  submissions  from  the  representatives  in
    respect of this matter.  As Mr  Lindsay  pointed  out  in  his  written
    submissions, the Secretary of State had considered  whether  discretion
    should be exercised in the  appellant's  favour  and  decided  that  it
    should not be.  As he further argued, there is  no  basis  in  law  for
    interfering with the  decision  under  appeal  where  the  exercise  of
    discretion has been properly considered and clear reasons given for the
    decision.  In this regard he  relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ukus [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).

52.  I have set  out  above  also  the  arguments  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant concerning the difficulties that she experienced  during  the
    failure by ISAS to provide her with her ATAS certificate for six  weeks
    after it was requested, leading to her overstaying by  eight  days  and
    the  difficulties  she  experienced  thereafter  in  making  her  entry
    clearance application.

53.  The difficulty with the submissions made on behalf of the appellant  is
    that they do not show that the respondent unlawfully failed to consider
    the exercise of her discretion in coming to a decision  in  respect  of
    that matter.  The appellant filed her application under  the  ten  year
    lawful residence Rule on 20  October  2016,  before  the  amendment  in
    paragraph 39E to applications made on or after 24 November  2016.  That
    relates purely to an arguable error made by the judge and that decision
    has already been set aside.  It does not seem to me that it can be said
    that the Secretary of State erred as a matter of law in the exercise of
    her discretion in this case.  She gave proper consideration to the 2015
    period of absence and the reasons given for it and came to a conclusion
    which was properly open  to  her.   The  further  detail  that  is  now
    provided is not such as can justify any interference with the  exercise
    of the Secretary of State's discretion.  The decision was a lawful one.



54.  This is clearly a sympathetic case.  The  appellant  has  unfortunately
    experienced difficulties on both of the  occasions  which  led  to  the
    significant periods of  her  time  of  her  being  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, but that cannot alter  the  lawfulness  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's exercise of discretion.

55.  Nor do I consider that it is such as to place sufficient weight in  the
    Article 8 balance as to render the decision disproportionate.  In  this
    regard I take full account of the evidence of  the  appellant's  sister
    and the relationship between  the  two,  as  well  as  the  appellant's
    private life with friends and her  studies.   It  is  clearly  a  close
    relationship and one which will be disturbed by the  appellant  leaving
    the United Kingdom.  But I do not consider it has been shown  that  the
    decision is disproportionate and as a consequence I conclude  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision in this case was a  lawful  one  and  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 30 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




