
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01749/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th December 2018                     |On 08th January 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                Altaf hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Salam of Salam & Co Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Resident Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Zucker (the judge) promulgated on 27th November 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born 1st  February  1980.   On
    22nd November 2016 he applied for entry  clearance  to  enable  him  to
    settle in the UK with his spouse Nasima Begum who is a British  citizen
    and to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.

The Refusal

 3. The application was refused on 4 January 2017.  The reasons are briefly
    summarised below.

 4. The Respondent refused the  application  with  reference  to  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent contended  that  this
    applied  because  the  Appellant  had  overstayed  in  the  UK,  worked
    illegally, and had made frivolous  applications.   The  Respondent  was
    satisfied that he had contrived in a significant way to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The application was also refused  with  reference  to  S-EC.2.2.(a)  of
    Appendix FM which provides than an application will normally be refused
    on grounds of  suitability  if,  whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
    knowledge, false information, representations or  documents  have  been
    submitted in relation to the application (including  false  information
    submitted to any person to obtain a document used  in  support  of  the
    application).  The Respondent's view was that the  Appellant  had  made
    false representations as when he had been  arrested  on  11th  November
    2014 he had stated that he was not in a relationship.  However, in  his
    application form he stated  that  his  relationship  with  the  Sponsor
    started in  November  2014.   He  had  not  adequately  explained  this
    discrepancy.

 6. The application was also refused with reference to E-ECP.2.6  and  2.10
    which require that the relationship between the applicant  and  partner
    must be genuine and subsisting, and the  couple  must  intend  to  live
    together permanently in the UK.  The Respondent did not accept that the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting or that the couple intended  to
    live permanently together because of the discrepancy  as  to  when  the
    relationship started.

 7. The Respondent considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on
    Human Rights.  It was not considered that the  application  raised  any
    exceptional circumstances which would warrant granting leave  to  enter
    the UK outside the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 8. The judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor.  The judge  found  that
    the discrepancy as to when the relationship commenced was  resolved  in
    the  Appellant's  favour.   The  judge  found  that  the   relationship
    developed and matured after the period of initial detention in  the  UK
    in 2014.  The Sponsor visited the Appellant while he  was  detained  in
    the UK and thereafter their relationship matured.  The couple  returned
    to Bangladesh voluntarily.  The judge accepted that there was a genuine
    marriage in Bangladesh on 15th June 2015.

 9. The judge found that the relationship had been entered  into  when  the
    Appellant's immigration status was precarious which affected the weight
    that could be given to the relationship.  The judge found at  paragraph
    12 that the Appellant had  overstayed,  and  worked  when  he  was  not
    entitled to do so, and when initially detained had made an  application
    for asylum, albeit on advice, although it was accepted  that  this  was
    subsequently withdrawn.  The judge commented;

         "That conduct is the  sort  of  conduct  which  can  undermine  the
         immigration system  (paragraph  320(11),  though  discretionary  in
         effect applies and is to be put into the mix.)"

10. The judge found that considerable weight must be given  to  the  public
    interest in this case and that a couple do not have a right  to  choose
    where they enjoy their family life.  It  was  found  that  family  life
    could continue in Bangladesh, and in coming to that view the judge took
    into account the fact  that  the  Sponsor  is  a  British  citizen,  in
    employment, and with family connections in the UK including her son who
    is at university.  The judge concluded that  there  was  no  sufficient
    basis to find that the private interests of the Appellant  and  Sponsor
    outweigh the public interest and therefore the appeal was dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. In brief summary it was submitted that the judge had erred  in  finding
    that paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied.   It  was
    pointed out that the Appellant had voluntarily departed  from  the  UK.
    His claim for asylum was withdrawn three days after it  was  made.   It
    was therefore submitted there were no aggravating circumstances so that
    paragraph 320(11) should have had no  application  to  the  Appellant's
    case.

Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Judge  Frankish  but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Finch in the following terms;

         "The Appellant made a voluntary return to Bangladesh and waited for
         more than a year before applying for entry clearance.  The evidence
         did not suggest that the Appellant had made a frivolous application
         for asylum, as he withdrew that application when  he  had  received
         legal advice that he should do so.  There was also no evidence that
         the Appellant had absconded, failed to meet conditions of leave  or
         bail, assumed false identities, switched nationalities or failed to
         comply with re-documentation processes.

         Therefore, it is arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         reliance on paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules  undermined
         his  application  of  the  principle  of  proportionality  for  the
         purposes of Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

         Therefore, the Grounds of Appeal do identify arguable errors of law
         and it is appropriate to grant permission to appeal."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Tan conceded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained
    a material error of law in that there were no aggravating circumstances
    to justify applying paragraph 320(11), and this materially affected the
    consideration of proportionality and the public interest.

14. I took the view that the concession was rightly made and did  not  need
    to hear from Mr Salem on this point.  I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15. I was invited  by  both  representatives  to  proceed  and  remake  the
    decision based  upon  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In the circumstances I found this to be appropriate.  Mr Tan
    did not make any oral submissions indicating that he  was  content  for
    the Tribunal to make a decision based upon the evidence that  had  been
    presented.

16. Mr Salem submitted that the appeal should be allowed.  I was  asked  to
    preserve  the  finding  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the
    relationship between the parties was genuine.   That  finding  had  not
    been the subject of any challenge.  Mr  Salem  submitted  that  it  was
    clear that paragraph 320(11) should not be applied  as  there  were  no
    aggravating circumstances.

17. I was  asked  to  find  that  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  were
    satisfied, and there was no public interest in refusing entry clearance
    to the Appellant.

18. At the conclusion of  oral  submissions  I  reserved  my  decision  and
    indicated that I would produce a written decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside  as  it  was  an
    error of law to find that paragraph 320(11)  applied.   No  aggravating
    circumstances were identified which would bring paragraph 320(11)  into
    effect.

20. I preserve the finding  in  paragraph  7  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision to the effect  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  married  in
    Bangladesh on  15th  June  2015  and  the  marriage  is  genuine.   The
    discrepancy as to the commencement of the relationship was resolved  by
    the judge in the Appellant's favour.  It follows that the Appellant did
    not make false representations in his application.

21. The factual matrix is that the Appellant arrived  in  the  UK  on  21st
    February 2007 with entry clearance as a working holidaymaker.   He  had
    leave until 5th February 2009.  Prior to that  leave  expiring  he  was
    granted further leave until 31st March 2010.

22. Prior to that leave expiring the Appellant made a  further  application
    for leave to remain which was refused.  When detained he explained that
    that application was refused on 15th September 2010 and I  accept  that
    to be the case.  Thereafter the Appellant remained in  the  UK  without
    leave.  He was detained on 11th November 2014.   He initially  made  an
    asylum claim but withdrew this approximately three days later.

23. The Appellant and Sponsor  began  a  relationship  only  after  he  was
    detained.  He therefore did not make  any  false  representations  when
    spoken to by the authorities when initially detained, when he explained
    that he was not in a relationship.   I  accept  that  the  relationship
    commenced later in November 2014.

24. It is common ground that the Appellant and Sponsor left the UK on  12th
    June 2015 and the Appellant did so voluntarily.  The couple married  in
    Bangladesh on 15th June 2015.  The Sponsor subsequently returned to the
    UK leaving the Appellant in Bangladesh but has returned on at least two
    occasions to visit him.

25. The Appellant waited until 22nd  November  2016  before  submitting  an
    entry clearance application as the spouse of a British citizen.

26. I am asked to consider this appeal with reference to Article 8  of  the
    1950 Convention.  In considering Article 8 I adopt  the  balance  sheet
    approach recommended at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC
    60, and in so doing have regard to the guidance given at paragraphs  39
    to 53.

27. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances, and why the decision to refuse his  human  rights  claim
    interferes disproportionately in his family life rights.  It is for the
    Respondent to establish the public interest  factors  weighing  against
    the Appellant.  The standard of proof is  a  balance  of  probabilities
    throughout.

28. I find that Article 8 is engaged on the basis of  family  life  between
    the Appellant and Sponsor.  Although this is a human rights appeal, the
    appropriate starting point is to consider whether the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules are satisfied.

29. I set out below paragraph 320(11);

         "(11)     where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in   a
             significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether  successful  or  not);
                  and

             there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
             not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
             conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple  identities,
             switching nationality, making frivolous  applications  or  not
             complying with the re-documentation process."

30. It is clear that the Appellant  overstayed  and  did  so  substantially
    between 2010 and November 2014.  He admitted working illegally but that
    is not listed as an aggravating circumstance in paragraph 320(11).   It
    is not suggested the Appellant absconded or failed  to  meet  temporary
    admission or reporting restrictions, nor is it suggested that  he  used
    an assumed identity or multiple identities or switched  nationality  or
    did not comply with the re-documentation process.  It is common  ground
    that he left the UK voluntarily.

31. It was not suggested before me, on behalf of the Respondent,  that  the
    Appellant had made frivolous applications.  It  is  the  case  that  he
    initially made an asylum claim but withdrew that  within  approximately
    three days.  I do not  find  that  that  amounts  to  making  frivolous
    applications.  I therefore conclude that paragraph 320(11) should  have
    no application  to  the  Appellant  in  this  appeal.   In  considering
    paragraph 320(11) I have taken into account the guidance issued  in  PS
    (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC)
    to the effect that great  care  must  be  exercised  in  assessing  the
    aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and  regard  must  be
    had to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in the UK to
    leave and seek to regularise their status by an application  for  entry
    clearance.

32. As with paragraph 320(11) the burden of proof is on the Respondent with
    reference to S-EC.2.2.(a) and the burden has not been discharged.  I do
    not find that the Appellant made false representations as to  when  his
    relationship the Sponsor commenced.  I am  satisfied  on  the  evidence
    before me, that the relationship started after the Appellant  had  been
    detained and while he remained in  detention.   He  was  therefore  not
    making a false representation when initially detained  when  he  stated
    that he was not in a relationship.

33. I find that E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10 are satisfied.  The finding made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal that there is a genuine  relationship  and  genuine
    marriage  is  preserved.   That  finding  was  not  challenged.   I  am
    satisfied that the parties are in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    and intend to live together permanently in the UK.

34. I have regard to the considerations in section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  It  is  in  the  public
    interest that a person seeking to enter the UK can speak English and is
    financially independent.  The Respondent  accepts  that  the  Appellant
    passed  the  appropriate  English  language  test,  and  that  adequate
    financial maintenance is available.  Those were not reasons  given  for
    refusing entry clearance.  Section 117B(4) provides that little  weight
    should be given to a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

35. I take into account that the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor started when the Appellant was in the UK unlawfully, and was in
    detention.  However, I must take into account that the  Appellant  left
    the UK voluntarily, and that the Sponsor travelled with him,  and  that
    they married in Bangladesh.  Their relationship has continued while the
    Appellant has been in Bangladesh.  Therefore, the greater part of their
    relationship has taken place while the Appellant is outside the UK.

36. I have to consider what  public  interest  factors  indicate  that  the
    public interest would be served by  refusing  entry  clearance  to  the
    Appellant.  I have taken all factors into account, and find it relevant
    to note that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are satisfied.

37. Therefore, notwithstanding that the Appellant overstayed in the UK  for
    a substantial period of time and previously worked  illegally,  I  must
    take into account his voluntary departure, and that  he  now  satisfies
    all the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   I  conclude  that  the
    public interest does not require him to be refused entry  clearance  to
    the UK, and that refusal would be disproportionate in the circumstances
    and would breach Article 8 in relation to family life.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

There has been no request for anonymity and no anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             12th December 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I make no fee award.  The appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal that was not before the initial decision maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             12th December 2018

