
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01807/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Dora [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Manyarara made following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross  on  5th  February
    2018.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  7th  May  1963.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  13th
    January 2017 refusing her application for leave to remain in the UK  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The claimant says that she arrived in the UK in 1992 and  has  remained
    here since then.  She initially lived with one sister and then  started
    living with another sister from 2005.  She  has  a  number  of  medical
    conditions, having been diagnosed  with  depression,  microprolactinoma
    and mixed hyperpeolactinaemia which is affecting her brain.  She   also
    suffers from interstitial lung disease which is a long-term  condition.



 4. The judge, in a lengthy determination, started  her  considerations  by
    reviewing how long the claimant had actually been in the UK.  She  said
    that she had been here since  1992.   In  2008  she  had  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain on long  residence  grounds  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State and the subsequent  appeal  dismissed
    by Judge Horvath.  Judge Horvath concluded that he  was  not  satisfied
    that the claimant was living in the UK from 1992 but  was  prepared  to
    find that she was here from 1995 to April 1999.  He was also  satisfied
    that she was in the UK from 2004 to the present date.

 5. Judge Manyarara concluded that the claimant could not show that she had
    resided in the UK from 2000 to 2001 until 2003 to 2004.  She rejected a
    document from British Gas which the claimant had produced  as  reliable
    evidence to establish that she had been in the UK between those  dates.



 6. The judge considered whether the claimant could succeed under paragraph
    276ADE(1) and whether there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into society  in  Nigeria.   She  concluded  that  no  such
    obstacles could be shown.  It was  not  accurate  to  describe  her  as
    facing potential destitution if she were returned to Nigeria where  she
    had linguistic and cultural attachments and had lived for  many  years.
    Neither did the judge accept that she could  not  be  treated  for  her
    medical conditions there.  Accordingly she  was  not  able  to  succeed
    within the Immigration Rules.

 7. The judge then conducted a review of the relevant case  law.   She  did
    not accept that the claimant enjoyed a family life with her sisters  in
    the UK and if the appeal were to succeed it would have  to  be  on  the
    basis of private life.

 8.  The  judge  placed  significant  weight  upon  the  claimant's  health
    conditions and concluded at paragraph 78 as follows:

         "I accept that the mental health input the appellant  is  receiving
         forms part of her private life in the UK.  Given the fact that  the
         appellant  is  actively  engaged  in  treatment  I  find  that  the
         respondent's decision would interfere with  her  private  life.   I
         find that to prematurely disrupt the appellant's current  treatment
         is  likely  to  give  rise  to  a  conflict  and  may   trigger   a
         deterioration.  I  find  that  the  appellant  would  benefit  from
         completing her current treatment regime by the  grant  of  a  short
         period of leave in order to facilitate this.   There  has  been  an
         improvement in the appellant's mental health in the past as seen by
         the earlier medical evidence."

    The judge concluded that there were compelling  circumstances  in  this
    case  and  that  the  claimant's  removal  at  this  stage   would   be
    disproportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the decision was  irrational.   The  claimant  had  been  found  to  be
    suffering from depression and the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that
    treatment would not be available in Nigeria.  It  was  clear  that  the
    judge had given significant  weight  to  the  claimant's  private  life
    established whilst her  presence  in  the  UK  was  precarious  despite
    directing herself to Section 117B of the 2002  Act.   The  only  factor
    relied upon in finding the claimant's removal would be disproportionate
    is that it would interfere with her NHS treatment for a condition  that
    was in no way life threatening; there was no basis in law  for  such  a
    finding.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Holmes on 30th July 2018  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

11. Mr Tarlow relied on his grounds and submitted  that  the  decision  was
    perverse.

12. Mr Coleman submitted that the Secretary of State had not met  the  high
    threshold  required  to  set  aside  a  decision  on   the   basis   of
    irrationality.  This was an application for  long  residence  based  on
    Articles 3 and 8 which could have been certified as clearly  unfounded.
    The fact that it had not been certified,  and  the  claimant  had  been
    given a right of appeal, was an  acknowledgement  that  an  Immigration
    Judge was not bound to dismiss it.  This was an exceptionally long  and
    comprehensive determination.  The judge  had  accurately  recorded  the
    factual matrix and had  anxiously  scrutinised  all  of  the  evidence.
    Indeed she had found against the claimant on a number of issues.  Every
    facet of the case had been examined in  considerable  detail.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that there are  compelling  circumstances  in
    this case and that a short period of leave was  appropriate  to  enable
    her to complete her treatment.

Findings and Conclusions

13. This is a meticulous determination.  The judge carefully considered all
    of the relevant evidence and the law to be applied.  She concluded that
    the claimant could not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    but then properly went on to consider whether there were any compelling
    circumstances in this case which would require the grant  of  leave  on
    Article 8 grounds.

14. The claimant says that she has been in the UK for 26  years.   She  has
    been unable to substantiate her claim to have arrived in 1992 but it is
    accepted that she arrived in 1995 and has been here  since  then  aside
    from a period between 2001 and 2004.  She  suffers  from  a  number  of
    medical conditions. They fall well short of the Article 3 threshold but
    nevertheless were sufficient for the judge to give a  ruling  that  she
    would be applying  the  joint  presidential  guidance  in  relation  to
    vulnerable adults.

15. She recorded  the  treatment  which  the  claimant  was  receiving  for
    depression, which was described as severe and psychotic  and  concluded
    that a short period  of  leave  in  order  to  facilitate  her  present
    treatment was the proportionate outcome.

16. The judge set out, as acknowledged by the grounds, the correct law  and
    was fully aware that the claimant's status in the UK  had  always  been
    precarious and therefore her private life  ought  to  be  given  little
    weight.  Little weight is not of course no weight and on any  view  she
    has been here for a very long period of time.

17. The judge had evidence before her, unchallenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, that the claimant was in the middle  of  treatment  and  in  her
    view, a short period of leave in order to allow  her  to  complete  her
    current treatment was the proper course. In fact the claimant has  been
    in the UK for a further eight months pursuing her appeal.

18. I cannot see that this is an irrational decision.  I take Mr  Coleman's
    point, that the fact that the Secretary of State chose not  to  certify
    this appeal was an acceptance by him that it would be open to  a  judge
    to allow the appeal.  However, that in itself is not a complete  answer
    to the irrationality challenge. The  Secretary of State quite  properly
    allowed the opportunity of an appeal in order to permit  the  claimant,
    for example, to put forward further evidence both in  relation  to  her
    stay in the UK and her medical  conditions.   Nevertheless,  it  is  an
    acknowledgment on the Secretary of State's part that this is an  appeal
    which could potentially have succeeded.

19. In these circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  irrationality
    challenge is made out.

Notice of Decision

The original judge did not err in law and the decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


