
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/01436/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2017                     |    On 28 November 2017           |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mrs Grace Adeleye
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Margaret Olusegun
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant Secretary of State brings an appeal  against  a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Atreya dated 30 December 2016 allowing the
    Respondent's human rights appeal. The Respondent had  appealed  against
    the Appellant's decision of 23 June  2015  refusing  her  human  rights
    application made on or around 28 May 2015.

2.   The Respondent was born on 14 January 1959 and is  therefore  57  years
    old. Her immigration history is, in summary, that she  had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2002 with valid  entry  clearance  as  a  student
    nurse. She was granted further periods of leave to remain as a  student
    nurse, the last expiring on 30 May 2010. She had returned to Nigeria on
    a number of occasions during that time.  The  Respondent  made  further
    applications for leave to remain or for  a  residence  card  under  EEA
    Regulations, unsuccessfully.  She has been  an  overstayer  in  the  UK
    since 30 May 2010.

3.   The Respondent has a daughter present in the United  Kingdom.   At  the
    relevant time  of  the  Appellant's  decision  on  23  June  2015,  the
    Respondent's daughter had limited leave to remain as a dependant of her
    husband, who was  a  Tier  1  points-based  Migrant.   The  Appellant's
    daughter and  husband  have  two  children  aged  4  and  just  over  1
    respectively at the time of the judge's decision.  The basis  on  which
    the Respondent sought leave to remain, and argued that her removal from
    the United Kingdom would amount to a disproportionate interference with
    her private and family life, was on the basis that she lived  with  her
    daughter and grandchildren, and provided an important part of the  care
    of the children.  Her son-in-law spent much  of  his  time  working  in
    Glasgow.

4.   The evidence of the Respondent  and  supporting  witnesses  before  the
    judge was not challenged by way of cross-examination (see  paragraph  4
    of the judge's decision).  I find it  significant  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the Respondent's evidence.  The judge made  the  following
    findings of fact.

         "It is clear to me from the  evidence  presented  to  me  that  the
         Appellant is a key and integral member  of  the  family  (paragraph
         23).


         The Appellant provides essential support to her daughter  which  is
         above  and  beyond  the  normal  level  of  support   provided   by
         grandparents.  Her daughter is vulnerable because of past postnatal
         depression.  The Appellant has lived with her  daughter  since  the
         birth of her daughter's second child (just over a year old  at  the
         date of hearing)."


5.   Before the judge was also a report of  an  independent  social  worker.
    The judge noted  that  her  qualifications  and  credentials  were  not
    disputed by the Appellant.  She was clearly experienced in  the  family
    jurisdiction.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  social  worker  was  an
    independent  and  impartial  expert  who  was  qualified  and  able  to
    undertake an assessment on the functioning  of  the  family  (paragraph
    24).  The judge summarised relevant extracts from the  social  worker's
    report, which, in the context of the judge's decision overall, she must
    be taken to have agreed with.

6.   The judge set out the  following  extracts  from  the  social  worker's
    report:

         "Having gained a fuller understanding of the role she plays  within
         the family, it is clear that  the  family  would  likely  be  at  a
         disadvantage without her  continued  support  and  intervention  as
         there is no service that could provide  this  level  of  healthcare
         even with financial support.


         In my professional opinion Ms Grace Adeleye continues to fulfil  an
         essential role as maternal grandmother providing both emotional and
         practical support for her  daughter  and  grandchildren.   She  has
         ensured that her daughter has been able to  function  as  a  parent
         with a child who has repeating illnesses the effect  of  which  the
         mother has found quite debilitating and stressful.


         Ms Adeleye would like to be available for  her  family,  supporting
         her daughter to manage her  grandchildren's  care.   She  has  been
         integral  to  the  family  functioning  and  has  provided  both  a
         practical and emotional support for her daughter and  grandchildren
         and would be exceptionally grateful for the opportunity to continue
         to provide this level of support."


7.   The judge also noted at paragraph 26  that  the  younger  daughter  had
    been admitted at least three times to hospital with bronchitis or other
    viruses and had required nebulisers.  The judge found  that  the  child
    had been referred to an asthma  clinic  and  suffered  from  a  serious
    medical condition that has required hospitalisation on  more  than  one
    occasion (paragraph 27).

8.   Against that background, and findings of  fact,  the  judge  considered
    applicable Immigration Rules, and Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  The  judge  directed  herself  as  to  the  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, at para 29:

              "(vi) ... is aged 18 years of above, has lived continuously in
             the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."




    The judge then found as follows:


         "30. In my judgment there are very significant  obstacles  for  the
             Appellant to return to Nigeria.  The Appellant has lived  here
             since  2003,  i.e.   thirteen   years.    Her   children   and
             grandchildren are in the United Kingdom  including  a  British
             son [name given].  She has no children in Nigeria and no other
             close family in Nigeria because she is a single woman and  her
             only other child lives in Canada.  She has lived in the United
             Kingdom for thirteen years and is  an  integral  part  of  her
             daughter's life and  provides  love  and  practical  emotional
             support to her daughter above and beyond the ordinary  because
             she lives with her grandchildren, their  father  being  absent
             during the working week and because  the  youngest  child  has
             health  problems   including   asthma   which   has   required
             hospitalisation.  The youngest child is vulnerable on  account
             of her health and asthma which required  hospital  admissions.
             The Appellant provides  essential  care  and  support  to  her
             daughter and grandchildren.


         31.  I allow the appeal under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
             Rules."


    I also note that at the end of her decision, at paragraph 52, the judge
    purports to allow the  appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


9.   At paragraph 32 onwards the judge considers further  or  alternatively,
    if she was wrong about her assessment under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Rules, the Respondent's position under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  The judge ultimately found that the decision to remove  the  Respondent
    from the United Kingdom would be disproportionate to  her  private  and
    family life,  and  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  at
    paragraph 51 of her decision.

11.  The Appellant Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision in grounds dated 11 January 2017.  In  her  first
    ground the Appellant argues that the judge has misdirected  herself  in
    law in her consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  In  summary,  the
    Appellant argues that most of the considerations which  the  judge  had
    set out at that part of her decision related to the  Respondent's  ties
    to the United Kingdom, and not to whether, as was  required  under  the
    relevant Rule, the consideration of whether  the  Respondent  had  very
    significant  obstacles  to  integration  into  Nigeria.   Further,  the
    Respondent argued that  the  test  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration was a high threshold and the judge  had  failed  to  engage
    with that Rule and the factors relied upon did not demonstrate that the
    Rule had been met.

12.  The Secretary of State's second ground challenges the  judge's  finding
    on Article 8.  It was argued that the judge had  failed  to  appreciate
    the public interest in removing the Respondent; any  disadvantage  that
    the children may suffer without the Respondent could  be  mitigated  by
    other  assistance  or  the   family   moving   to   Glasgow;   parental
    responsibility remained with the children's parents; the obligation  on
    the judge under  s.117B  NIAA  2002  to  place  little  weight  on  the
    Respondent's private life was not manifested in the  judge's  decision;
    there was no reasoning as to why the Respondent had a family life  with
    her adult son; the Respondent was not  financially  independent.  In  a
    decision dated 20 July  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett
    permission has been given on both grounds.

13.  At the outset of the hearing before me, I indicated to the  parties  my
    preliminary view that there appeared to be an error in the judge having
    purported to allow the Respondent's appeal under the Immigration Rules.
     As has been the case since the Immigration Act 2014  was  implemented,
    the First-tier Tribunal no longer has jurisdiction to allow  an  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  The only ground of  appeal  available  in
    the present appeal was whether the decision to refuse the  Respondent's
    human rights claim was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998,  i.e.  on   the   basis   that   the   decision   represented   a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  Respondent's  rights   under
    Article 8 ECHR.

14.  Of course, whether a particular Immigration  Rule  is  satisfied  is  a
    relevant finding to be made by a First-tier  Judge,  and  the  positive
    satisfaction of the Immigration Rules will be a  weighty  consideration
    in the proportionality balancing exercise (see Mostafa  (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC)).   That  was  not  the  judge's
    approach in the present case, however.  Both parties agreed  that  that
    was an error of approach, but whether that  was  material  depended  on
    other matters.

15.  Mr Clarke advanced his grounds of appeal as per the  grounds  on  which
    permission had been granted.  In fairness, Mr Symes did not put up very
    great resistance to the proposition that the judge had erred in law  in
    appearing to find that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) had been  satisfied.  Mr
    Symes was prepared to accept that the issue raised in that paragraph of
    the Rules was essentially one of the situation that an  individual  may
    face upon return to their country of origin, rather than an  assessment
    of the individual's ties to the United Kingdom.

16.  In that regard I find that the  judge  did  err  in  law  not  only  in
    purporting to allow the appeal under immigration rules  (para  31)  but
    also  in  purporting  to  find  that  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) were met, given that most of the considerations that  she
    set  out  at  paragraph  30  were  considerations   relating   to   the
    Respondent's ties to the United Kingdom, and the only issue relevant to
    whether there would be very significant obstacles to  the  Respondent's
    integration in Nigeria were the fact that she had no children  in  that
    country and no other close family ties there and was  a  single  woman.
    Although Mr Symes did not concede that there was any material error,  I
    find that there was, as the judge has  taken  into  account  irrelevant
    considerations, and has failed to give adequate reasons for her finding
    that 276ADE(1)(vi) was satisfied.

16.  However, Mr Symes  defended  the  attack  on  the  judge's  alternative
    finding under Article 8  more  vigorously.   He  argued  that  she  had
    directed herself entirely appropriately in law at paragraphs 33 to  34,
    identifying  that  there  needed  to  be  compelling  reasons  why  the
    Respondent's  removal  would  be  disproportionate  and  that  she  was
    entitled to leave to remain outside the Rules.

17.  At  paragraph  37  the  judge  had  reiterated  her  finding  that  the
    Respondent provided a primary carer type role to her grandchildren.  At
    paragraph 38 the judge found as follows:

         "I find that the Appellant  is  a  biological  grandparent  to  the
         children and provides the quality of care of  a  primary  carer  or
         parent through her care and support and is an integral part of  the
         family unit.  The rights of the grandchildren have to be taken into
         account in the context of the Appellant's appeal."


18.  Mr Symes argued that that was a finding which is entirely open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before her, in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    Respondent's evidence not  having  been  challenged  by  the  Appellant
    Secretary of State.  Mr Symes argued  that  there  was  an  appropriate
    further direction in law at paragraph 39 of the decision regarding  the
    five stage steps to consider in the case of Razgar v Secretary of State
    for the Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  840  and  that  the  judge
    considered  the  relevant  considerations  in  Section  117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (see  judge's  decision
    paragraph 44). She took into  account  at  paragraphs  32  and  40  the
    Respondent's overstaying, and at paragraphs 32 and 44 the  significance
    that the Respondent  did  not  meet  the  immigration  rules  (in  this
    alternate finding).

19.  Mr Symes argued that the judge had made reference to the importance  of
    maintaining Immigration Rules and the public interest in doing  so  and
    that the judge's reasons overall were  sustainable,  and  her  findings
    were ones which were open to her on the evidence.

20.  I find that the Secretary of State's challenge  in  her  second  ground
    represents, in general terms, a disagreement with the  outcome  of  the
    appeal under Article 8.  The submissions set out at paragraphs 6 to  10
    of the grounds of appeal have the tenor more of arguments to be made on
    the  merits,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  rather  than  identifying
    specific material errors of law in the judge's decision.

21.  Mr Clarke accepted that the judge  had  not  at  paragraph  46  made  a
    finding that the Respondent had a family life with her British  citizen
    brother, and that she had not materially misdirected herself in law  or
    failed to give reasons on that matter, and for the avoidance of  doubt,
    I find that any reference to the Respondent's brother's presence in the
    United Kingdom appears to have played little relevance in  the  judge's
    overall determination of the appeal.

22.  I agree with and adopt as part of my reasoning the  submissions  of  Mr
    Symes. I find that the Appellant Secretary of State's grounds of appeal
    do not identify a material error of law.  Although the judge  erred  in
    law in purporting to allow the appeal under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  I
    find that this is not material to her conclusion that the  appeal  fell
    to be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.  For those  reasons,  I  find  that
    there is no material error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision,  and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's  appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The judge's decision did not involve the making of a material error  of
    law.


    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                    Date: 28.11.17

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


