
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01966/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 26 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                               SARABJIT SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel, instructed by Cameron Clarke
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 5 October 2018  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Brewer which refused the Article 8 ECHR  appeal  of
    the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 21 June 1983.   He  claims
    to have arrived illegally in the UK in  2003.   On  16  June  2011  the
    appellant underwent a Sikh  marriage  to  a  British  national.  On  19
    September 2012 the couple registered the marriage.

 3. On 15 November 2016 the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis  of  his  marriage.   The  respondent  refused  the
    application on 16 January 2017.   The  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brewer on 20 September 2018.

 4. In a bundle provided approximately two days prior to the hearing and at
    the hearing before Judge Brewer, the appellant raised new evidence.  In
    a witness statement dated 17 September 2018, the  appellant  maintained
    that his wife's family had forced her to leave him and go to live  with
    them in Wales and that he had been unable to contact her.  Secondly, he
    maintained that an EEA national was pregnant with his  child  and  that
    although they were not a couple, he asserted a  family  life  with  the
    unborn child.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with these matters as follows:

         "18.  The  basis  of  the  appellant's   appeal   became   somewhat
             convoluted, for reasons I shall refer to below.  In short,  at
             the outset of the hearing the appellant  stated  that  he  had
             made a woman who is not his wife pregnant and  therefore  says
             that he has family life with  his  wife,  RK,  and  'putative'
             family life with his unborn child.  I  shall  return  to  this
             below."

    and

          "22.    Before turning to the facts I have found  I  turn  to  the
             basis of the appeal.  At the outset of the  hearing  Mr  Saini
             introduced a number of new documents which he said showed that
             the appellant had impregnated a lady who I shall refer  to  as
             M.  The appellant provided a supplementary  witness  statement
             in which he says that he has become close  to  M,  they  slept
             together, and she is expecting his child in November 2018.   M
             was not  present  and  provided  no  witness  statement.   The
             documents provided by Mr Saini in relation to  this  contained
             no evidence that M is pregnant, if she  is  pregnant,  by  the
             appellant.

         23.  We discussed this, and the  parties  agreed  that  the  matter
             raised was a new matter and that I could take it into  account
             with the consent of the respondent pursuant to  Section  85(5)
             of the 2002 Act which is an imperative: The Tribunal must  not
             consider a new matter unless the Secretary of State has  given
             the Tribunal consent to do so.   The  respondent  did  not  so
             consent.

         24.  Mr Saini then asked for an adjournment so that the  respondent
             would have time to consider  the  new  matter.   However,  the
             respondent's position was that given M is an EEA national  the
             new matter is essentially a wholly new application given  that
             if M is due to  give  birth  with  the  appellant's  child  in
             November, she became pregnant  in  or  around  February  2018,
             despite which  there  has  been  no  new  application  and  no
             concrete evidence that  the  appellant  is  the  father.   The
             respondent would not consider the new claim as a new matter in
             the present  appeal  but  would  obviously  consider  a  fresh
             application.

         25.  Given  the  discussion  I  rejected  the  application  for  an
             adjournment and the hearing proceeded."

 6. The appellant objects to the refusal to adjourn. The adjournment should
    have been granted in order to allow for more evidence  to  be  obtained
    about the EEA national and her pregnancy  and  for  the  respondent  to
    consider whether to consent to that new matter being admitted  as  part
    of the appeal.   The  grounds  also  objected  to  the  FTTJ  providing
    insufficient reasoning for the refusal to adjourn; see paragraph 14  of
    the grounds.

 7.  Following  the  provisions  of  Section  85  of  the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2002, Judge Brewer had to decide whether he was able to
    "consider" the new material as part of the appeal.  In  line  with  the
    guidance of Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017]  UKUT  00488
    (IAC),  paragraph  23  shows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
    determined that the new  evidence  was  a  new  matter.  The  appellant
    accepted before Judge Brewer that he was seeking to admit a new  matter
    and that the consent of the respondent was required for that new matter
    to be admitted following Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.

 8. As recorded in the final sentence of paragraph 23 of  the  decision  of
    Judge Brewer, the respondent did not  consent.  The  provisions  of  s.
    85(5) of the 2002 Act are mandatory:

         "(5) But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless  the
         Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to  do  so.  (my
         emphasis)"


    Where the respondent did not consent, Judge Brewer was  prevented  from
    considering the new evidence on the pregnancy of the EEA national.  Put
    another way, he had no jurisdiction to consider the new material  about
    the EEA national.

 9. If the appellant objects to the Home Office Presenting Officer refusing
    consent and preventing the First-tier Tribunal from considering his new
    evidence about the EEA national, his remedy is not via  this  statutory
    appeal but judicial review. That is clear from paragraph 2 of the  head
    note of Quaidoo (new matter procedure process) [2018] UKUT  0087  (IAC)
    states:

         "2.  If an appellant considers that the decision of the  respondent
         not to consent to the consideration of a new  matter  is  unlawful,
         either by reference to the respondent's guidance or otherwise,  the
         appropriate remedy is a challenge by way of judicial review."


10. Before me, the appellant clarified that this was not the basis  of  his
    challenge. Rather, jurisdiction having been settled by the respondent's
    refusal to consent, it was still open to Judge  Brewer  to  adjourn  in
    order for the appellant to  provide  further  evidence  about  the  EEA
    national and her pregnancy. His decision not to do so was unlawful  and
    unreasoned.

11. I did not find that submission was capable of showing an error  of  law
    in the decision of Judge Brewer not to adjourn. He was being  asked  to
    adjourn for  further  evidence  on  a  matter  over  which  he  had  no
    jurisdiction. By making the adjournment application the  appellant  was
    asking for more time to reformulate or add to his new evidence  in  the
    hope that the respondent might make a different decision on  consenting
    to admit the new matter. Judge Brewer was under no obligation to  grant
    an adjournment  on  that  basis.  On  the  contrary,  he  acted  wholly
    correctly and in line with  the  overriding  objective  to  hear  cases
    fairly and justly in refusing to adjourn for the appellant  to  provide
    further evidence on a matter over which the First-tier Tribunal had  no
    jurisdiction. He provided reasons in paragraph  25,  stating  that  the
    respondent's position was clear and it was not appropriate  to  adjourn
    for the issue to be looked at again where that was so.

12. Paragraph 16 of the grounds maintains that the First-tier Tribunal also
    erred in failing to consider the application for a further  new  matter
    to be  admitted,  that  matter  being  the  threat  of  harm  from  the
    appellant's family or his wife's family in India where they  were  from
    different castes.  This submission can be dealt with relatively briefly
    where the materials show that this was not  a  new  matter  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It was raised as part of the original  application
    for leave to remain. The respondent addressed it in the refusal letter,
    on page 6 of 8 finding that the claim to fear harm on return  to  India
    had  no  basis  where  the  appellant  had  "provided  no  evidence  to
    corroborate these claims".  Further, the First-tier Tribunal went on to
    address the claim of harm on return to India in  paragraph  50  of  the
    decision, finding it had no merit.

13. I therefore found that the appellant's first ground of challenge had no
    merit.

14. The appellant's second ground, set out in paragraphs 33 to  40  of  the
    written grounds, challenges the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  on
    the Article 8 ECHR claim and, in particular, on  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant having been forcibly separated from his wife by  her  family.
    The written grounds, not elaborated by Mr Saini at the hearing, are, in
    my view, only a disagreement with  the  decision  and  not  capable  of
    showing irrationality or perversity  in  the  reasoning  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Brewer  who  considered  the  Article  8  ECHR   claim
    thoroughly in paragraphs 27 to 48 of his decision.

15. Paragraph 40 of the grounds  maintains  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to give weight to the evidence  of  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist,
    whose report included a disclosure from the appellant's wife  that  she
    had been sexually abused by a sibling.  The grounds are misconceived in
    suggesting that the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that  this  part
    of the report or that the wife may have been subject  to  abuse  within
    her own family. The findings of Judge Brewer in  paragraph  47  of  his
    decision show the opposite, the judge accepting that the wife disclosed
    this matter to her GP in 1998. It was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to find it unlikely that the appellant's family would have  reacted  to
    this allegation in 2017 by "abducting" the appellant's wife  where  she
    had reported the allegation to her GP  some  10  years  earlier.   That
    finding was open to him. The evidence  did  not  oblige  the  judge  to
    accept the appellant's claim that he had been forcibly  separated  from
    his wife who was being in some way mistreated by her birth family.

16. Further, the First-tier Tribunal gave wholly cogent reasons for placing
    little weight on the evidence  of  Ms  Bilkhu  of  Jeena,  a  community
    organisation, who had assisted the appellant  in  trying  to  find  his
    wife. The judge identified in paragraph  45  that   Ms  Bilkhu  had  no
    psychological or psychiatric qualifications and placed little weight on
    her evidence where she stated that I oral evidence that  "her  insights
    are based on the fact that she "reads people"  well".   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was not obliged to accept her evidence at its highest and  the
    grounds merely seek to state otherwise.

17. For all of these reasons I did not find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal disclosed an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  it  must
    therefore stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  24  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


