
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01512/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House via Skype   |Decision & Reason Promulgated      |
|For Business                       |                                   |
|On 19th May 2021                   |On 10th June 2021                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AZIZ DAGLI
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Jibowu, of Counsel, instructed by Rogols
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Turkey born on 25th  February  1965.  He
       came to the UK as a visitor in October 1989.  He  married  a  British
       Citizen, Ms Karen Cross, on 4th April 1990, and applied to remain  as
       a spouse. His application was granted, and on 17th March 1994 he  was
       granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

    2. On 17th October 2018 the claimant was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
       grievous  bodily  harm  and  sentenced  to  54  months  (4.5   years)
       imprisonment  at  Leicester  County  Court.  As  a  result  of   this
       conviction the Secretary of State served on him a notice of intention
       to deport on 7th December 2018.  The  claimant  raised  human  rights
       grounds as to why he should not be deported,  but  the  Secretary  of
       State concluded that a deportation order  should  be  signed  against
       him, and this was done on 14th January 2019. The appeal against  that
       deportation order was allowed on human rights grounds  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Obhi  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  30th
       September 2019. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of
       State by First-tier Tribunal Judge LS Bulpitt on 16th  January  2020.
       On 15th June 2020 I found, in a decision  on  the  papers,  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and set aside that decision  for
       the reasons which can be found in my decision at Annex A.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19, and with regard to the overriding object set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal Procedure Rules to decide matters fairly  and  justly,  this
       matter was heard via Skype for Business, a format  to  which  neither
       party raised an objection. There  were  no  significant  problems  of
       audibility or connectivity at  the  hearing  once  the  claimant  was
       resent the joining link to the hearing.

    4. The matter comes before me now to remake the appeal. The parties both
       confirmed that there was no objection to the finding of an  error  of
       law on the papers applying Rule 34 of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
       Rules 2008 in light of the decision in R (on the application of JCWI)
       v President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin).

    5. In my error of law decision, I retained  from  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal the findings summarised at paragraphs 8 and 9  of
       my error of law decision.

    6. Directions from Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  dated  27th  August  2020
       required the claimant to inform the Upper Tribunal  if  the  remaking
       hearing would involve witnesses giving oral evidence and  whether  an
       interpreter was required by 5th September 2020, and directed that any
       witness statements be served 10 days prior  to  the  hearing.  In  my
       error of law decision  I  required  that  there  should  be  skeleton
       arguments served and filed by the parties by 28th July 2020,  and  an
       agreed consolidated bundle serve 7 day prior to the remaking hearing.
       The claimant filed a consolidated bundle and a skeleton  argument  in
       accordance with these directions, and  informed  the  Upper  Tribunal
       that there would be witnesses giving evidence, but  no  need  for  an
       interpreter. No skeleton argument was provided by  the  Secretary  of
       State, for which Mr Kotas apologised.

  Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    7. The evidence of the claimant from his  written  statements  and  oral
       evidence is, in summary, as follows. He arrived in the UK with a  six
       month visa to complete a language course in October 1989. He met  and
       formed a relationship with a British citizen Karen Cross, now  Dagli,
       and they were married on 4th April 1990. Karen had a daughter H,  who
       was 6 years old when they married, and whom the claimant  brought  up
       as a child of the family. He obtained permission  to  remain  on  the
       basis of his marriage, and initially did unskilled work as a  machine
       operator in two printers and a pork  pie  factory  in  Leicester  and
       worked as a general labourer on  building  sites  in  Leicester.  The
       couple had two children together: a boy, R, born in 1991 and a  girl,
       B, born in 1992. The claimant has been known by the English name Ben,
       rather than Aziz his Turkish name, since before he came to the UK.

    8. Sadly, the claimant's wife was then  diagnosed  with  cancer  of  the
       uterus and had three major operations. He could not cope and  started
       to drink excessively, and was convicted of a number of  drink-driving
       offences, but after doing a drink-driving course he ceased  offending
       in this way. He progressed to doing  work  as  a  joiner  and  Corian
       fabricator in Leicester and Rugby. His wife made a recovery from  her
       cancer, and he moved to working  for  himself  fitting  kitchens  and
       bedrooms for customers and as a subcontractor for  companies.  During
       the credit crunch he returned to work as a joiner for  two  companies
       and acquired skills in plumbing. He then  worked  for  himself  again
       designing and fitting kitchens, bathrooms and bedrooms. He has a good
       circle of friends in Leicester; prior to imprisonment he was a member
       of Northampton Archery Club and did  work  for  homeless  and  animal
       welfare charities, and has been a kind and helpful  neighbour  as  is
       reflected in the letters from friends supporting him remaining in the
       UK.

    9. The claimant deeply regrets his criminal behaviour on 23rd  September
       2017, and says he will never offend again.  In  prison  he  completed
       courses in cleaning and IT skills. He  is  entirely  integrated  into
       British life as are all of  his  friends  and  family  here.  He  was
       released from prison in January 2021 and has returned  to  live  with
       his wife. Since coming out of prison the claimant has set  up  a  new
       company fitting kitchens and bathrooms,  and  believes  that  he  can
       establish himself well in this area again if permitted to  remain  in
       the UK. He has already started to obtain work and has money in a bank
       account relating to this business. He  will  use  subcontractors  and
       provide employment to others as he is getting older and cannot do  it
       all himself. He is also planning to employ his son R to  give  him  a
       sense of hope and purpose despite his debilitating medical condition,
       and has registered for PAYE to be able to do this properly. An  email
       from the claimant's probation officer, dated 18th May 2021,  confirms
       the records relating to the claimant show that he has  complied  with
       his conditions of release, has been in employment, and demonstrated a
       positive attitude during supervision.

   10. The claimant says that he has no connections with Turkey and has only
       travelled there for the funeral of  his  father  and  for  occasional
       holidays, and has equally had holidays in Spain, France and the  USA.
       He says that the only work he did in Turkey, prior to coming  to  the
       UK, was in the army. He joined at 17 years, become a sergeant in  the
       air force at the age of 18years until he left when he came to the  UK
       when he was 24 years old. It would not be possible to go back to this
       career. He says that he could not make a living in Turkey as all  his
       connections and experience as a self-employed fitter are  in  the  UK
       and he lacks paper qualifications  and  is  nearly  at  the  official
       Turkish retirement age of 60 years, and further he would  not  get  a
       pension there as he has not worked for the past 30 years  in  Turkey.
       When he travelled to Turkey for his father's funeral in 2018  he  saw
       that there were very high levels of unemployment even  amongst  young
       people, and he does not believe he would be able to  support  himself
       through self-employed work in his country of origin as no  one  would
       take him seriously at his age. He  and  his  wife  have  only  a  few
       hundred pounds of savings to fall back on which would not suffice for
       him to be able to rent somewhere as 6 months  or  a  year's  rent  is
       needed upfront in Turkey. The claimant accepts that he speaks Turkish
       but as he has no Turkish friends and has been in the UK for 31  years
       it is possible to tell that he does not and has not lived  in  Turkey
       for some time from the way he speaks.

   11. The claimant says he could not imagine not living in the UK with  his
       wife, the three adult children and 5 grandchildren: J aged  17  years
       from his step-daughter H and T aged 11 years from  his  step-daughter
       H; and M aged 9 years, R aged 5 years and I aged 3  months  from  his
       son R. They all live in Leicester, H and  her  partner  and  children
       live about half a mile away from the claimant and  his  wife;  and  R
       with his partner and children and B live about 12  miles  away.  They
       see each other a lot, almost every day.

   12. The claimant says that he has suffered from depression  since  before
       he went to prison and for which he has been prescribed Fluoxetine, an
       anti-depressant both prior to prison and whilst in prison, and  which
       he continues to take now. He argues that his mental health would also
       make it difficult for him to attempt to take on a new life in  Turkey
       at his age. Ultimately, he does not believe he would  survive  if  he
       had to return to Turkey with no family, no work, no  home,  no  money
       and without any financial support from the Turkish government.

   13. The claimant says that he also needs to remain in the  UK  to  assist
       his son R with his life-long  Crohn's  disease.  Before  he  went  to
       prison he kept an eye on R  and  provided  him  with  some  work  and
       ensured that he took his medication correctly.  R has not coped  well
       whilst he was in prison for 2 years and 3 months and is currently not
       compliant with his medication as he is  having  a  mental  breakdown,
       suffering from anxiety  and  drinking  too  much  alcohol.  When  the
       claimant came out of prison everywhere was in lockdown so it was  not
       possible for the claimant to immediately provide  for  R,  but  since
       April 2021 he has set about sorting things  out.  He  drives  him  to
       hospital for his appointments around once a month and  checks  he  is
       taking his medication. Neither R nor his wife can drive. R  comes  to
       stay with the claimant and his wife for three nights of the  week  so
       as to give him and his family a break, particularly as his wife has a
       new baby and they want to protect the grandchildren (M, R and I) from
       seeing R when he is in a bad way. The claimant will also  shortly  be
       able to provide R with some work which will assist him with acquiring
       some self-respect. Due to R's medical conditions (anxiety and Crohn's
       which means he constantly needs the toilet and is often in  pain)  he
       has never had work except with the claimant.

   14. The claimant says that his wife did her best with  R  whilst  he  was
       away but ultimately R needs his help. R's siblings cannot help as the
       claimant does as they have their own work and  families:  he  is  the
       only one who is self-employed and so is able to have the  flexibility
       to give R the support he needs.

   15. Medical notes from R's GP for May 2021 shows  that  he  is  currently
       suffering from a flare up of his Crohn's disease,  for  which  he  is
       awaiting further investigations, and also that he is failing to  take
       his  medication  for  this  condition,  and  that  he  suffers   from
       depression and anxiety with panic  attacks  for  which  he  has  been
       prescribed Sertraline.  The notes also record that he is  drinking  a
       litre of brandy or whisky twice a week. The notes indicate  that  the
       stress of  the  deportation  proceedings  against  the  claimant  are
       contributors to the worsening of his mental health and his failure to
       take his Crohn's disease medication. A letter dated 19th  April  2021
       from Dr Peerally of the gastroenterological  department  a  Leicester
       University Hospital sets out that R  has  terminal  Crohn's  disease,
       meaning that it is a condition which will last his  entire  life.  It
       also expresses concerns that  R's  is  not  managing  his  medication
       properly and instead of taking what was prescribed is  buying  potent
       steroid  medication  from  the  internet  and  taking  it  completely
       randomly. Dr Peerally has made a plan to gradually take R  off  these
       inappropriate drugs and replace them with safer steroids, and  to  do
       further investigations as R is still opening his bowels 6 to 10 times
       a day.

   16. The claimant says that his wife could  not  live  in  Turkey  as  she
       cannot speak  Turkish  and  has  a  long  history  of  mental  health
       problems. She is nearly 60 years old and has lived in  Leicester  all
       of her life. She works part-time for Sharps Bedrooms  and  could  not
       live away from her children and grandchildren. She is emotionally and
       financially dependent on the claimant, and he on her. They own  their
       own home without a mortgage.   Whilst  he  was  in  prison  his  wife
       survived, in part, on money he got from selling  his  car  and  other
       savings he provided her with before starting  his  sentence.  He  was
       given additional bail to sort out his affairs to do this by the judge
       prior to serving his sentence.

   17. Mrs Karen Dagli's evidence is, in summary, as follows.  She  is  very
       upset at the thought of the claimant being deported from the UK,  and
       could not imagine life without him. She could not  leave  the  UK  to
       live in Turkey because she could not leave  her  home,  children  and
       grandchildren as they are all very close.  She  says  that  she  also
       could not adjust to living with the claimant in Turkey  as  she  does
       not speak Turkish, or indeed any other  foreign  language,  does  not
       understand the society there, and could not work as she does  in  the
       UK. She has a job working three days a week booking appointments  for
       designers to go to people's homes for Sharps Bedrooms.  The  claimant
       does not follow a Turkish lifestyle in any way. She and the  claimant
       also need to remain in the UK to help  her  son  R  who  has  Crohn's
       disease, which causes him to suffer from  fatigue  and  pain  on  bad
       days, and further he also suffers badly from anxiety and is  drinking
       too much. She says she has tried to help R and is very worried  about
       him, but it is only the claimant R accepts help from  with  his  ill-
       health. No one else in the family  could  help  R  with  his  medical
       problems bar the claimant.  She also helps R  by  looking  after  her
       granddaughter on a regular basis, and also helps her daughter H  with
       childcare for her daughter T twice a week and at weekends if she  has
       to work. Mrs Dagli also needs the claimant  to  survive  financially.
       She struggled whilst he was in prison and has been in receipt of  tax
       credits due to her low wage, and only has a small amount  of  savings
       of around �1000. She also suffers from anxiety, for which  she  takes
       medication,  and  two  autoimmune  conditions  including  a   thyroid
       problems.

   18. The claimant relies upon the report of Dr Marzio  Ascione,  chartered
       clinical psychologist dated 7th September 2019. Dr Ascione  sets  out
       his qualifications and confirms his  duty  to  the  court.  Pertinent
       findings in  the  report  are  as  follows:   that  the  claimant  is
       intellectually in the high average range but with characteristics  of
       attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: that the  claimant  suffers
       from moderate level depression  for  which  he  has  been  prescribed
       Fluoxetine since October 2018;  separation from his family is  likely
       to cause the  claimant's  mental  state  to  deteriorate,  which,  if
       untreated, would make it difficult for him to obtain employment;  and
       the claimant is at low risk of re-offending in the community.

   19. It is argued by the Secretary of State in  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter and in oral submissions from Mr Kotas, in summary, as follows.
       He accepts there are no issues of credibility. It is simply a  matter
       of applying the facts to the legal framework. The claimant  has  been
       sentenced to 54 months imprisonment so the  public  interest  in  his
       deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by  the  existence  of  very
       compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in  the
       exceptions to deportation at 1 and 2 of s.117C  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   20.  The more serious  the  offence  committed  the  greater  the  public
       interest is in the deportation.  It  is  argued  that  this  claimant
       committed a very serious offence as he could have  caused  death  and
       not just serious injury as he was using his car as a weapon, and this
       must be given proper weight in the proportionality exercise.

   21. With respect to the second, family life, exception to deportation  it
       is argued that this is not met for the following reasons. It  is  not
       conceded that it would be unduly harsh for Mrs Dagli to accompany her
       husband to Turkey but no  specific  submissions  were  made  on  this
       point. It is however argued that it would not be unduly harsh for the
       claimant's wife to remain in the UK without him, and  thus  that  the
       second exception cannot be met. This is because  Mrs  Dagli  has  her
       three children, two with partners, and  five  grandchildren  near  to
       her, and with whom she has almost daily contact, so she would not  be
       alone. She owns her own home and so could continue to live there. So,
       despite  her  long  marriage  with  the  claimant,  her  anxiety  and
       depression her situation  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  if  he  were
       deported.

   22. With respect to the first, private life, exception, it is argued that
       whilst he might have some difficulties on return the claimant  cannot
       show that he would have very significant obstacles to integration. It
       is argued that he would be able to establish a private life in Turkey
       within a reasonable period of time because he lived in Turkey for the
       first 24 years of his life, speaks Turkish and as it is not  accepted
       he would not be able to  work  as  there  is  no  country  of  origin
       evidence that it is hard for older people to obtain work and  he  has
       transferrable skills.

   23. It is also argued that there are  no  very  compelling  circumstances
       over and above these exceptions as the sad impact on  the  family  of
       the claimant's deportation is simply  the  ordinary  consequences  of
       deportation. It is argued that the evidence before the Upper Tribunal
       lacks any sort of prognosis for R if the claimant  is  not  there  to
       provide him with help with his medication and appointments, and  that
       practically he could get himself to the hospital. R did  not  himself
       give evidence. There is no direct caring role of the claimant for  R,
       and there is no Article 8 ECHR family life relationships between  the
       adults in the family. The fact that the claimant is at  low  risk  of
       reoffending is simply not enough to meet this very high test  in  the
       context of his conviction and sentence of imprisonment.

   24. For the claimant it is argued by Mr Jibowu that the  first  exception
       is met as it would be  unduly  harsh  for  family  life  between  the
       claimant and his wife to take place in Turkey as he has no ties there
       ; he has not lived there for 30 years and would not be able to obtain
       work or accommodation there, and because his wife  is  a  breadwinner
       for the family and could not work in Turkey, and because  this  would
       leave their son R, who is seriously unwell without  their  care;  and
       also that their grandchildren would be without their care and support
       which in turn facilitates the claimant's step-daughter H in her  work
       and R's partner in her work. It is argued that  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh for the claimant's wife to remain in the UK without him as they
       have a thirty year marriage, and in the context of her suffering from
       anxiety, depression and two autoimmune conditions and having to  deal
       with R alone when he does not respond  to  her  as  he  does  to  the
       claimant.

   25. It is argued by Mr Jibowu that the second exception is met  as  there
       would be very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration  in
       Turkey  due  to  his  age;  lack  of  job/work  prospects;  lack   of
       accommodation; lack of family  support  and  thus  ultimate  probable
       destitution in that country.

   26. It is argued therefore that as the claimant meets the two  exceptions
       to deportation, as  he  would  have  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration if returned to Turkey and  because  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh both for his family to live without him in the UK  or  for  his
       wife  to  live  with  him  in  Turkey,  that  there  are   compelling
       circumstances over and above those exceptions  in  part  because  two
       exceptions are met. In addition, it should  be  considered  that  the
       claimant is vital to R, as without him, whilst he has been in prison,
       R has slipped into a very bad and medically  dangerous  place.  Other
       family members simply not able  help,  practically  and  due  to  not
       having the same relationship, and R's prospects would be dire without
       the claimant. The claimant remaining  will  not  only  safeguard  R's
       health but also give him work which no one else  has  or  would  give
       him, and which is vital to his self-esteem.  In the context where the
       offending was out of character and there is no  possibility  that  he
       will reoffend, it is argued that the evidence shows  that  there  are
       compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions and the appeal
       should be allowed.

   27. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

  Conclusions - Remaking

   28. The proper legal approach to the determination of this appeal  is  to
       firstly consider whether the claimant can meet either or both of  the
       exceptions to deportation at s.117C(4) and (5)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Secondly, I must conduct  a  balance
       sheet exercise to determine whether the claimant can  meet  s.117C(6)
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act in which I balance the
       strength of the public interest in his  deportation  against  whether
       there are matters over and above the exceptions  and  decide  whether
       his deportation is proportionate thereby applying the test of whether
       there are very compelling circumstances over and above exceptions.

   29. I find that the evidence from the witnesses is credible.  There  were
       no submissions to the contrary by  Mr  Kotas  for  the  Secretary  of
       State. The claimant and his wife both gave detailed  answers  to  all
       questions; their oral and written evidence was consistent, and  their
       evidence was consistent with each other and the documentary  evidence
       submitted. I find there was no attempt to exaggerate their situation.
       I also find that the report of Dr Ascione is one to which weight  can
       be given. It is written by an appropriately qualified expert  and  is
       one  which  complies  with  the  standards  for  expert  reports.  No
       submission was made by Mr Kotas that the report should not  be  given
       weight. I have also placed reliance on the GP notes and  letter  from
       Dr Peerally from Leicester Royal Infirmary dated 19th April 2021 with
       respect to R's ill-health.

   30. I have retained from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal findings
       that in committing his criminal offence the claimant used his car  as
       a weapon and could have killed the victim, and that  the  victim  may
       have lasting injuries, and thus as a result the offence is clearly  a
       serious one for which there is an obvious and strong public  interest
       in his deportation.

   31. I have retained from the First-tier Tribunal the  following  findings
       in the claimant's favour: that he entered a guilty plea (albeit at  a
       late stage); that his actions in committing the  index  offence  were
       very much out of character and he has expressed remorse; that he  was
       a model prisoner and was on unconditional bail; that he has lived  in
       the UK for over 30 years and is socially and culturally integrated in
       the UK; that he has no ties with Turkey and would have start anew  if
       sent there; that he has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
       his wife and has a close and supportive family unit  with  his  adult
       children and step-child and grandchildren; that the claimant's  adult
       son, R, is unwell with Crohn's disease and is reliant on  his  father
       for assistance.

   32. The private life exception to deportation at s.117C(4)  of  the  2002
       Act has three requirements: firstly, whether the  claimant  had  been
       lawfully resident for most of  his  life;  secondly,  whether  he  is
       socially and culturally integrated in the  UK;  and  thirdly  whether
       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   claimant's
       integration in Turkey. It is not dispute that the  first  and  second
       requirements are met based on the retained findings from  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. I must consider whether the third element is met based
       on the evidence before me.

   33. The key guidance  on  the  test  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration is to be found in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813.  In
       essence the test to be applied is whether if returned to  Turkey  the
       claimant would be enough of an insider to have a  meaningful  private
       life. The burden is on the claimant to show this, and  the  threshold
       is a high one as indicated by the word "very".

   34. It is a preserved finding  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       claimant has no family or friends in Turkey, and  has  had  no  links
       with that country so would be starting  anew.  The  claimant  has  no
       useful work experience to build on in Turkey, as his only work was in
       the Turkish army and I find that he would not be able  to  return  to
       this at his age (56 years) and after  this  period  of  absence.  The
       claimant contends that he would not be able to find  work  in  Turkey
       due to his age, as he is nearing the Turkish pensionable  age  of  60
       years, in the context of high unemployment. The  Home  Office  Turkey
       Background Note of April 2021 records that the unemployment  rate  is
       10.9%, with over a fifth of the population living below  the  poverty
       line. I accept that obtaining work which  would  not  result  in  him
       living in absolute poverty would be very difficult for  the  claimant
       on  return  to  Turkey.   He  would  have  the  benefit  of  speaking
       reasonable Turkish, but I accept his  submission  that  his  31  year
       absence during which he has had no contact with the Turkish  Diaspora
       in the UK will have left his language outdated in some ways  and  his
       manner of marks him as an outsider. I also find that no family member
       in the UK is in a position to support the  claimant  in  Turkey:  his
       wife has a small part-time job and  receives  tax  credits;  and  his
       children are clearly not in well paid employment which  would  enable
       them to provide any significant help for the claimant financially  in
       Turkey. However, I must consider also that  the  claimant  has  shown
       himself  to  be  a  resourceful  man:  working  since  he  was  given
       permission to remain in the UK in various unskilled  capacities,  and
       then developing skills in the making of kitchens and  bathrooms,  and
       indeed most recently taking steps  to  re-establish  himself  in  his
       bathroom and kitchen fitting self-employed business in the  UK  after
       leaving prison.

   35. Mr Kotas has accepted that the claimant would have difficulties in re-
       integrating himself in Turkey, but submitted that he would  not  have
       very significant obstacles to such integration. I find  however  that
       there are two  additional  factors  which  must  be  considered:  the
       claimant's mental health and the context of his family  life  in  the
       UK. The claimant suffers from moderate depression  for  which  he  is
       prescribed medication, and this condition existed both prior  to  his
       imprisonment, during and continues to the present day:  this  is  his
       evidence, but it is also supported by the report  of  Dr  Ascione.  I
       find that the accepted tight family bonds in the UK with his wife  of
       31 years, adult children and grandchildren in the UK have facilitated
       the claimant psychologically in finding work and re-establishing  his
       private life. The claimant himself identifies family and  his  mental
       health problems as matters pertinent to his not being able to work in
       Turkey in his statement of 13th May 2021 at paragraphs 7  and  8.   I
       conclude that without these ties, in  the  context  of  his  moderate
       clinical depression and the lack of any alternative  support  network
       Turkey, and given the degree of difficulty a man  of  his  age  would
       have in finding work in Turkey given the levels  of  unemployment  in
       that country, a place which has become  alien  to  him,  and  without
       formal qualifications, that the claimant would have very  significant
       obstacles in finding work. I accept without work, accommodation would
       be all but impossible to obtain, and that other aspects of a  private
       life would not fall in place for the claimant and find that he  would
       be a real risk of destitution. Ultimately, I therefore conclude  that
       the claimant meets this third aspect of the private life exception to
       deportation.

   36. The test for the exception to deportation relating to family life  at
       s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act requires that it would be unduly harsh to a
       partner or minor child for the claimant to be deported. There  is  no
       submission that this test can be met through a  relationship  with  a
       minor child, the claimant's children  are  all  adults,  so  in  this
       appeal the question is whether the claimant can show that it would be
       unduly harsh for his wife, Mrs Dagli, to have to go and live with him
       in Turkey and that it would be unduly harsh for her to remain in  the
       UK without him whilst he is deported. Unduly  harsh  is  an  elevated
       threshold connoting something severe  or  bleak,  as  per  MK(s.55  -
       Tribunal Options) Sierra Leone [2015] 223 (IAC),  but  this  test  is
       not one which requires some element of exceptionality: indeed as  the
       Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 have said it
       could potentially be quite commonly found to exist. Unduly  harsh  is
       not a test to be equated with very compelling circumstances, although
       in this appeal I must of course revert to  this  test  in  the  final
       consideration.

   37. Mr Kotas made no substantive  submissions  on  whether  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the claimant's wife, Mrs Dagli, to have  to  go  and
       live in Turkey with him. I find that it would be  for  the  following
       reasons: she is a British citizen who has lived  her  whole  life  in
       Leicester and lives in a extended family  situation  with  her  three
       children all  continuing to live very close by and with almost  daily
       contact with them. Mrs Dagli provides care several times  a  week  to
       two of her granddaughters to facilitate the work  of  their  parents,
       and also assists with care of her adult son R several times a week to
       keep him away from his family when he is not in a  fit  state  to  be
       with them due to his physical and mental problems. Mrs  Dagli  speaks
       no Turkish or indeed any other foreign  languages,  and  has  had  no
       contact with the Turkish Diaspora in the UK. She is 59 years old. She
       has a long-standing job which she wishes to continue doing in the UK,
       and I find she would not be able to obtain work in Turkey due to  her
       lack of language skills. She has health problems:  she  suffers  from
       anxiety and has two autoimmune  conditions  for  which  she  receives
       treatment in the UK, and which would make adaption to life in  Turkey
       without  language  skills,  the  prospect  of  work,  her   children,
       grandchildren, friends and work impossible for her to cope  with  and
       thus unduly harsh.

   38. Mr Kotas however did submit that it would not be unduly harsh for Mrs
       Dagli to remain in the UK without the claimant whilst he is  deported
       to Turkey. In essence he argued that  her  close  family  network  of
       children and grandchildren; her work; the fact that she owns her  own
       home with no mortgage and thus will not be rendered homeless  by  the
       claimant's deportation means that her life in the  UK  could  not  be
       described as sufficiently bleak, and thus unduly harsh,  without  the
       claimant. I find however  that  this  is  to  fail  to  consider  the
       psychological impact of the claimant's deportation in the context  of
       a marriage of 31 years. In her witness statement she  says  that  her
       "world would fall apart if he is  to  be  deported".  I  accept  this
       evidence. Mrs Dagli suffers from physical and mental health problems,
       and her evidence is also that she has struggled  to  make  ends  meet
       financially from her three day a week job whilst the claimant was  in
       prison. I find that she would not be in a position to afford to  make
       regular visits to the claimant in Turkey to see her life  partner.  I
       accept, on the basis of her and the claimant's credible evidence, she
       would be left alone to  struggle  with  the  care  of  her  seriously
       psychologically and physically unwell son R, who does not respond  to
       her and for whom she cannot offer work as the claimant  can.  I  find
       that ultimately in the context of all of the evidence it can properly
       said that life in the UK without the claimant would be very bleak for
       Mrs Dagli and thus unduly harsh if he were deported.

   39. The ultimate question in this appeal is whether the claimant can meet
       the test at s.117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
       2002. It is not sufficient that  both  of  the  above  exceptions  to
       deportation for those who have sentences less  than  four  years  are
       met, as this claimant was sentenced to four and a half years for  his
       criminal behaviour. The question is whether there are very compelling
       circumstances over and above the exceptions at s.117C(4) and  (5)  of
       the 2002 Act. This is ultimately a proportionality exercise balancing
       the criminal behaviour and the very strong  public  interest  in  the
       deportation of foreign criminals against the impact of deportation on
       the claimant's private and family life ties to the  UK.  As  per  the
       discussion in HA (Iraq) v SSHD this is a test  which  will  impose  a
       very high threshold, when properly applied, and  so  be  very  rarely
       met.

   40. An aspect of the public interest in the deportation of  the  claimant
       is, I find, diminished. This is the aspect  of  the  public  interest
       which concerns protection of the public.  I find  that  the  claimant
       poses a low risk of recidivism due to his genuine remorse, the  index
       offence being found to be out of character, his  good  behaviour  and
       constructive engagement with his time  in  prison,  the  evidence  of
       compliance with  his  conditions  on  release  from  prison  and  the
       psychological evidence of Dr Ascione that the claimant  poses  a  low
       risk of reoffending. However, the public interest contains two  other
       important factors:  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  immigration
       control system designed to deport  foreign  criminals  and  deterring
       other would be foreign criminals. Although, some consideration should
       also be given to the fact that the sentence is one of four years  and
       six months, and so is at the lower end of those having  to  meet  the
       s.117C(6) 2002 Act test under the statutory  scheme     the  claimant
       has been convicted of a serious crime of violence  which  could  have
       killed the victim and did in fact caused serious injury. When all  of
       these factors are considered I  find  that  the  public  interest  in
       deportation must be given very serious weight.

   41. On the balance sheet in favour of the claimant I weigh the fact  that
       I have found, for the reasons I set out above,  that  he  would  have
       very significant obstacles to integration and that it would be unduly
       harsh to his wife for him to be deported, and thus that he is able to
       show that he meets both exceptions to deportation  at  s.117C(4)  and
       s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I find
       that over and above meeting the exceptions the  high  degree  of  the
       claimant's integration in UK society, his very long period of  lawful
       residence in the UK, his total dislocation from his country of origin
       and particularly his genuine and subsisting 31  year  marriage  to  a
       British citizen are factors which go beyond the minimum  requirements
       of  the  exceptions,  and  are  exceptional  and  should   be   given
       significant weight.

   42. In addition, I find that there is the consideration of the  care  and
       support the claimant provides to his adult son R. I do not find  that
       there is a formal carer relationship, but I do find on  the  credible
       evidence of the claimant and his wife that there is,  most  unusually
       as R also has his own family, a family life relationship between  the
       claimant and R. This is because, I find, there are more  than  normal
       emotional  ties  between  them  resulting   from   real,    effective
       and committed support by the claimant, and thus family life applying
       the conclusions of the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO Delhi [2017] EWCA
       Civ 320 and Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

   43. The facts that R is suffering from serious life-long Crohn's disease,
       is  abusing  alcohol,  failing  to  take  the  prescribed  medication
       properly and dangerously taking drugs purchased from the internet are
       corroborated by documentary medical evidence from his GP and hospital
       doctor. I accept the credible evidence of both witnesses that  it  is
       only the claimant who has the relationship with R which means that he
       will listen to him about his medical conditions.  I  find  this  high
       degree of dependency, creating family life  ties,  exists  because  R
       spends three nights a week with the claimant and his wife due to  his
       problems with Crohn's disease, anxiety and his  inability  to  manage
       his medication in a rational way and his resorting to  excessive  and
       dangerous drinking of alcohol on a twice weekly basis which makes  it
       highly undesirable for him to remain with his own partner  and  three
       young children, aged 9, 5 and three  months.  I  find  that  now  the
       claimant is out of prison and lockdown has loosened the  claimant  is
       starting to be able again to manage R's medication and to  facilitate
       him attending  hospital  appointments  which  he  needs  for  further
       investigations into his Crohn's disease. I  find  that   it  is  only
       because of their father and son relationship that R  is  able  to  do
       this and that it is because of the special  accommodations  that  the
       claimant makes because of this relationship and  the  fact  that  the
       claimant runs his own business, that R has been and will be  able  to
       do some work, and that this is important to his self-respect.

   44. In these circumstances I find that in addition to the claimant  being
       able to over and above meet the requirements of the two exceptions  a
       factors that weighs strongly in his favour is the  family  life  ties
       the claimant has with R, and the impact on R's  health  and  R's  own
       family and Mrs Dagli which his deportation would have, as they  would
       be left to struggle coping with R without prospects of improving  his
       compliance with his medication and providing meaning for his life for
       him through work.

   45. In conclusion  I  must  weigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  the
       deportation of the claimant who has committed a most serious crime of
       violence and spent four and a half years in prison against the  right
       to respect for family and private life of him as  a  person  who  can
       meet two exceptions to deportation, who has  significant  aspects  of
       meeting those exceptions which I find to be properly over  and  above
       the minimum basis of meeting them, particularly his 31 year  marriage
       to a  British  citizen,  and  who  has  in  addition  a  family  life
       relationship providing real, effective and committed support  to  his
       adult son R, and is uniquely able to assist R who  is  in  a  parlous
       physical and psychological condition. I conclude that it can properly
       be said that there are very compelling circumstances  in  this  case,
       and that this is one of the rare  and  exceptional  cases  where  the
       claimant is entitled to succeed in his appeal  as  deportation  would
       ultimately amount to a disproportionate interference with  his  right
       to respect for his Article 8 ECHR rights.




    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 3. I remake the appeal by allowing it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    26th May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Turkey born on 25th  February  1965.  He
       came to the UK as a visitor in October 1989.  He  married  a  British
       Citizen on 4th April 1990, and applied to remain  as  a  spouse.  His
       application was granted, and  on  17th  March  1994  he  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  On 17th October  2018  he  was
       convicted of an offence of grievous bodily harm and sentenced  to  54
       months imprisonment at Leicester Country Court. As a result  of  this
       conviction the Secretary of State served on him a notice of intention
       to deport on 7th December 2018.  The  claimant  raised  human  rights
       grounds as to why he should not be deported,  but  the  Secretary  of
       State concluded that a deportation order  should  be  signed  against
       him, and this was done on 14th January 2019. The appeal against  that
       deportation order was allowed on human rights grounds  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Obhi  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  30th
       September 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge LS Bulpitt on 16th January 2020 on the basis that
       it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  not  utilising
       the  correct  test,  namely  whether  there   are   very   compelling
       circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2,
       as required  at  s.117C(6)  and  instead  applied  a  lower  test  of
       compelling circumstances.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object  set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and   justly
       directions were sent out to the parties by email on 20th  April  2020
       seeking written submissions on the assertion of an error of law  with
       a view to determining  that  issue  on  the  papers,  and  giving  an
       opportunity for any party who felt that a hearing  was  necessary  in
       the interests of justice to make submissions on that  issue  too.  No
       response was received from either party.

    4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in the interests
       of justice to decide this matter without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
       determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law.  I  find
       that it is appropriate to determine whether there is an error of  law
       on  the  papers  given  that:  neither  party  has  put  forward  any
       submissions objecting to proceeding in  this  way,  the  claimant  is
       represented by Rogols solicitors who were served with the  directions
       as well as his having been provided with a copy personally; and given
       that more than six weeks has elapsed since the directions  were  sent
       out, and compliance with  the  directions  should  have  taken  place
       within four weeks.

  Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In the grounds of appeal it is argued by the Secretary of  State,  in
       summary, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  applying  the
       wrong legal test when making findings and failed to give  appropriate
       weight to the claimant's circumstances and the  public  interest,  in
       accordance with the case law. As the appellant has been sentenced  to
       54 months imprisonment the public interest in  his  deportation  will
       only be outweighed by the existence of very compelling  circumstances
       over and above those described in the exceptions at 1 and 2 of s.117C
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  Although  this
       correct test is set out at paragraphs 13, 37 and 44 of  the  decision
       it is not applied when the test is implemented at paragraph 52 of the
       decision, as  at  that  point  only  "compelling  circumstances"  are
       mentioned. The more serious the offence  committed  the  greater  the
       public interest is in the deportation, see MS [2019] UKUT 122. It  is
       argued that this claimant committed a  very  serious  offence  as  he
       could have caused death and not just serious injury as he  was  using
       his car as a weapon, and this was not  given  proper  weight  in  the
       proportionality exercise. It is also argued that the four  compelling
       circumstances identified were insufficient  as:  the  impact  on  the
       family was simply an ordinary consequences of  deportation;  although
       the claimant is found to be integrated in the UK it was wrong to find
       he lacked ties with Turkey when he had lived there until  he  was  24
       years old, he had visited a number of times, he had  work  skills  he
       could apply there, is fit to work and can presumably  speak  Turkish.
       Although the claimant has lived in the UK for 30 years  he  lived  in
       Turkey for 24 years prior to this. The demanding test set out by  the
       Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) is not met  on  the  facts  of  this
       case.

    6. There is no Rule 24 notice and no submissions are put forward by  the
       claimant in relation to the issue of error of law in response to  the
       directions.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. At the beginning of the "Findings" section, at paragraph  37  of  the
       decision, the First-tier Tribunal sets out a very clear  and  correct
       self-direction that this appeal can only succeed if "there  are  very
       compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions
       1 and 2", and notes that this creates  a  particular  hurdle  to  the
       appellant. The First-tier Tribunal Judge reminds herself  again  with
       respect to this test at paragraph 44 of the decision. I do  not  find
       that it is significant that the "very" is missing at paragraph 49  of
       the decision. The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  correctly  adopts  the
       balance sheet approach, placing reliance on the  decision  in  Hesham
       Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal notes that the claimant had used the car as a
       weapon and could have killed  the  victim  at  paragraph  37  of  the
       decision and so fairly sets  out  the  seriousness  of  his  criminal
       offending and the force of the public interest at the  start  of  the
       findings section. At paragraph 51 there is a reminder that the victim
       of the attack may have lasting injuries.

    9. In the claimant's favour, in summary, it is found as follows: that he
       had entered a guilty plea (albeit at a late stage); that his  actions
       in committing the index offence were very much out of  character  and
       he has expressed remorse; that he was a  model  prisoner  and  is  on
       unconditional bail; that he had lived in the UK for 30 years  and  is
       socially and culturally integrated in the UK; that  he  has  no  ties
       with Turkey and would have start anew if sent there; that  he  has  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife  and  a  close  and
       supportive family unit with his adult children and step-children  and
       grandchildren; that the claimant's adult son, R,  is  unwell  with  a
       chronic condition and is reliant on his  father  for  assistance  and
       that having to rely upon adult care services would not  be  the  same
       for him as being helped by the claimant,  the  father  he  knows  and
       trusts.

   10. I do not find that it has been show by the Secretary  of  State  that
       any evidence is missing from  the  consideration  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. The question is whether the "very compelling circumstances"
       test was properly applied to the facts of the case by the  First-tier
       Tribunal, and thus whether the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       proper explains how there are very compelling factors  over  and  the
       exceptions to deportation.

   11. Whilst the public interest may be somewhat diminished on the facts of
       this case in relation to protection of the public, as it would appear
       that there is a low risk of recidivism due to claimant's remorse  and
       the index offence being found to be  out  of  character,  the  public
       interest in maintaining the  integrity  of  the  immigration  control
       system designed to deport foreign criminals and in deterring  foreign
       criminals remains an extremely weighty factor.

   12. I find that it cannot be said that this decision  is  a  sufficiently
       reasoned application of the correct  test  for  deportation  for  the
       following reasons. The private life exception to deportation involves
       three factors:  firstly,  whether  the  claimant  had  been  lawfully
       residence for most of his life, secondly whether he was socially  and
       culturally integrated in the UK, and thirdly whether there  would  be
       very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration  in  Turkey.
       The first and second requirements are clearly found to be met by  the
       First-tier Tribunal, but the  third  element  is  not  addressed,  as
       having to start a new with no ties is not the  same  as  having  very
       significant obstacles to integration. As such it is  not  found  that
       the private life exception to deportation can be met by the  claimant
       in the decision. The test for the exception to  deportation  relating
       to family life requires that it would be unduly harsh on a partner or
       minor child. There is no finding of undue harshness  in  relation  to
       any  such  family  member,  or,  going  beyond  the  wording  of  the
       exception, in relation to the adult child family members. As there is
       no finding that the  family  life  exception  is  met.  There  is  no
       evidence not considered in relation  to  these  exceptions  which  is
       explicitly found to be a similar weighty significance.  I  find  that
       the decision is therefore insufficiently reasoned in relation to  the
       proportionality exercise that must be carried out  in  a  deportation
       case such as this. There is no finding that an exception is  met  and
       no reasoning as to why there is something very compelling above  that
       exception; or alternatively there is no explanation  as  to  why  the
       facts of the  case,  whilst  not  meeting  an  exception,  show  very
       compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.

   13. I preserve the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal summarised
       at paragraphs 8 and 9 above, but set aside the decision allowing  the
       appeal.



    Decision:

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal but preserve the findings as indicated at paragraph 13 above.

 3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.



Directions - Remaking

1.   Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal might properly be held remotely,
    by Skype for Business, on a date to be fixed within the period July  to
    September 2020.

2.   No later than 14 days after these directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (the date of sending is on the  covering  letter  or  covering
    email):

    (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email  any  objection  to  the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

    (b)  without prejudice to the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

         (i)  Skype contact details and a contact telephone number  for  any
             person who wishes to attend the hearing remotely, which  might
             include  the  advocates,  the   original   appellant   or   an
             instructing solicitor; and

         (ii) dates to avoid in the period specified.

3.   If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  will
    consider  the  submissions,  and  will  make  any  further   directions
    considered necessary.

4.   If there is no objection to a remote hearing, the following  directions
    supersede any previous case management directions and shall apply.

      i. The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note: No
         1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19  Pandemic  when  complying
         with these directions.

    ii.  The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and serve  on  each
         other (a) an electronic skeleton argument and (b) any  rule  15(2A)
         notice to be relied upon within 28 days of the date this notice  is
         sent.

    iii. The appellant shall be responsible for compiling  and  serving  an
         agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely
         on at the hearing. The bundle should  be  compiled  and  served  in
         accordance with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at  least  7
         days before the hearing.

5.   The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
    reasons,  if  they   face significant   practical difficulties in
    complying.

6.   Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line.  Attachments  must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This  address  is  not
    generally available for the filing of documents.

7.   Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
    original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use
    of any address apparent from the service of these directions.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    15th June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

