
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01622/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2018                   |On 26 September 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                          CLOVER MICHELLE PATTERSON
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by Perera & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Clover Michelle Patterson, is a citizen of Jamaica  born
    on 31 March 1968. In 2001 she arrived as a visitor for six months.  She
    states that subsequently she was granted leave to remain as  a  student
    nurse but the Respondent's records show that  on  7  October  2002  she
    applied for such leave  and  on  16  December  2002  was  refused.  Her
    daughter, Celena Patterson, was born in Jamaica on 10 November 1996 and
    entered as a visitor in July 2002 with one month's leave. There  is  an
    issue whether the Appellant sought to regularise her immigration status
    in 2007 but she did make an application on  16  April  2010  which  was
    refused and her appeal against that decision dismissed. On 27  November
    2012 she made a further application and was granted discretionary leave
    under the Immigration  Rules  (according  to  the  Respondent's  letter
    granting her leave) on account of her daughter until 13 June 2016.

 2. On 12 May 2016, in time, the Appellant applied for further leave  based
    on her private and family life protected by Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention. A week later Celena made an application for  further  leave
    and on 24 November 2016 was  granted  30  months'  discretionary  leave
    expiring on  16  June  2019  by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph  276
    ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. On the day of the hearing she  was
    due in the afternoon to register as a first-year student at the  School
    of Oriental and African Studies in London.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 3. On 10 January 2017 the Respondent refused the Appellant  further  leave
    because her daughter was over the age of 18 and appeared to be  leading
    an independent life. Because she was over  18,  the  Respondent  stated
    that Section EX.1 of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not
    apply. The Appellant had not lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom
    for at least 20 years and did not meet any of the other  time  critical
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Further, with reference to  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  the  Respondent
    considered there were no very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's
    re-integration into Jamaica to which  she  had  travelled  in  December
    2014. The Respondent acknowledged  the  Appellant  had  been  raped  in
    Jamaica at the age of 28 from which her daughter  had  been  conceived.
    Nevertheless, the Respondent  considered  there  were  no  sufficiently
    compelling circumstances to warrant the  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

First-Tier Tribunal Proceedings

 5. By a decision promulgated on  17  May  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal P-JS White dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,
    finding the Appellant had not shown that the  requirements  of  Section
    EX.1 had been met because her daughter was over 18. He also  found  the
    Appellant's depression was not severe and there  was  no  evidence  the
    recommended treatment would be unavailable to her in Jamaica  and  that
    she would be able to establish a new circle of friends and re-integrate
    on return.

 6. On 25 July 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hollingworth  granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal because it was  arguable  the  Judge
    had not adequately dealt with, first the Appellant's  fear  of  return,
    arising, at least in part, from her traumatic experience in Jamaica and
    second the length of time she had been in the United  Kingdom  and  the
    basis on which she had been granted discretionary leave on 13  December
    2013.



Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 7. The Applicant attended the hearing, accompanied  by  her  daughter.   I
    explained the purpose of the hearing and the procedure to be adopted.

 8. For the Respondent, Ms Pal properly accepted that the Appellant and her
    daughter lived together at the same address.

Submissions for the Appellant

 9. Mr Coleman produced a copy of  the  explanatory  memorandum  which  the
    Respondent had prepared to accompany the  Changes  to  the  Immigration
    Rules in  August  2017.  He  submitted  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of Section EX.1 which could  apply  where  a  parent  was
    seeking further leave and had previously had leave issued in respect of
    a minor child who was now an adult.

10. He continued that the Judge had given inadequate consideration  to  the
    circumstances of Celena's conception. In reply to an enquiry put by  me
    about medical evidence relating to Celena, Mr Coleman  confirmed  there
    was no expert evidence but referred to her statement in which  she  had
    at length given details of her relationship with and  reliance  on  her
    mother, in particular at paragraphs 8-16 and 18. He concluded the Judge
    had made a material error of law and his decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

11. Ms Pal for the Respondent submitted the Judge had adequately dealt with
    the expert psychiatric evidence at paragraph 16 of his decision and  he
    had found that treatment would be available in Jamaica.




12. At paragraph 13 he had noted the Appellant's poor immigration  history.
    She had been granted discretionary leave on 13 December 2013  when  her
    daughter was aged about 16 and that leave expired after her  daughter's
    18th birthday. She was now an  adult  and  the  Judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph  18  of  his  decision  was  sustainable,  namely  that   the
    consequence might be that she would have to decide whether to remain in
    the United Kingdom and lead an independent life or follow her mother to
    Jamaica. There was no material error of law in the Judge's decision.


13. In answer to a question from me, Ms Lal accepted that the Appellant met
    the antecedent requirements of the Immigration Rules for  Section  EX.1
    to be considered.

Response for the Appellant

14. Mr Coleman reiterated that it was essential to  look  at  the  relevant
    version of Section EX.1. The Judge had not considered the  second  limb
    of Section EX.1(a)(i)(aa).  Additionally,  in  his  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision he had erred in  failing  to  give  due
    weight to what had happened to the Appellant in Jamaica.



Findings and Consideration

15.   Section EX.1 at the date of the decision  under  appeal,  11  January
    2017 provided: -

         This paragraph applies if
          (a)(i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
          relationship  with a child who ---

            (aa)  is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age  of  18
            years when the applicant was first granted leave  on  the  basis
            that this paragraph applied;..............................




           (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
            UK;.....




    I find the Judge made a material error of law  in  not  addressing  the
    second limb of sub-paragraph (aa) dealing with the situation  where  an
    applicant's child has ceased to be a minor.




16. In the balancing exercise to assess the proportionality of the decision
    under appeal the Judge did not refer to the circumstances of the  birth
    of the Appellant's daughter which had been accepted by  the  Respondent
    and which may go some way to explain the lack of  contact  between  the
    Appellant and her family referred to by the Judge at paragraph  14  and
    the difficulties she would have re-integrating on return to Jamaica.




17. These are material errors of law which impugn the conclusions which the
    Judge reached. Consequently his decision is set  aside.  There  was  no
    dispute as to the factual background  to  the  Appellant's  application
    leading to the decision under appeal. She has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with her daughter  who  when  the  Appellant  was
    granted leave under the Immigration Rules in 2013 was under the age  of
    18.


18. I take into account the Appellant's history in Jamaica, the  length  of
    time she has been in the United Kingdom  (albeit  much  of  it  without
    leave), some 17 years at the date of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal,
    the  unchallenged  evidence  of  the  particularly  close  relationship
    between the Appellant and her daughter and the  position  in  life  her
    daughter has now reached (about to embark on tertiary  education  after
    setbacks caused principally by the state of the law: see paragraphs 6-9
    of the daughter's statement). I also have considered the  poor  and  in
    many  respects  quite  unsatisfactory   nature   of   the   Appellant's
    immigration history. She speaks English and there was no  challenge  to
    her claim that she has supported herself  and  her  daughter  for  many
    years without recourse to public funds.




19. I find that given the Appellant's  history  and  the  continuing  close
    relationship  of  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter,  that   for   the
    foreseeable future as  a  student  the  Appellant's  daughter  will  be
    emotionally and financially dependent on the Appellant.  The  Appellant
    has no family to whom she can in reality  turn  to  for  assistance  in
    Jamaica or in the United Kingdom and the same is so for her daughter.




20. The Appellant meets the requirements of Section EX.1 and  so  satisfies
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Respondent has said  the
    Immigration Rules reflect his understanding of the State's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the European Convention. On that  basis  the  appeal
    succeeds on human rights grounds.




21. For the sake of completeness, giving substantial weight to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of proper immigration controls, I find that
    for the reasons already mentioned and taking  account  of  the  matters
    referred to in paragraphs 18-20  of  this  decision,  the  Respondent's
    decision is disproportionate to any of the legitimate public objectives
    identified in Article 8(2) of the  European  Convention.  Consequently,
    the appeal would, if necessary, also succeed under  Article  8  outside
    the Rules.

Anonymity

22. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I consider none  is
    required.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside. The decision is re-made and  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant allowed.
    No anonymity order is made.

Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   17.
ix. 2018






Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT : FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and so must consider whether to make a fee  award.
The basis on which the appeal has been  allowed  is  on  evidence  submitted
subsequent to the decision of the Respondent and so I find that  it  is  not
appropriate to make any fee award.

Signed/Official  Crest                                                  Date
17. ix. 2018



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

