
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/01182/2019
                                                               HU/02193/2019
                                                               hu/02196/2019
                                                               hu/02198/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 7th January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MOHAMMED [Y] (plus 3 dependants)
                        (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Aboni, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Jaffar of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal in  respect  of  Mr  [Y]'s  and  his
       dependants' human rights claims. To ease following  this  decision  I
       shall refer to Mr [Y] as the Claimant/Appellant although this is  the
       Secretary of State's appeal.

    2. When granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes
       noted that the Secretary of State's original refusal letter was based
       on  the  Claimant's  alleged  dishonesty  in  relation  to  his   tax
       affairs/disclosure of his earnings.  In summary  Judge  Landes  noted
       further that:

        i) It was arguable that the Judge did not give adequate reasons for
           his conclusion that the calculations  may  have  an  element  of
           complexity to it and did not consider the matters set out in the
           decision in Khan at paragraphs 4 and 5;

       ii) The Judge did not explain why  he  found  the  Appellant  to  be
           credible save to say that the amendment was "accepted" by HMRC;

      iii) As was pointed out in the grounds of appeal, the fact that  HMRC
           took no further action was not determinative;

       iv) The Judge did  not  explain  or  make  findings  about  why  the
           Appellant did not realise an error had been made when he  signed
           the tax return;

        v) Neither did the Judge explain why he found the  calculation  may
           have had an element  of  complexity  about  it  so  far  as  the
           accountants were concerned. It was  difficult  to  see  why  the
           calculation in  the  tax  return  would  be  complex  given  the
           documents in the Appellant's supplementary bundle;

       vi) This dividend income could simply have been copied over into the
           tax return submitted in January 2012;

      vii) Similarly the correct net profit for the year 2012/2013 appeared
           in the Appellant's profit and loss account signed by  the  first
           Appellant and could just have been carried  over  into  the  tax
           return submitted in January 2014.

    3. At the hearing before me today, Ms Aboni said that she relied on  the
       grounds of appeal. The Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  as
       to why the Appellant's circumstances were complex. The accounts  were
       prepared by qualified accountants. The Judge had failed to follow the
       guidance in Khan. It was not sufficient  to  blame  the  accountants.
       There was no evidence from the accountant as  to  why  there  was  an
       error and what the error was. The Judge had erred in his  assessment.
       The Judge appeared to give credit when there was no penalty  imposed.
       The issues of no penalties being imposed was a different issue.  Just
       because they have accepted the amended accounts does  not  mean  that
       there was no deception used. Ms Aboni  said  the  grounds  of  appeal
       referred to Khan. Ms Aboni said I should also refer to  the  case  of
       Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673. That was an earnings deception
       case. At paragraph 67 it was made clear that the fact that no penalty
       imposed does not mean that there is  a  duty  on  HMRC  to  impose  a
       penalty in every case. At paragraph 73 it was clear that  there  were
       many reasons why HMRC may not impose a penalty or investigate  a  tax
       return. Ms Aboni said that if I found that there was an error of  law
       then it was open to me to re-make the decision.

    4. Mr Jafar in his submissions said that there  was  a  failure  by  the
       Secretary of State to fully appreciate the case before him. At D3  of
       the SSHD's bundle it was to be noted that the Appellant had  married.
       He had been to and from back home. There was a  child.  There  was  a
       health reason too. The SSHD when reviewing the evidence at page 4  of
       the refusal letter referred to various questions but did  not  engage
       with question 7. Namely that at the time the Claimant was  submitting
       his returns to HMRC he was distracted by all of  these  life  events.
       The witness statements in the bundle had confirmed this. In  Khan  at
       paragraph 4 of the headnote the matters included deception,  lack  of
       knowledge or  carelessness.  There  were  3  stages.  The  Claimant's
       attention was diverted at the time. It was not in question whether or
       not the Claimant had signed the document. The point was  whether  the
       Claimant had given an explanation. His attention was diverted just at
       that time.

    5. At [14] there was explicit acceptance by the Judge of the explanation
       provided. At [15] the Judge then accepted the  evidence.  The  SSHD's
       grounds were drafted without context the case.

    6. In respect of complexity at paragraph  19  the  Judge  was  making  a
       routine generalisation that there can be an element of complexity  to
       it. It was a perfectly rationale and logical point to make. The point
       was that the Judge did not regard that as determinative.  Looking  at
       the determination as a  whole,  the  Judge's  decision  was  entirely
       logical  and  rationale.  The  grounds  reflected  no  more  than   a
       disagreement and there was no error of law.

    7. As for blaming the accountants, one should look at the circumstances.
       Paragraph 34 of Khan does say that a defence can be mounted where  an
       individual's attention is distracted at the time.  That  was  despite
       Khan being a  Judicial  Review  case  which  has  a  higher  test  of
       perversity. The finding was not starred or a Country  Guidance  case,
       so it is was not legally binding,  but  there  was  nothing  in  Khan
       outside the Judge's decision.

    8. The Judge's decision was fully reasoned and with an analysis at [16].
       The whole context was at [17]. It may not have  been  appropriate  to
       make a complaint. There was a letter from the  legal  representatives
       to the Accountants with proof of posting seeking an explanation  from
       the accountants. The accountants letter at p10 onwards  was  evidence
       of his bank account.

    9. There had been two amendments relied upon by the SSHD. Page 4 of  the
       refusal letter refers, but it was an immaterial  discrepancy  in  any
       event.

   10. In reply Ms Aboni  said  that  she  maintained  that  there  were  no
       adequate reasons in the Judge's decision.  If  there  was  a  genuine
       error then what was the explanation and why did the Judge accept  it?
       One cannot merely blame an accountant. There was no explanation  from
       the accountants. The Judge has failed to give  adequate  reasons  and
       has failed to go through the headnote of Khan.

   11. In considering my decision I have to look carefully  at  the  Judge's
       decision, but it is also necessary to carefully consider the caselaw.
       The SSHD's grounds of appeal refer to the case  of  R  (Khan)  [2018]
       UKUT 384 (IAC) which was a decision of Martin Spencer J.  The  SSHD's
       grounds of appeal do not refer to the Court of Appeal's decision in R
       (Balajigari) and others v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  673,  [2019]  1  WLR
       4647, but the importance of R (Khan) was not undermined.

   12. In Balajigari Underhill LJ had delivered the judgment of the Court of
       Appeal  to  which  all  members  had  contributed.  The  problem  was
       identified from the outset in the judgment at paragraph 5,

           "5.   It has been Home Office practice  to  refuse  applications
           for ILR in all, or in any event the  great  majority  of,  cases
           where there are substantial discrepancies between  the  earnings
           originally declared to HMRC by a *4655 T1GM applicant (even  if
           subsequently  amended)  and  the  earnings   declared   in   the
           application for ILR or  a  previous  application  for  leave  to
           remain ("earnings discrepancy cases"), relying on  the  "General
           Grounds for Refusal" in Part 9 of the Immigration Rules."

   13. There was also reference by the Court of Appeal to the wider concerns
       about the use of paragraph  322  (5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at
       paragraph 32 of its judgment.

           "32.  The Guidance does not purport to, nor could  it,  restrict
           the meaning of paragraph 322(5). We did not understand it to  be
           contended otherwise on behalf of  the  claimants.  Although  the
           examples given include cases involving criminality, a threat  to
           national security, war crimes or travel bans, it is  clear  both
           from the Guidance itself and from the terms of the rule that  it
           is not restricted to such types of case. We are aware that there
           has been concern expressed both in Parliament and elsewhere that
           paragraph 322(5) may be being used for a purpose  for  which  it
           was not intended. In particular,  there  have  been  suggestions
           that it may have been intended to  apply  only  to  cases  where
           there is a threat to national security. In our view, it is clear
           from its terms that that is not so."

   14. As I have indicated already, the decision  of  Martin  Spencer  J  in
       R(Khan) was specifically considered by the Court of Appeal. The Court
       largely agreed with that decision,  but  not  on  every  aspect.  For
       example, importantly, it was said in respect of the 'starting  point'
       that,

           "42.  Although Martin Spencer J clearly makes the point that the
           Secretary of State must carefully  consider  any  case  advanced
           that the discrepancy is the result of carelessness  rather  than
           dishonesty, there is in our view a danger  that  his  "starting-
           point"  mis-states  the  position.  A  discrepancy  between  the
           earnings declared to HMRC and to the Home Office may justifiably
           give rise to a suspicion that it is the result of dishonesty but
           it does not by itself justify a conclusion to that effect.  What
           it does is to call for an explanation. If  an  explanation  once
           sought is not forthcoming, or is unconvincing, it  may  at  that
           point  be  legitimate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  infer
           dishonesty; but even in that case the position is not that there
           is a legal burden on the applicant to disprove  dishonesty.  The
           Secretary  of  State  must  simply   decide,   considering   the
           discrepancy in the light of the explanation  (or  lack  of  it),
           whether he is satisfied that the applicant has been dishonest."

   15. Therefore because the SSHD's grounds only refer  to  the  case  of  R
       (Khan) it is important to note that the Court made  this  distinction
       with how that judgment ought to be  looked  at  in  relation  to  the
       'starting point'.

   16. The Court of Appeal did agree with  another  important  part  of  the
       judgment in R (Khan) relating to fairness at paragraph 43,

           "... This is because what is being asserted by the Secretary  of
           State is that an applicant for ILR has been dishonest. That is a
           serious  allegation,  carrying  with  it  serious  consequences.
           Accordingly, we agree with Martin Spencer J that  the  Secretary
           of State must be satisfied that  dishonesty  has  occurred,  the
           standard of proof being the balance of probabilities but bearing
           in mind the serious nature of the  allegation  and  the  serious
           consequences which follow from such a finding of dishonesty."

   17. Counsel for one of the Appellants had made what the Court  of  Appeal
       had referred to as being  a  'bold'  submission  in  respect  of  the
       Finance Act 2007 relating to penalties  imposed  by  HM  Revenue  and
       Customs. There was also reference to the Tameside duties.  The  Court
       had no hesitation in rejecting those  submissions  at  paragraphs  70
       onwards in its judgment. As Ms Aboni has said  the  Court  also  made
       clear that the fact that there was no penalty imposed  by  HMRC  does
       not mean that there was no dishonesty.

   18. I also note that a large aspect of the  appeal  dealt  with  judicial
       review matters. This matter before me is a statutory appeal and  many
       of those issues are not relevant.

   19. I then turn to the Judge's decision in this case. I list some of  the
       findings of the Judge:

        1) The Judge noted that there were  character  and  conduct  issues
           raised against the Claimant;

        2) The Judge said he had considered the written and  oral  evidence
           with care and had concluded that the Claimant had  provided  him
           with a credible explanation;

        3) The Judge noted the dates of the amendments correctly;

        4) The Judge noted that there was communication with HMRC and  that
           HMRC had said that there would no further action taken;

        5) The Claimant was acting on professional advice and there was  no
           deceit on his part.  When  the  error  was  discovered,  it  was
           corrected;

        6) The Claimant had changed accountants in  any  event  and  as  no
           further  action  was  taken  by  HMRC  it  may  not  have   been
           appropriate to make a complaint about the former accountants;

        7) The Judge said he was balancing the  fact  that  there  were  no
           other negative factors against the Claimant. Be that in  respect
           of his character  or  other  immigration  breaches  or  criminal
           matters;

        8) The Judge was of the view that as there  was  employment,  self-
           employment and dividend income then  any  such  calculation  may
           have an element of complexity to it;

        9) The fact  that  the  Claimant  may  have  misled  HMRC  was  not
           supported because the Claimant was paying  back  more  tax  than
           before and which was acceptable to all parties.

   20. Against that background, I also note that the Claimant had sent in  a
       letter of complaint with proof of posting to his former  accountants.
       That letter was before the Judge. There does not appear to have  been
       a response, but in my judgment the Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
       that as there was no issue with HMRC then to proceed with a complaint
       would have been to do too much.

   21. It is tempting to  conclude  that  short  decisions  from  First-tier
       Tribunal Judges mean that there  has  not  been  sufficient  for  the
       losing party to know why it has  lost.  I  remind  myself  that  just
       because a decision is long or short  does  not  mean  it  contains  a
       material  error  of  law.  The  issue  is  whether  within  R  (Iran)
       principles a material error of law has been shown.

   22. I have to remind myself that even if another Judge might have come to
       a different decision does not mean that there is a material error  of
       law. I also remind myself that this Judge saw and heard the Claimant.
       Indeed the Claimant was cross examined at the hearing.

   23. In my judgment, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       decision. The Judge looked carefully to the explanations provided  to
       him and cross referred to the written evidence. He had before  him  a
       case in which the burden of proof of to prove dishonesty was  on  the
       SSHD. The Judge made clear that he had been given an explanation  for
       the errors by the Claimant. The Judge had read through  and  referred
       to the witness statement of the Claimant. The Claimant had  explained
       the family and health issues that his wife was going through and  the
       birth of their children in the UK with no assistance from any  family
       members to look after their child. He also referred to his own health
       issues  at  that  time.  The  Claimant  had  therefore  provided  the
       explanation for what went wrong which led to the mistake and  how  he
       had not been able to concentrate on work and tax affairs to the  best
       of his ability. This led to the Claimant's distraction at that  time.
       That context was vital.

   24. I note what is said by the Court of Appeal at  paragraph  42  of  its
       judgment that a discrepancy in the tax affairs is  not  the  starting
       point. I also note that the Claimant has provided  a  consistent  and
       plausible explanation for what went  wrong  in  those  years  of  his
       business when  he  had  work  as  an  employee,  self-employment  and
       dividend  income.  The  point  being  that  the  Judge  accepted  the
       Claimant's evidence that the family life, new  child,  new  marriage,
       health problems of his wife  and  of  himself  all  featured  in  the
       reasons why there was an error in the tax returns.

   25. As I have said, it may be that another Judge might  have  come  to  a
       different conclusion, but that does not mean that there is  an  error
       of law. Perhaps some Judges would have prepared longer decisions. But
       that does not show a material error of law either.  In the  end  this
       Judge accepted the Appellant's evidence and explanation.  He  did  so
       with sufficient reasoning so that the losing party knew why  it  lost
       and when that losing had attended the hearing and cross examined  the
       Claimant. It  was  for  the  losing  party  in  this  case  to  prove
       dishonesty. The Judge did not accept it had done so.  The  Judge  did
       not go beyond the case law.  He did not conclude  that  just  because
       there was no penalty imposed  by  HMRC  that  it  meant  that  was  a
       sufficient reason to allow by itself to allow the appeal. The Judge's
       decision was much more  nuanced  than  that.   The  Judge  noted,  in
       reality, that in the real world there was no need for the Claimant to
       follow up the complaint about his former accountants because HMRC had
       not  taken  any  action  in  any  event  and  the  Claimant  had  new
       accountants now.

   26. Therefore, despite the helpful submissions of Ms  Aboni,  I  conclude
       that there is no material error of law in the Judge's decision.



NOTICE OF DECISION

There is no error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal.

The appeal of  the  Claimant  and  the  three  dependants  therefore  remain
allowed.


Signed: A Mahmood      Date: 01.10.2019

