

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number
HU/01547/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 3rd December 2018                                                     On
7th January 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                 FAHEEM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr W Rees (Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's human rights appeal was dismissed for the reasons given
   in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on the
   1st of October 2018. Having set out the Appellant's immigration history
   and the applicable law the Judge found that the Appellant could not meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules. At the end of the decision the
   Judge briefly addressed whether there was any exceptional feature that
   would justify a grant of leave under article 8 outside the rules and
   found that there were none.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that there were
   compelling and compassionate circumstances that would have justified a
   grant of leave under article 8 outside the rules. The grounds pointed to
   the Appellant's work history in the UK set out in paragraph 6 of the
   grounds and it was noted that section 117B of the 2002 Act had not been
   addressed. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The submissions made by Mr Rees are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings, the Home Office were not called on to respond. In essence
   the argument put forward was that the Appellant had been in the UK for
   over 11 years and was well integrated having obtained an MBA, a good work
   record (KFC, the Olympics and in the west end) and had strong
   friendships.

4. At the hearing I indicated that I could not see anything that could be
   said to be exceptional about the Appellant's case and sought further
   submissions on the point but these relied on the Appellant's being well
   integrated. At the hearing I indicated that I was satisfied that there
   was no error in the decision and reserved the reasons which are set out
   in this decision.

5. Article 8 is of very limited assistance in private life case unless
   there is a threat to the physical and moral integrity of the individual
   and this is not such a case. The Appellant came to the UK as a student
   and obtained the qualification sought but that was on the basis that he
   would leave the UK at the expiry of his leave.

6. His work record is consistent but not exceptional in any sense and it is
   not surprising that he has made good friends since he has been here. It
   is not surprising or exceptional that an individual in the Appellant's
   circumstances would take advantage of the opportunities that arise but
   simply doing so cannot be said to be exceptional and when here
   precariously the Appellant could not have gained any expectation that he
   would, or should, be permitted to remain. The Appellant had not shown
   that he could not return to Pakistan or that there would be any obstacles
   to his doing so or that it would be unreasonable to expect him to do so.

7. Article 8 is not a general dispensing power from the Immigration Rules
   which always form the starting point for the consideration of the public
   interest. There is a clear difference between being unable to meet the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules and being in a situation not
   contemplated by the rules. The Appellant simply could not meet the rules
   and it could not be said that his circumstances were not reflected in the
   rules as they stand. There was no evidence to show that there were
   compelling circumstances that would have justified a grant of leave
   outside the rules.

8. The decision of the Judge was brief and justifiably so in the
   circumstances. It is not necessary for a Judge to go through each and
   every point that is raised but the decision must show what the decision
   is and why, giving sufficient reasons for the findings made. The bald
   statement that the Appellant's circumstances were not exceptional was
   sufficient and there was nothing else in the Appellant's background that
   would have suggested that a different result could have been obtained.
   The decision was open to the Judge on the facts and the decision contains
   no error.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Signed: [pic]

Dated: 17th December 2018

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th December 2018

































