
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01455/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                            PAZ CAYABYAB VIZCONDE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     in person along with her husband Mr Nicolas
Americanos
For the respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of the Philippines, appealed to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision by the respondent of 30 June 2015  to  refuse
   her application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her private
   and  family  life.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Pacey
   considered the appeal on the papers, as requested by the  appellant,  and
   dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals with permission  to  this
   Tribunal.

2.  The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
   in three ways. It is contended that the Judge made a  material  error  in
   proceeding to determine the appeal without the respondent's bundle  which
   contained evidence relevant to the  determination  of  the  issues  under
   appeal. It is secondly contended that the Judge erred in considering  the
   appeal under Ex 1 of Appendix FM when that provision does  not  apply  to
   the appellant, who had leave to remain as a visitor  in  the  UK.  It  is
   contended that this is a material error as the  Judge  did  not  consider
   Article 8 outside the Rules. The third ground  contends  that  the  Judge
   erred  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  fulfilled  the
   requirements of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as her husband  is
   a national of Cyprus.

3. I deal firstly with the third ground. This ground  has  no  substance  as
   there was no EEA appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and there is
   no evidence that this issue was raised in the papers  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge.

4. The first ground contends that the Judge erred in proceeding to  consider
   the appeal in the absence of the respondent's bundle. It is apparent that
   the Judge did not have the bundle from paragraph 17 of the decision where
   she says that she did not have the application form before  her  and  was
   therefore unable to determine how long the appellant and her partner  had
   been in a relationship and whether they were married.  This  led  to  the
   Judge to conclude that the relationship was not longstanding. However the
   evidence in the respondent's bundle actually shows that  they  had  known
   each other since 2011 and had married on 22 September 2012. Although  the
   Judge did go on to assess the situation as if  the  couple  were  married
   [18], she did so without knowing the background to  the  relationship  or
   its duration. In my view this was a material error as a proper assessment
   under Appendix FM or Article 8 requires a full and  detailed  picture  of
   the appellant's circumstances.

5. The Judge went on to consider the appeal under Appendix FM  and  focussed
   on the 'insurmountable obstacles'  test  under  Ex  1.  However,  as  the
   grounds point out, and as accepted by Ms Savage, the appellant  does  not
   fall within paragraph E-LTRP2.2 because she was in the UK as  a  visitor.
   Accordingly Ex 1 does not apply to the appellant. Having considered Ex  1
   the Judge went on to look at whether she needed  to  go  on  to  consider
   Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules and decided that  there  were  no
   'good arguable grounds' for  doing  so  in  this  case  [35].  Ms  Savage
   submitted that this was not a material error as the Judge considered  all
   of the factors relevant to an Article  8  assessment  of  'insurmountable
   obstacles' at paragraphs 23-26 of the decision. However I cannot be  sure
   that this is the case, particularly in light of the fact that  the  Judge
   did not have the respondent's bundle before her when she considered  this
   issue. The Judge's decision to decline go on to look at Article 8 outside
   the Rules could have been different had she realised that  the  appellant
   did not meet the Rules at all. Also, a proportionality  assessment  under
   Article 8 could have encompassed factors other than those  considered  in
   the Judge's 'insurmountable obstacles' assessment,  for  example  factors
   relating to the circumstances of the appellant and her husband within the
   UK. Further, the Judge has not given any consideration to the  provisions
   of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

6. In light of both errors identified above I find that  the  Judge  made  a
   material error of law and that the First-tier Tribunal decision should be
   set aside in its entirety.

7. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  her  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 7th January 2016

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


