
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01012/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely via   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Skype)                               |                                     |
|On 25 September 2020                 |On 13 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     AUH
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Childs of Counsel, instructed by Rashid &
Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    documents were available in paper format on the court file.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mehta promulgated on 23 April 2020,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 24 December 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, who claims to have entered the
    United Kingdom on 1 January 2011, although entry clearance was  granted
    to him as a visitor between 21 February 2011 and 21 August 2011.  Since
    then, the Appellant has remained  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    making two applications for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds,
    the first on 1 July 2013 which was refused on 5 August  2013  and  most
    recently on 24 September 2019, the refusal of which is the  subject  of
    this appeal.  This application was made on the basis of the Appellant's
    private life in the United Kingdom and on  the  basis  of  his  medical
    conditions.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet the  requirements  for  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, in particular because  there
    were no very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  in  Pakistan.
    The Appellant had lived in Pakistan to  the  age  of  48,  he  retained
    knowledge of  life  and  culture  there,  he  would  be  able  to  find
    employment, his wife and children as well as  family  members  were  in
    Pakistan and medical treatment would be available to  him  there.   The
    Respondent noted that the Appellant claimed that he had  fled  Pakistan
    in 2011 following a fight as a political event, but it was  noted  that
    he had not made an application for asylum in the  United  Kingdom.   In
    relation to his medical claim, the Respondent noted the lack of medical
    evidence submitted with the  application  and  although  a  psychiatric
    report had been provided, it was undated, not signed and not on  headed
    letter paper and was therefore not given any weight.  In any event, the
    Appellant's medical conditions could not meet the  high  threshold  for
    breach of Article 3 and medical treatment was available for his claimed
    conditions.

 5. Judge Mehta dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 23  April
    2020 on  all  grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was a vulnerable witness  and  therefore  applied  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: 'Child, vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance'.  In relation to the Appellant's  private
    life claim, the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration on return  to  Pakistan,  on
    the basis that he has spent the majority  of  his  life  there,  speaks
    Urdu, could re-establish  contact  with  his  family  members  and  any
    financial support  received  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  continue.
    Overall, the  Appellant's  removal  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for private life.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    medical grounds under Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights on the basis that there was no real risk of  suicide  on  return
    and the Appellant's claim did not otherwise  meet  the  high  threshold
    applicable to such cases.  Further there was no  credible  evidence  of
    any subjective or objective fear of risk of persecution  on  return  to
    Pakistan and the Appellant's family members would be protective factors
    on return.



The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law when  considering  whether  there
    were very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  to
    Pakistan under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's  physical  and  mental  health  and  therefore
    failed to consider the cumulative effect of all of  his  circumstances.
    Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  when
    undertaking the proportionality balancing exercise for the purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  by  failing  to
    take into account the Appellant's physical and mental health; that  the
    Appellant will be deprived of adequate treatment on return; his  health
    conditions will worsen; and he will face ostracization from society due
    to his mental illness.

 8. At the oral hearing, Ms Childs relied on the written grounds of appeal,
    emphasising that  the  Appellant  had  expressly  relied  on  both  his
    physical and mental health problems as very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Pakistan and as part of his private life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights;
    which, for the purposes of  both  grounds  of  appeal,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal simply failed to take into  account.   In  essence,  the  same
    submissions were made in relation to both  grounds  of  appeal,  albeit
    within the context of different legal provisions.

 9. The evidence in relation to the Appellant's health  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal comprised of a medico-legal report by  Dr  John  Babalola
    dated 3 September 2019 and a photocopy of a  number  of  prescriptions.
    Counsel for the Appellant confirmed that there was no  further  medical
    evidence, including no evidence of any formal diagnosis of any  of  the
    Appellant's  claimed  physical  health  conditions  (these   are   only
    mentioned in Dr Babalola's report,  but  it  is  not  expressly  stated
    whether he has seen any of the Appellant's medical records relating  to
    these or at all), no evidence of the Appellant receiving any  treatment
    for any of his conditions, nor of what treatment  he  required  in  the
    future (save for the reference in Dr Babalola's report for the need for
    psychotropic treatment), no evidence of the impact of  the  Appellant's
    physical or mental health on his day-to-day living and  no  explanation
    of what the medication on the prescription forms was for.

10. Ms Childs submitted that although there was what could be considered  a
    lack of medical evidence, there  was  sufficient  information  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to enable it to assess  the  Appellant's
    mental health in particular and to make findings on his Article 3 claim
    expressly on that basis.  The fact that the claim failed under  Article
    3 does not prohibit these factors been taken into account under Article
    8 and if the Appellant's mental and physical health had been considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal, it may have come to a different  conclusion
    on this part of the appeal.  In particular, there was  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal of the Appellant being supported in the  United
    Kingdom by friends, one of whom gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of providing the Appellant with daily support;  further  there
    was evidence of insufficient and inadequate mental health provision  in
    Pakistan and of stigma towards those suffering from poor mental health.
     Ms Childs also  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why the Appellant would have  sufficient
    family support on return, in particular to assist his ability to access
    treatment and to provide him with emotional support.

11. On a separate point, not expressly raised in  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal, Ms Child's submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the limited flexibility available within section 117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  to  attach  more  than
    'little weight' to the Appellant's private life established at  a  time
    when he was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tan submitted that whilst on its  face,
    the First-tier Tribunal fails to consider the  Appellant's  mental  and
    physical health as part of its assessment of whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  in  Pakistan
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and for the purposes of
    its proportionality assessment under Article 8; this failure could  not
    have been material to the outcome of the appeal.

13. Mr Tan relied upon the findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  which  followed
    detailed consideration  of  the  limited  medical  evidence  which  was
    available.  Within those findings, the First-tier Tribunal  found  that
    any risk of suicide was only in the context of a claimed risk on return
    to Pakistan, however this was not credible and it was found that  there
    was neither a subjective nor objective fear of  persecution  on  return
    for the reasons claimed.  There was further an express finding that the
    Appellant would be able to access medical treatment and that  he  would
    have family support on return to Pakistan, a finding with clear reasons
    as to why the Appellant's claim not to be in touch with them or able to
    re-establish contact, was rejected.  The Appellant has  not  challenged
    any of these findings, including that he would have access  to  medical
    treatment.  The single article relied upon by the Appellant as  to  the
    inadequacy  or  inaccessibility  of  mental  health  treatment  in  the
    Pakistan was at best weak evidence in comparison to that set out within
    the Respondent's reasons for refusal  letter,  which  outlined  medical
    facilities available for  both  the  Appellant's  physical  and  mental
    health needs.

14. Overall, the Respondent relies on the lack of any detailed evidence  as
    to the Appellant's health or its impact on his day-to-day  life  either
    in the United Kingdom or likely impact upon him on return to  Pakistan,
    such that even if express consideration had been given to these factors
    within the context of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and/or
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the appeal  would
    inevitably have been dismissed.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is no dispute between the parties that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not expressly take into account the Appellant's physical or  mental
    health,  individually  or  cumulatively   together   with   his   wider
    circumstances when making findings on  his  private  life  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The findings  of
    fact on this aspect of the appeal, including whether he  could  satisfy
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, are contained in  paragraphs
    30 to 47 of the decision, which do not contain a  single  reference  to
    the Appellant's health, which is considered only for  the  purposes  of
    the Article 3 claim.  It is clear that the Appellant  had  specifically
    relied  upon  poor  physical  and  mental  health  as  an  obstacle  to
    reintegration in Pakistan and it was an error of law for the First-tier
    Tribunal not to expressly deal with this aspect of the  claim  or  make
    findings on it in the context of Article 8.  However, the real issue in
    this appeal is whether that error of law wais material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal.  For the reasons set out below, it was not.

 2. Although the Appellant claims to  suffer  from  a  number  of  physical
    health problems, there was no evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    of a diagnosis for any of them (in particular no evidence from a GP and
    to the contrary, the Appellant has stated that he had not even  visited
    his GP for a period of  five  years);  no  evidence  of  any  treatment
    currently being given or required for  any  of  the  conditions  (there
    being no indication what the Appellant's prescriptions were for or  how
    he obtained them) and save for the Appellant  expressing  a  desire  to
    take employment in the United Kingdom once his health  allows  him  to,
    there is no evidence at all of the impact of any of his physical health
    conditions on his day-to-day life.

 3. There  was  some,  but  very  limited,  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's mental health before the First-tier Tribunal, in  the  form
    of  a  medico-legal  report  from  Dr  Babalola  and  relatively  brief
    reference in the Appellant's written statement to being diagnosed  with
    depression being prescribed antidepressants and sleeping pills.

 4. Again, there is no evidence of the Appellant having  sought  assistance
    from his  GP  for  any  mental  health  problems  (as  detailed  in  Dr
    Babalola's report, the Appellant had  been  deregistered  from  his  GP
    practice having not attended for over five years), no specific evidence
    of a prescription for any medication for mental health problems  or  of
    any treatment for this at all within the United  Kingdom;  no  specific
    evidence of when the  Appellant's  mental  health  problems  began;  no
    detailed or specific evidence of what treatment is  required  and  very
    little, if any substantive evidence of the impact  of  the  Appellant's
    mental health on his day-to-day living, either in the United Kingdom or
    what it may be on return to Pakistan.

 5. Dr Babalola's report is, at best, of very limited assistance to matters
    which the First-tier Tribunal could have considered within the  context
    of Article 8 and it is clear that when  this  evidence  was  considered
    within the context of Article 3, the First-tier Tribunal makes a number
    of criticisms  of  the  report.   In  particular  the  lack  of  detail
    contained within  it  and  lack  of  confirmation  as  to  whether  the
    conclusions are based on anything other than  what  the  Appellant  has
    self-reported, as opposed to by reference to any other medical records.
     Further, clear findings are  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    medical treatment would be available to  the  Appellant  on  return  to
    Pakistan, that financial support from the United Kingdom could continue
    and that he would be able to re-establish contact with  family  members
    on return who would provide support and be a protective factor for him.
     These findings have not been challenged by the Appellant, and although
    within the different context of an Article 3  claim,  would  also  have
    relevance to any assessment under Article 8.

 6. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  availability  of
    medical treatment on return to Pakistan and of any possible  stigma  to
    those with mental health problems, was similarly scant.  In relation to
    the adequacy of treatment, it is for  an  Appellant  to  establish,  at
    least initially,  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  treatment
    required.  However, in this case, there is not even  an  identification
    of what treatment is required, let alone any specific  evidence  as  to
    its availability or otherwise.   The  mere  fact  that  there  is  only
    limited mental health provision in Pakistan  falls  far  short  on  the
    facts of this case of establishing that this Appellant could not access
    adequate  treatment.   Similarly,  the  single  article  about   stigma
    attached to mental health, in the absence of any detailed evidence from
    the Appellant about his presentation or impact  of  his  mental  health
    (which is not covered in any detailed way  in  Dr  Babalola's  report),
    falls far short of establishing alone, or in combination with any other
    factors, a very significant obstacle to his reintegration on return  to
    Pakistan and could carry little,  if  any  weight  within  the  overall
    proportionality balancing exercise.

 7. In conclusion, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  relation
    to the Appellant's physical and mental health was so lacking that on no
    rational view could the Appellant's claim relying on poor  physical  or
    mental health lead to a conclusion that there would be very significant
    obstacles to his reintegration return to Pakistan, nor that his removal
    to Pakistan would be a disproportionate interference with his right  to
    respect for private life in the United Kingdom.  This  is  particularly
    so taking into account the factors in section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and there being no even arguable  basis
    upon which anything other than little weight could be attached  to  the
    Appellant's private life given that  he  has  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully for virtually all of his time  here  and  only  made
    applications to attempt to regularise his stay  on  two  occasions,  in
    2013 and 2019.  For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's failure to
    expressly consider the Appellant's mental and  physical  health  within
    the context of his Article 8 claim is not a material error of law,  his
    appeal would inevitably be dismissed on human  rights  grounds  in  any
    event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson     Date 26th September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
