
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01610/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd February 2019                |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     OE
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Karnik, Counsel instructed by
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity order was made by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  on  8th
    February 2018 and for the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.
     OE is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
    direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure
    to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings  being  brought
    for contempt of court.


 2. The appellant is a national  of  Nigeria.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in August 2016 with entry clearance as a  student.  He  made  a
    number of applications for leave to remain,  and  he  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully until 12th May 2014 when he was  appeal  rights
    exhausted following an unsuccessful application for leave to remain  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The appellant made a further application for  leave
    to remain on Article 8 grounds that was refused by  the  respondent  in
    March 2015  and  the  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   ("FtT")   in   April   2016.
    Applications for permission to appeal were refused by the  FtT  on  7th
    September 2016, and by the Upper Tribunal on 2nd  November  2016.  Most
    recently, in July 2017 the appellant again applied for leave to  remain
    on Article 8 grounds. That application was refused  by  the  respondent
    for the reasons set out in a  decision  dated  12  December  2017.  The
    appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  FtT  Judge
    Swinnerton for the reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  18th
    September 2018.  It is that decision that is the subject of the  appeal
    before me.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. The appeal was heard by FtT Judge Swinnerton on  12th  September  2018.
    The appellant attended without legal representation and  there  was  no
    appearance on behalf of the respondent. The focus  of  the  appeal  was
    upon the appellant's relationship with his  two  children,  a  daughter
    aged 10, and a son aged 8 respectively, both of whom  live  with  their
    mother. At paragraph [8] of the decision, the Judge  records  that  the
    appellant was called to give evidence.  As to the contact  arrangements
    with his children, the appellant gave evidence that  "..  his  children
    sleep over with him one Saturday night every two weeks and that he also
    sees his children on Saturdays to give them classes and takes  them  to
    the youth club on Fridays as well as taking them to school and  picking
    them up from school on certain days during the week. His children  live
    with their mother with whom  the  appellant  does  not  enjoy  friendly
    relations.".  The appellant confirmed that he had no documentation,  to
    confirm the extent of the claimed contact. The appellant's evidence was
    that he had separated from his wife, in mid 2015.


 4. The Judge's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at  paragraphs
    [15] to [20] of the decision. At paragraph [17], the Judge states  that
    he did not find the appellant to be an entirely credible  witness.  The
    Judge referred to an apparent inconsistency in the  evidence  regarding
    the appellant's separation from his wife. Before FtT Judge  Swinnerton,
    the appellant claimed that he had separated from his wife in  mid  2015
    and that they had never lived separately between September 2008 and mid
    2015. However, in a previous  appeal  before  FtT  Judge  Simpson,  the
    appellant and his wife gave evidence that they had separated  in  2008,
    but successfully reconciled before separating again in April 2015, when
    the appellant's wife left the family  home  with  their  children.  The
    Judge accepted however that the appellant has lived separately from his
    wife and children since mid 2015, and the Judge found that the children
    live with their mother. As for the relationship between  the  appellant
    and his wife, the Judge states at paragraph [17] as follows:


         ".. Neither is it in dispute that the appellant does  not  enjoy  a
         cordial relationship with his estranged wife who did not attend the
         hearing in support of  the  Appellant's  appeal  and  nor  did  she
         provide any statement or letter detailing the  involvement  of  the
         Appellant in the lives of their children. It is clear that there is
         little or no prospect of any reconciliation between  the  appellant
         and the mother of his children."


 5. At paragraph [18] of the decision, the Judge concludes as follows:


         "With  respect  to  the  involvement  of  the  appellant  with  the
         upbringing of his children, as stated above the  child  arrangement
         order provides for the children of the appellant to spend one night
         with him every other weekend which  equates  to  approximately  two
         nights each month. It also provides that the parties can agree  for
         additional time to be spent by the children with their father.  The
         appellant gave evidence at the hearing that he  sees  his  children
         each Saturday to help them with  their  schoolwork,  that  he  also
         takes them to a youth club as well as taking them to and collecting
         them from school on one or more days during the  week.  I  did  not
         find the evidence of the appellant to be entirely credible in  this
         respect because the level of contact  indicated  by  the  appellant
         appeared to be significantly greater  than  that  detailed  in  the
         child  arrangement  order.  I  noted  also  that   there   was   no
         confirmation in writing by way of a letter or  statement  from  the
         mother of the Appellant's children as to the claimed extent of  the
         contact of the appellant with his children. Additionally I find  it
         surprising that, despite not having a cordial relationship with the
         appellant,  the  mother  of  his  children  would  not  offer  some
         confirmation of the nature of his contact with his  children  given
         that such support would clearly be of assistance to the  mother  of
         the children too in respect of assistance  with  their  schoolwork,
         attendance at the youth club and  taking  to  and  collection  from
         school as this would all lessen the parental burden upon the mother
         of the Appellant's children."


 6. The Judge noted that the appellant's eldest child is aged 10 and is now
    a British citizen. The Judge also noted the both of the  children  have
    always lived in the UK. At paragraph [20], the  Judge  stated  that  he
    accepts "..that the appellant is,  to  some  extent,  involved  in  the
    upbringing of his children but not to the extent that  he  maintains.".
    The Judge found that it is in the best interests  of  the  children  to
    remain living with their mother but that must be  weighed  against  the
    public interest  considerations.  The  Judge  concluded,  at  [20],  as
    follows:


         "Were the appellant to be returned to Nigeria, he would  of  course
         not have the same access to as children but he would still be  able
         to maintain contact with them. The children would continue to  live
         with the mother and would continue to go to school as  they  do  at
         present. They would not be able to spend  alternate  weekends  with
         their father or  any  other  time  that  has  been  agreed  by  the
         appellant  and  his  estranged  wife.  That  said,   in   all   the
         circumstances of this case, I do not accept that  the  decision  of
         the respondent is disproportionate.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 7. The grounds of appeal are somewhat incoherent but draw attention to the
    Child Arrangement Order that was before the FtT  Judge,  and  criticise
    the weight attached to  the  lack  of  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    estranged  wife,  in  circumstances  where  the  terms  of  the   Child
    Arrangement Order plainly provides for additional contact, by  consent,
    beyond the alternate weekend contact.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by  FtT  Judge  Hollingworth  on  5th
    December 2018.  In doing so, he noted that it is  arguable  that  given
    the provisions of the Child Arrangement Order including further contact
    by arrangement, the foundation for concluding that  the  appellant  was
    not entirely credible in this respect, is flawed. He also noted that it
    is arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient weight to the lack
    of a cordial  relationship  in  terms  of  explaining  the  absence  of
    evidence from the children's mother.  The matter  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  contains  a  material
    error of law, and if so, the remake the decision.


 9. Before me, on behalf of  the  appellant  Mr  Karnik  submits  that  the
    decision cannot stand in light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    SR (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT
    00334.  He submits that the FtT Judge failed to have proper  regard  to
    the terms of the Child Arrangement Order that is to be found at section
    'G' of the appellant's  bundle.   The  order  records  that  a  minimum
    arrangement would be set down as part of the order, but  this  did  not
    preclude the parties from making additional arrangements if so  agreed.
    In addition to contact on alternate  weekends  from  10am  on  Saturday
    until 8pm on Sunday, the order made by the Family Court  provides  that
    the parties must make sure  that  the  children  spend  time  with  the
    appellant for such reasonable  times  and  on  such  occasions  as  the
    parties may from time to time agree,  always  giving  priority  to  the
    needs of the children knowing that those needs will change  over  time.
    He submits that the arrangements in place are in  accordance  with  the
    spirit of that order.  In any event, the Judge found that the appellant
    is separated from his estranged wife and that there is no prospect of a
    reconciliation. Although the Judge did not accept  that  the  appellant
    has contact to  the  extent  claimed,  the  Judge  did  find  that  the
    appellant is to some extent involved  the  children's  upbringing.  The
    Judge also noted that the oldest child is a British citizen, but failed
    to have a sufficient regard to those matters in determining the  public
    interest and in reaching his conclusion.


10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bates submits that the burden of  proof
    rests with the appellant and the Judge was clearly aware of  the  terms
    of the order made by the Family Court. At  paragraph  [18],  the  Judge
    noted that the order "also provides that  the  parties  can  agree  for
    additional time to be spent by the children with their father", but the
    Judge was concerned about the distinct lack of any supporting  evidence
    to establish that the appellant has  contact  to  the  extent  that  he
    claims. He submits that the Judge was entitled  to  note  the  lack  of
    evidence in support of the claim being made. For example, there was  no
    letter from the children's school confirming the  appellant  drops  off
    and collects the children, as he claims. There is no  letter  from  the
    youth club that the children attend, and no  evidence  whatsoever  that
    the children's mother consented to all of the additional contact  being
    claimed.  Mr Bates submits that if it is correct that the appellant  is
    having significantly more contact than  the  minimum  set  out  in  the
    Order, there is no reason why the appellants estranged  wife  would  be
    unwilling to confirm that additional contact, and  the  role  that  the
    appellant plays in the children's lives. He submits it was open to  the
    Judge to accept that the appellant is, to some extent, involved in  the
    upbringing of his children, but to reject the appellant's  evidence  as
    to the extent of that involvement.  Mr Bates accepts  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in SR (subsisting parental relationship -  s117B(6))
    may have been relevant, butt reminds  me  that  the  decision  was  not
    available until September 2018 and  was  plainly  not  brought  to  the
    attention of the Judge.


Discussion


11. I accept, as Mr Bates submits, that it is for  an  appellant  to  place
    before the respondent and the Tribunal, all  material  upon  which  the
    appellant relied to suggest that  the  consequences  of  removal  would
    interfere with the Article 8 rights of the family; R. (Kotecha) v  SSHD
    [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin).


12. The FtT Judge found that the appellant  is  not  an  entirely  credible
    witness. There were  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant at the hearing of the appeal before FtT Judge Swinnerton, and
    that previously given by the appellant and his former  partner,  before
    FtT Judge Simpson.  It was in my judgement open to the Judge to make an
    adverse  credibility  finding  against  the  appellant  regarding  that
    relationship, but the fact that his evidence regarding his relationship
    with his former  partner  was  unreliable,  is  not  to  say  that  the
    appellant's evidence regarding his relationship with his  children,  is
    equally unreliable.  Here, there was before the FtT,  evidence  in  the
    form of a Child Arrangement Order made by the Family Court that set out
    in the minimum level of contact that the appellant was to have with his
    children. The Judge found the evidence  of  the  appellant  not  to  be
    entirely credible  because  the  level  of  contact  indicated  by  the
    appellant appeared to be significantly greater than  that  detailed  in
    the Child Arrangement Order.  I accept, as Mr Karnik submits,  that  in
    addition to contact on alternate weekends, the order made by the Family
    Court provides that the parties must make sure that the children  spend
    time with the appellant for such reasonable times and on such occasions
    as the parties may from time  to  time  agree.   The  evidence  of  the
    appellant regarding that additional contact was not challenged, because
    the respondent was not represented at the hearing of the appeal  before
    the FtT.  However, the Judge was concerned about the lack  of  evidence
    from the mother of the children about the claimed extent of the contact
    between the appellant and his children. The issue for me is whether  it
    was open to the Judge to reject the appellant's account of the  contact
    arrangements, for the reasons given in the decision.


13. It is now well established that a finding might only be set  aside  for
    error of law on the grounds of  perversity  if  it  was  irrational  or
    unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that   was   wholly
    unsupported by the evidence. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal  should  not
    overturn  a  judgment  at  first  instance,  unless  it  really  cannot
    understand the original judge's thought  process  when  the  Judge  was
    making material findings.   Here,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's
    analysis of the evidence is irrational. The Judge refers several  times
    in the decision to the lack  of  a  cordial  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the children's mother.  The  Judge  found  it  surprising
    that despite not having a cordial relationship with the appellant,  the
    mother of his children would not offer some confirmation of the  nature
    of the appellant's contact with the children. In my  judgement,  having
    concluded that it was not in dispute that the appellant does not  enjoy
    a cordial relationship with  his  estranged  wife,  it  can  hardly  be
    surprising that she did not  attend  the  hearing  of  the  appeal,  or
    provide evidence in support of the appeal.  In any event, the FtT Judge
    did not reach any concluded view as to the level of contact enjoyed  by
    the appellant with his children.  There is no doubt that the Judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his children, and that he  maintains  some  involvement  in  their
    upbringing.


14. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") sets out requirements that, if met,  mean  that  there
    will not be any public interest in a person's removal from the UK.  One
    of the requirements  is  that  the  person  must  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.  An appellant
    can have a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  their
    biological child even if they do not have an active role in the child's
    upbringing, so long as there is some degree of ongoing direct  parental
    care.  In  SR  (subsisting  parental  relationship  -  s117B(6)),   the
    appellant  was  found  to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with his child even though  he  had  not  been  taking  an
    active part in his upbringing, and only saw the child for 3 hours every
    two weeks.


15. The FtT Judge cannot of course be criticised for not referring  to  the
    decision in SR (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6), not  least
    because that decision was not handed down until September 2018, and may
    not have been available when the appeal was heard.   The  appellant  is
    not a person who is liable to deportation, and as such by operation  of
    s117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the public  interest  does  not  require  his
    removal. The appellant plainly has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with is two children. At least one of those children is  a
    British citizen and the other has lived in  the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of seven years or more.  FtT Judge Swinnerton noted at paragraph
    [16] of the decision, that FtT Judge Parker had allowed  an  appeal  by
    the mother of the appellant's children in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    25th of May 2018. In that decision, FtT  Judge  Parker  found  that  it
    would be unreasonable for the children to return to Nigeria.


16. Reviewing the decision of FtT Judge  Swinnerton  as  a  whole,  I  have
    reached the conclusion that in rejecting the evidence of the  appellant
    regarding the extent of  his  contact  with  his  children,  the  Judge
    reached a finding that  was,  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge,
    irrational.  In any event, in his analysis of the best interests of the
    children, weighed against the public interest, the FtT Judge  erred  in
    law such that there is a material error of law in the decision  and  it
    must be set aside.


17. I remake the decision having regard to the findings  made  by  the  FtT
    Judge. Although not expressly set out in the decision, it would  appear
    that the Judge accepted that the appellant  was  having  at  least  the
    minimum level of contact provided for in the order made by  the  Family
    Court.  On any view of the evidence, the Judge accepted, at [20],  that
    the appellant is, to some extent, involved in  the  upbringing  of  his
    children.


18. The approach to Section 117B(6) where British children are involved was
    also considered in SF and others (Guidance  -  post-2014  Act)  Albania
    [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  The Tribunal held that where  a  decision  to
    refuse the application would require  a  parent  or  primary  carer  to
    return to a country outside the EU, the case must always be assessed on
    the basis that it would be unreasonable to  expect  a  British  Citizen
    child to leave the EU with that parent or primary carer.
    In such cases it will usually be appropriate  to  grant  leave  to  the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK  with  the
    child, providing there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.
    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse  to  grant  leave  where  the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations  of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK  or  in  the
    EU.  The    circumstances    envisaged    could    cover    amongst
    others: criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
    398 of the Immigration Rules; a very poor immigration history, such as
    where  the  person  has  repeatedly  and  deliberately   breached   the
    Immigration Rules.
    In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision  maker
    must consider the impact on the child of any separation.


19. I accept that the appellant is not primary carer of his  children,  but
    as I have set out, the FtT Judge found that  he  is,  to  some  extent,
    involved in the upbringing of his children. There has  already  been  a
    decision of the FtT in a separate appeal, that it would be unreasonable
    for the children to be asked to return to Nigeria. FtT Judge Swinnerton
    found that it is in the best interests of the children to remain living
    with their mother.  Having considered all circumstances I am  satisfied
    that's the public interest does not  require  the  appellant's  removal
    because it would plainly be unreasonable for the children to  be  asked
    to return to Nigeria.


20. As Sales LJ made clear in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803, sections
    117A-117D of  the  2002  Act  provide  a  structured  approach  to  the
    application of Article 8 which produces in all cases a  "final  result"
    compatible with Article 8.  Where  Parliament  has  declared  that  the
    public interest does  not  require  a  person's  removal  in  specified
    circumstances, and those circumstances are present, that is the end  of
    the matter.


21. I am satisfied that the interference with family life in this  case  is
    disproportionate and it follows that the appeal is allowed on Article 8
    grounds.


Notice of Decision


22. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Swinnerton is  set
    aside.


23. I remake the decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.






    Signed                                  Date          12th April 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

