

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/01390/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Rolls Building, London       |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 February 2018                   |            On 22 February 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                           linford benjamin grant
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Harding, instructed by Grange & Castle
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of FtT Judge
    S D Lloyd that was promulgated on 29 March 2017.  Judge  Lloyd  decided
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  of
    22 December 2015 refusing his human rights claim on private and  family
    life grounds.

 2. After considering the grounds of application, the rule 24 response  and
    Mr Harding's skeleton argument, and after hearing from Mr  Harding  and
    Mr Melvin, I concluded there was  no  legal  error  and  dismissed  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I announced my decision at  the  end  of
    the hearing and gave brief reasons, but indicated that I would  reserve
    my full reasons, which I now give.

 3. The first issue is whether Judge Lloyd was required by law to carry out
    the two-stage process recommended by the Supreme Court in paragraphs 58
    and 60 of R (MM (Lebanon) & others) v SSHD and another [2017] UKSC  10.
    The general provisions of the immigration rules  envisage  a  two-stage
    process, the second involving a  fact-sensitive  consideration  of  any
    human rights issues outside the Rules. The duty of the tribunal hearing
    appeals against any adverse decision of the Secretary of  State  is  to
    ensure that the ultimate disposal of the application is consistent with
    the ECHR.

 4. It is evident from the decision and reasons statement that Judge  Lloyd
    was alert to this approach since at paragraph 11 he  recorded  that  Mr
    Chohan (representing the appellant) had conceded that the appellant did
    not meet the requirements of the immigration rules and relied solely on
    article 8 ECHR.  Judge Lloyd had no power to go behind this  concession
    even if he had wanted because it was a concession in  relation  to  the
    facts.

 5. In any event, Judge Lloyd at paragraph 32 kept the  provisions  of  the
    immigration rules in mind, where he says:

         "However, to draw from the immigration rules, I did not  find  that
         this   would   amount   to   an   insurmountable   obstacle.    The
         'insurmountable obstacle' test is not the one that  I  am  applying
         directly under article 8, but the rules remain a lens through which
         proportionality  can  be  assessed,  being  reflective  of  the  UK
         government's assessment of the balance to be struck in private  and
         family life claims."

    His reference to insurmountable obstacles can only be  a  reference  to
    paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM.  I am satisfied this  shows  that  Judge
    Lloyd considered the appellant's appeal not only by direct  application
    of article 8 but also through the lens of the  immigration  rules.   He
    did so because of the need to consider UK  government  policy;  if  the
    appellant would benefit from the immigration  rules/  policy,  then  to
    deprive him of such benefit might be arbitrary and disproportionate.

 6. I conclude there is nothing in this first ground to show legal error.

 7. The second issue  is  whether  Judge  Lloyd  carried  out  the  classic
    structured  five-stage  approach  to  the  assessment  of   article   8
    proportionality.  I do not accept  judges  are  required  to  use  this
    structure, even though it has  become  commonplace.   Lord  Thomas,  at
    paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60,  provides  the
    following advice to judges regarding the approach to article 8:

         83.  One way of structuring such a judgment would be to follow what
         has become known as the "balance sheet" approach. After  the  judge
         has found the facts, the judge would set out each of the "pros" and
         "cons" in what has been described as a "balance sheet" and then set
         out reasoned conclusions as to whether the  countervailing  factors
         outweigh the importance attached to  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders.

 8. This provides an alternative to the approach set out in paragraph 17 of
    R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  I am satisfied Judge Lloyd has  used
    a balance sheet approach.  He has set out and assessed all the  factors
    in the appellant's favour (including the length of time he has been  in
    the UK, his relationship and the medical and care needs of  his  wife),
    and weighed them against the public interest, which of course  includes
    the statutory provisions of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Judge Lloyd carried out a balancing exercise  of  the
    competing interests.

 9. Within this second ground is a related issue  of  whether  Judge  Lloyd
    gave no weight to the private life the appellant has developed  in  the
    UK whilst an overstayer.  The law requires little weight  to  be  given
    and not no weight.  I have considered the decision and reason statement
    as a whole and note that in paragraph 22 Judge Lloyd does exactly  what
    is required and gives little weight to  the  appellant's  private  life
    established whilst he was an overstayer.

10. Also within this second ground is a question as to whether Judge  Lloyd
    had proper regard to the European Court of  Human  Rights  judgment  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867.   In  light  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment regarding the ambit of that decision in AM (Zimbabwe)
    v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64, I find there is  nothing  in  this  argument
    because the medical evidence regarding the appellant's  wife  does  not
    show she comes close to meeting the relevant thresholds.

11. The third issue is whether Judge Lloyd applied the wrong legal test  in
    relation to whether it was proportionate to expect the appellant's wife
    to relocate to Jamaica.  I am aware that Judge Lloyd did not  find  the
    appellant to have provided a  credible  account  or  credible  evidence
    about the situation he would  find  if  he  returned  to  Jamaica  (see
    paragraphs 17 to 21).  Judge Lloyd also concluded that he had not  been
    give an up to date picture  of  the  medical  and  care  needs  of  the
    appellant's wife (see paragraphs 24 to 27).

12. In this context, Judge Lloyd considers the impact on  the  family  life
    between the appellant and his wife should  the  appellant  be  expelled
    from the UK.  He first considers whether family life could continue  in
    Jamaica were the appellant's wife to move with him.  He concludes  that
    it would because the level of care  in  Jamaica  would  be  sufficient.
    Judge  Lloyd  then  considers  the  alternative   scenario   that   the
    appellant's wife remains in the UK without  him.   As  Judge  Lloyd  is
    exploring alternative scenarios, it is not correct to  say  he  applied
    the wrong legal test.

13. Having considered the grounds and the decision as a whole, I  find  the
    arguments presented amount  to  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    judicial findings made.  As Judge Lloyd found, the appellant had a poor
    immigration history, he and his wife had started their relationship  in
    full knowledge that he had no right  to  stay  and  that  he  might  be
    required to leave.  It is unsurprising  that  the  decision  was  made,
    given the evidence of the  situation  in  Jamaica  and  of  his  wife's
    medical and care needs was not good.

14. It follows that there is no basis on which to set aside  Judge  Lloyd's
    decision.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.
FtT Judge S D Lloyd's decision does not contain an error on a point  of  law
and is upheld.

Signed                                       Date         13 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy
