
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01013/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2018                      |On 10 May 2018                       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ummay Moriwam Tangina
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Majid promulgated as long ago as 21 August 2017.   The  grounds  of
         appeal were settled on the Entry Clearance Officer's behalf  by  Mr
         Tarlow who appears before me today.

      2. Those grounds outline the extent to which  Judge  Majid  failed  to
         engage with the judicial function of making findings of fact on the
         matters in dispute.  The issues which called for consideration were
         (i) whether the relationship between the applicant and  her  spouse
         was  genuine  and  subsisting  (E-ECP.2.6)  and  (ii)  whether  the
         applicant and partner intended to live together permanently in  the
         United Kingdom (E-ECP.2.10).

      3. I gave a provisional indication relying on the conjoined appeals in
         MM v SSHD and others (AA/06906/2014) (as yet unreported)  in  which
         the Upper Tribunal (Vice-President  Ockleton,  Judge  O'Connor  and
         Judge Smith)  had  occasion  to  look  at  several  decisions,  all
         deriving from Judge Majid, which  were  formulaic  and  lacking  in
         judicial acumen.  Many of the pro forma  paragraphs  criticised  in
         the decisions under consideration in  the  conjoined  appeals  have
         been replicated in this case.

      4. Mr Spurling, who appears for the respondent, properly  and  readily
         conceded that this decision is  so  fundamentally  flawed  that  it
         cannot be sustained and must be set aside.  I do not think it would
         assist anyone for me to enumerate each  and  all  of  the  multiple
         deficiencies. Two examples will suffice. At paragraph 18 the  judge
         says:

             "I found  the  evidence  adduced  on  the  Appellant's  behalf
             credible and I am  able  to  help  her  given  her  particular
             situation and what I have said in this Decision.  I  am  aware
             that it is a traditional marriage arranged by elders and there
             is good evidence for member to allow her appeal."


         And at paragraph 25:-

             "I am able to change the decision of the  Respondent  in  this
             case and allow this appeal." (emphasis added in each instance)


      5. Both these extracts deploy language of the type that was deprecated
         by the Upper Tribunal in the conjoined appeal decision.  It is  not
         the function of a judge "to help" those he perceives  as  deserving
         litigants or "to change  decisions"  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
         although a proper exercise of the judicial function  may  have  the
         effect of doing either or both.  A judge is required to  apply  the
         law to the facts as he finds them. If there  are  any  findings  of
         fact in this decision, they are  extremely  difficult  to  discern.
         And, in any event, there is  no  meaningful  attempt  to  identify,
         still less apply, the relevant law.

      6. It is inevitable, as both representatives concede, that the  matter
         should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
         determined afresh.

      7. I appreciate that remitting the  appeal  will  have  a  significant
         effect on Miss Tangina, not merely by re-opening  the  matter,  but
         also by adding to her legal costs. This is  very  regrettable.  The
         fault is not that of the Entry Clearance Officer but lies  entirely
         in the abrogation of  judicial  responsibility  by  the  particular
         judge who heard the  matter.  It  would  not  be  right  to  remake
         decision  today  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  because  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision is not simply wrong, but irredeemably  flawed  in
         limine. However, I would  wish  my  words  of  concern  and  regret
         regarding the additional expense to find their way to Miss Tangina.

Notice of Decision

      1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the Upper Tribunal is set
         aside.

      2) The matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House
         for a fresh decision to be made by a judge other than Judge Majid.

      3) The listing office at Taylor House are to use their best endeavours
         to have  this  matter  brought  on  for  hearing  at  the  earliest
         opportunity so that the redetermination  is  made  as  soon  as  is
         practically possible.

      4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Hill             Date         3 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




