
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01055/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 4 August 2020                     |On 13th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    K. L.
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.  S  Vokes,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Khan  &  Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer

Introduction

1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
   Tribunal Osborne ('the Judge') issued on 6 December 2019 by which the
   appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse him leave to remain in
   this country on human rights (article 8) grounds and to deport him to
   Jamaica was dismissed.

2. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission to appeal on all grounds by
   means of a decision dated 3 February 2020.

Remote hearing

3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
   during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field
   House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public. The
   hearing and its start time were listed in the cause list. I was addressed
   by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we were together in
   the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open
   court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no party
   has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction
   on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

4. The parties agreed that all relevant documents were before the Tribunal.
   The audio and video links remained unbroken between the representatives
   and the Tribunal throughout the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing
   both representatives confirmed that the hearing had been completed
   fairly.

5. The appellant attended the hearing remotely. No member of the public
   joined the hearing remotely or attended Field House.

Anonymity

6. The Judge issued an anonymity direction and no request was made by
   either party for such direction to be set aside.

7. I observe that no reasons were given by the Judge for the making of the
   anonymity direction. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerned
   with the issuing of an anonymity direction and I observe that the
   starting point for consideration of such a direction in this Chamber of
   the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and tribunals, is open justice. The
   principle of open justice is fundamental to the common law. The rationale
   for this is to protect the rights of the parties and also to maintain
   public confidence in the administration of justice. Revelation of the
   identity of the parties is an important part of open justice: Re:
   Guardian News & Media Ltd [2010] UKSC 1; [2010] 2 AC 697.

8. Paragraph 18 of the Guidance Note confirms that the identity of children
   whether they are appellants or the children of an appellant (or otherwise
   concerned with the proceedings), will not normally be disclosed nor will
   their school, the names of their teacher or any social worker or health
   professional with whom they are concerned, unless there are good reasons
   in the interests of justice to do so. I note that the step of not naming
   a wife or children and the attendant step of there being no reference
   made to where the family reside, the ages of the children or what school
   they attend, is often a suitable alternative to the making of an
   anonymity direction.

9. However, I observe that two of the appellant's children are subject to
   care orders and it is necessary to confirm this state of affairs within
   this decision because of the substance of the article 8 appeal.
   Consequently, the identification of the appellant could well lead to the
   subsequent identification of children subject to care orders. In such
   circumstances, this is a matter where the demands of open justice do not
   outweigh the article 8 rights of those children and so I confirm the
   anonymity direction, which is detailed at the conclusion of this
   decision.

Background

10. The appellant is a national of Jamaica and is presently aged 35. He was
   granted leave to enter the United Kingdom for 6 months as a visitor on 9
   September 2002, when aged 18.

11. During the currency of his leave to enter, he was included as a
   dependent child on his mother's application for indefinite leave to
   remain. As he was aged over 18 at the date of application, the respondent
   concluded that he was not a dependent child and refused his application
   for settlement. A subsequent appeal against this decision was dismissed
   by Immigration Judge Boyd QC by means of a decision promulgated on 15
   July 2005 (TH/01227/2015).

12. An application for leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules
   ('the Rules') was submitted on 28 March 2008. The appellant was granted
   discretionary leave to remain on 20 April 2010, valid for 3 years. A
   subsequent application to vary leave was successful and the appellant
   enjoyed leave to remain in this country until 27 January 2017. A further
   variation of leave application was submitted on 10 January 2017.

Family

13. The appellant is in a relationship with a British citizen, K.S. They
   met in or around 2007 with their relationship commencing in or around
   2011. They have six children, the elder two are children of K.S. from a
   previous relationship: 'K' and 'J'. K was aged 17 at the date of hearing
   and is now an adult. The younger four children are:'K2', 'K3,' 'R' and
   'I'. K2 and K3 are presently subject to care orders and are under the
   care of a stepsister of K.S. The appellant is the biological father of
   the four youngest children.

Criminal convictions

14. The appellant has 10 criminal convictions concerning 20 offences, with
   the first conviction occurring in 2004 when he was aged 19. Several
   convictions relate to theft, assault, criminal damage and possession of
   class B drugs (cannabis). The convictions were dealt with by non-
   custodial sentences until December 2013 when he received a 3 months
   custodial sentence, suspended for 12 months, for depositing controlled
   waste without an environmental permit contrary to section 33(1)(a) of the
   Environmental Protection Act 1990. In April 2017 he was imprisoned for 8
   weeks for possessing a bladed article in a public place.

15. The appellant was arrested by police officers on 18 February 2017. He
   was found to be in possession of 50 wraps of class A drugs, namely crack
   cocaine and heroin. He sought to conceal the items when apprehended.

16. On 17 August 2017 the appellant was convicted by a jury at Bristol
   Crown Court on 3 counts: (i) possessing a controlled class A drug
   (heroin) with intent to supply; (ii) possessing a class A drug (crack
   cocaine) with intent to supply and (iii) a criminal property offence.

17. On 18 August 2017, Mr. Recorder Parroy QC sentenced the appellant to 4
   years and 6 months imprisonment for counts (i) and (ii) concurrently and
   to a concurrent sentence of 12 months' imprisonment for count (iii). For
   the purposes of sentencing Mr. Recorder Parroy QC identified the
   appellant as having a significant role in the street supply of drugs:

         'As a drug user yourself you know perfectly well the pernicious
         effect that class A drugs have. You were standing on that corner in
         Hepburn Road with 50 wraps of class A drugs, crack cocaine and
         heroin, selling to anyone who was prepared to buy and you were
         arrested and we know about your attempts to conceal what you had
         been doing and prevent the police from recovering the necessary
         evidence ...

         ... I accept that this is a case where, within the guidelines which
         I must follow, you had a significant role, being motivated by
         financial advantage with, obviously, inevitably an understanding of
         the scale of operation and you were street dealing which makes this
         a category 3 case ...'

18. The respondent signed a deportation order on 22 December 2018 and on 7
   January 2019 she issued a decision refusing the appellant leave to remain
   in this country on human rights grounds.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

19. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Newport on 25 November
   2019. As to the core of the appellant's appeal, the Judge noted, at [20]:

         '20. At the outset of the appeal hearing Miss Wallace [Home Office
            Presenting Officer] and Mr. Fracyzk [Counsel for the appellant]
            were good enough to confirm that the core issue to be determined
            in this appeal is the issue of 'unduly harsh' and 'very
            compelling circumstances' over and above those described in
            Exceptions 1 and 2 as set out in section 117C(4) and (5) and
            mirrored in the Immigration Rules ... In that way Miss Wallace
            confirmed most helpfully that the appellant has an established
            family life with [K.S] (his partner), her two natural children
            [K and J], and the appellant's own four natural children [K2 and
            K3] (the subject of care orders) and [R and I] (who are also the
            natural children of [K.S.].'

20. The appellant attended the hearing from detention and was represented.
   He gave oral evidence as did K.S. The Judge found the appellant to be an
   unimpressive witness and K.S. to be a plausible and honest witness.
   However, the Judge accepted in his decision that the appellant 'should
   not be categorised as a fundamentally dishonest person', at [27], and
   acknowledged that he was an enhanced prisoner, at [28].

21. The Judge considered the OASys assessment filed with the Tribunal,
   observing at [30]:

         '30. Ultimately, the OASys assessment reports that the appellant is
            a medium risk to the public in the community; a medium risk to
            known adults in the community; a medium risk to staff in the
            community but a low risk to children in the community. Whilst he
            remains in custody, the OASys assessment records that the
            appellant is a low risk in all those categories. For the most
            part the OASys report is an impressively compiled document. The
            author Nadine Lawrance provides cogent reasons for her
            assessment. At page 41 of the report Ms Lawrance states,

               'I would assess that his offending behaviour demonstrates
               that he believes he is justified in offending that meets his
               needs, e.g. to support himself financially, avoid arrest,
               seek revenge or he feels aggrieved or treated unfairly. His
               behaviour also indicates he holds beliefs that support the
               use of violence to achieve his goals.'

            Miss Lawrance confirms that the appellant takes responsibility
            for his current offences and admits his drug use and dealing.
            The appellant presented as motivated not to reoffend and
            complies well with the prison regime. However, Miss Lawrance
            reported that the appellant does not want to engage with any
            offence focused interventions and refused to be assessed for TSP
            [Thinking Skills Programme] or be referred to the Behaviour
            Change or Better Man Courses. He also refused support with his
            drug use saying that he is now clean and needs no further input.
            Having heard the appellant give specific evidence upon these
            specific issues raised in the OASys assessment, I find that
            there may well have developed (at least to some extent) a
            misunderstanding between the appellant and Ms. Lawrance in the
            preparation of her report. The appellant asserted with some
            force that he has never refused to engage in any aspect of
            prison life and has never refused the opportunity of improving
            himself whilst in prison. He asserted that if he had failed to
            act appropriately, he would not have remained an enhanced
            prisoner. The appellant treated this area of potential dispute
            with mature reflection and deep thought. He genuinely tried to
            remember whether he had refused any opportunities that were put
            to him. I was impressed by this part of the appellant's evidence
            and I take it fully into account in my consideration of the
            evidence as a whole.

22. The judge was therefore able to make positive findings as to some
   aspects of the appellant's evidence.

23. Having reminded himself of the Court of Appeal judgments in N (Kenya)
   v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1094;
   [2004] I.N.L.R. 612 and OH (Serbia) v. Secretary of State for the Home
   Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694; [2009] I.N.L.R. 109 the Judge observed,
   at [23] and [24]:

         '23. ... Having considered all the evidence I have heard in this
            appeal, I find that the expression of society's revulsion at the
            particular crimes committed by this appellant and the building
            of public confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who
            commit serious crimes is a relevant feature of this appeal.

         24. Assessing proportionality in an appeal such as this is an
            exercise in taking all relevant matters into consideration and
            appropriately balancing them. It is a most delicate matter. I
            find most definitely that society is entitled to express its
            revulsion against the appellant's criminal reoffending.'

24. As to article 8 the judge noted that K2 and K3 are the subject of care
   orders and reside outside the family home. Neither child has had direct
   contact with the appellant since his imprisonment and there was no
   indication that either child had been particularly affected by the
   absence of their father.

25. The judge considered the position of K.S. at [43]:

         '43. In respect of [K.S.], even upon her own account, given
            thoughtfully and carefully in her oral evidence, she is just
            about managing. [K.S.] Has now been without the appellant in the
            family home for more than two years. She has shown herself to be
            capable of making sensible judgements in the best interests of
            the children. There is no challenge to the quality of her
            parenting. There is no suggestion that [K.S.] is proving to be
            anything other than a wholly appropriate mother and carer for
            all of the four children in her care. The consequences of the
            appellant's deportation will for her be harsh. She will have the
            responsibility of caring for all four children throughout their
            minorities. However, she is a capable mother who is managing and
            is providing the children with commendable stability. The
            consequences of the appellant's deportation will not be unduly
            harsh for [K.S.].'

26. As to K, I and J, the Judge found at [42]:

         '42. Insofar as [K, I and J] are concerned, I am far from satisfied
            on the basis of all the evidence presented in this appeal that
            the consequences for them of the deportation of the appellant
            would be unduly harsh. Having said that, in no way do I
            underestimate the effect upon them of the appellant's
            deportation to Jamaica. That will be a significant event in
            their lives. It might properly be described as having 'harsh'
            consequences for them in that it will present them with
            significant difficulties in continuing the sort of relationship
            with the appellant that they have previously enjoyed.
            Objectively, [I and K] appear to have not been particularly
            affected by the absence of the appellant, [J] has missed the
            appellant and his behaviour has become more challenging. That is
            to be expected. One of the main functions of any parent is to
            provide stability for any child of the family. I am satisfied
            that to some extent the appellant, despite his criminal
            offending, provided the family home with a degree of stability.
            He is and was a father figure to whom the children look for
            stability. In the absence of the appellant, whilst he is in
            prison/detention, and during his period of deportation, that
            stability will largely be absent. It is the sort of disruption
            to family life that families can reasonably be expected to
            manage, albeit that some members of some families will find it
            more difficult than others. Additionally, I find that the
            appellant has by his behaviour also been responsible for
            introducing into his family home a considerable degree of
            instability. The appellant's absence from the home during his
            period of imprisonment is his responsibility. It follows that it
            is the appellant's behaviour/offending which has led to [J] and
            [R] suffering emotional/behavioural difficulties. Medium risk of
            reoffending which the appellant represents, suggests that his
            presence in the family home will increase the risk of further
            instability in the future. It is likely that the children will
            suffer from any such instability.

27. The Judge considered the position of R, at [44]-[45]:

         '44. [R] seems to be the person who has been affected and is
            affected most by the continued absence of the appellant. Due to
            the sensible and child focused disclosure by [K.S.] whilst
            discussing [R's] difficulties with the school, supportive
            counselling has been put in place for [R]. He is benefiting from
            that. I find that the destabilising effect of the appellant's
            absence is more profound in the case of [R] than any of the
            other members of the family. I am satisfied that [K.S.] and all
            the other children will have suffered and will perhaps in the
            future suffer effects to their life which can be described (per
            MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [33]) as the commonplace
            incidents of family life.

         45. Missing a parent to the extent that one needs the support of a
            counsellor should not properly be termed the commonplace
            incidents of family life. Insofar as [R] is concerned I find the
            consequences of his father's deportation will have unduly harsh
            consequences. However, those consequences can, and I am sure
            with the assistance of [K.S] will be, ameliorated and
            appropriately treated by the caring services that are available
            in this country. To that extent, the consequences of the
            appellant's deportation for [R] do not and will not amount to
            very compelling circumstances above those set out in Exception
            2.

28. The Judge concluded at [50]-[52]

         50. Pursuant to the judgment in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 16 I have
            conducted the above structured approach to proportionality on
            the basis of the facts as I have found them to be on the
            evidence in this particular appeal, the law as established by
            statute, and case law. Ultimately, I have to decide whether
            deportation is proportionate in this particular appeal. I have
            balanced the strength of the public interest in the deportation
            of the appellant against the impact upon the private and family
            life not only of the appellant but of the five other present
            members of his immediate family. Having given due weight to the
            strength of the public interest and the deportation of the
            appellant in this matter, and having also given due weight to
            the private and family lives of [K.S.] all members of her
            household together with [K2 and K3], I find that the article 8
            appeal is not sufficiently strong to outweigh the public
            interest in the appellant's deportation. That is why I find in
            all the circumstances of this appeal the appellant's appeal must
            fail.

         51. It was no part of the respondent's case that [K.S.] and the
            children will accompany the appellant to live with him in
            Jamaica. At no time did Ms Wallace put to [K.S.] that she could
            relocate to Jamaica.

         52. The appellant is aged 35 years. He arrived in the UK in
            September 2002 and so has been in this country for 17 years. He
            is young enough to adapt to life in this home country. The
            appellant is a mature adult who has an aptitude for work. His
            positive attitude to work will stand him in good stead in
            finding employment wherever he lives. The appellant has provided
            no documentary evidence to suggest that he would unduly suffer
            difficulties in obtaining employment in Jamaica. For these and
            for all the other reasons I have set out above, the respondent's
            decision to deport the appellant is in all the circumstances
            proportionate in a democratic society to the legitimate aim to
            be achieved.

Grounds of Appeal

29. Mr. Fracyzk, who represented the appellant before the First-tier
   Tribunal, advanced with his usual clarity two grounds of challenge on
   issues of law:

         i) The FtT erred by taking into account the concept of public
            revulsion in the balancing exercise.

        ii) The FtT erred by not weighing the seriousness of the criminal
            offence when assessing as to whether there are very compelling
            circumstances.

30. As accepted by Mr. Vokes at the oral hearing, the grounds are narrow in
   scope.

31. By way of her decision to grant permission to appeal, UTJ Gill
   reasoned:

'Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N J Osborne may have erred in taking into
account public revulsion at foreign nationals committing offences as
increasing the weight of the public interest.

It may well be that the error is not material, given the high threshold
applicable in relation to whether there are very compelling circumstances
over and above the exceptions. Nevertheless, in view of the positive
findings that the judge made in relation to whether deportation would be
unduly harsh on the appellant's children, it is at least arguable that the
error is material.'

Decision on Error of Law

32. The first ground of appeal details:

         'The FTTJ has taken into account, in the balancing exercise, the
         concept of public revulsion [FTTD/para23-24]. This amounts to an
         error because the Supreme Court has rejected this concept as part
         of the balancing exercise under article 8 ECHR, because it is too
         emotive (Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, para. 23)

         Further, it cannot be assumed that the decision would have been the
         same had the Judge not fallen into this error of law, given that:
         (1) the Judge concluded that deportation would be unduly harsh (in
         respect of [R]) [FTTD/para 45]; (2) the Judge made various positive
         findings in respect of the appellant [FTTD/para 27-28/30]; and (3)
         the Judge concluded that the decision has caused, and will continue
         to cause, suffering for the family as a whole [FTTD/para 44].'.

33. On behalf of the respondent Ms. Everett accepted that the Judge had
   erred in placing weight upon public revulsion in the proportionality
   balancing exercise. However, she submitted that the error was not
   material.

34. The Judge's statement at [23] as to the applicable legal principles,
   namely as to the 'expression of society's revulsion', may on initial
   consideration be considered to offend against the judgment of Lord Kerr
   in Hesham Ali v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC
   60; [2016] 1 W.L.R. 4799, at [168]:

         '168. Expression of societal revulsion, the third  of  the  factors
             applied in  OH  (Serbia),  should  no  longer  be  seen  as  a
             component of the public interest in  deportation.  It  is  not
             rationally connected  to,  nor  does  it  serve,  the  aim  of
             preventing crime and disorder.  Societal  disapproval  of  any
             form of criminal offending should  be  expressed  through  the
             imposition of an appropriate penalty.  There  is  no  rational
             basis for expressing additional revulsion on  account  of  the
             nationality of the offender, and indeed  to  do  so  would  be
             contrary to the spirit of the Convention.'

35. In considering as to whether such offence, or error of law, arises I
   observe Lord Wilson's partial retraction in Hesham Ali, at [70], of
   previous comments he made in the Court of Appeal case of OH (Serbia) as
   to public revulsion and the deterrent effect of deportation:

         '70.  In the Court of Appeal in OH (Serbia) v  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694, [2009] INLR  109,
             I stated, at para 15(c):

                  "A further important facet  [of  the  public  interest  in
                  deportation] is the role of  a  deportation  order  as  an
                  expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes and in
                  building public confidence in  the  treatment  of  foreign
                  citizens who have committed serious crimes."

             By his counsel, the appellant mounts a sustained objection  to
             my statement and I am constrained to agree with part of it.  I
             regret my reference there to society's  revulsion  at  serious
             crimes and I accept Lord Kerr's criticism of it  at  para  168
             below. Society's undoubted revulsion at certain crimes is,  on
             reflection, too emotive a concept to figure in this  analysis.
             But I maintain that I was entitled to refer to the  importance
             of public confidence in our determination of these  issues.  I
             believe that we should be sensitive to the public  concern  in
             the UK about the facility  for  a  foreign  criminal's  rights
             under article 8 to preclude his deportation. Even though,  for
             the purposes of the present appeal, we must ignore section  19
             of the Immigration Act 2014 , the depth of public concern  had
             earlier been made manifest not only in section  32(4)  of  the
             2007 Act but also in the amendments to the  immigration  rules
             introduced on 9 July 2012 to which I will  turn  in  the  next
             paragraph. Laws serve society more effectively if  they  carry
             public support. Unless it lacks rational foundation (in  which
             case the courts should not pander to it),  the  very  fact  of
             public concern about an area of  the  law,  subjective  though
             that is, can in my view add to a court's objective analysis of
             where the  public  interest  lies:  in  this  context  it  can
             strengthen the case for concluding that  interference  with  a
             person's rights under article 8 by reason of  his  deportation
             is justified by a pressing social need.'

36. I observe that at [23] of his decision the Judge identifies public
   revulsion as being considered in his proportionality assessment together
   with 'the building of public confidence in the treatment of foreign
   citizens who commit serious crimes'. He refers to them both as 'a
   relevant factor', rather than 'relevant factors', which is suggestive of
   the Judge having sought to adopt the approach of Lord Wilson, though in a
   manner that could fairly be considered clumsy. However, the Judge then
   proceeds to refer to public revulsion again, without more, at [24]. I am
   satisfied that the reference to 'public revulsion' has no part to play in
   the proportionality exercise to be undertaken in a deportation appeal,
   but as observed by UTJ Gill when granting the appellant permission to
   appeal, the materiality of the error has to be considered consequent to
   the high threshold applicable in relation to whether there are very
   compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions established by
   section 117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 ('the 2002 Act'). I note Law LJ's dicta in SS (Nigeria) v. Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550; [2014] 1 W.L.R.
   998, at [54], that the public interest in deportation can only be
   outweighed 'by a very strong claim indeed'. In the circumstances of this
   matter, the incorporation of a public revulsion consideration into the
   proportionality exercise without more is not by itself capable of
   establishing a material error of law in circumstances where several other
   relevant factors, both positive and adverse to the appellant, have also
   been placed into the judicial consideration.

37. I am aided in such assessment by Mr Vokes acceptance before me that
   ground 1 alone was insufficient to establish a material error of law and
   that ground 2 should be read in conjunction as it established the
   required materiality. The core to the challenge advanced by ground 2 is
   identified within the grounds of appeal as:

         'The FTTJ failed to take into account material factors when
         considering whether there were very compelling circumstances beyond
         undue harshness [FTTD/para 45]. The Judge has not weighed the
         seriousness of the offence, for which the appellant was convicted,
         as part of the test whether there are very compelling circumstances
         (which is a requirement as per MS (s.117C(6): 'very compelling
         circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122, para 20)

         Further, this is a ground that cannot be rejected, on
         immateriality, on the basis that 'on any view it is obvious that
         distribution of class A drugs is a serious matter' (should such a
         point be taken). The issue of very compelling circumstances
         requires an assessment of fact and degree given the array of
         interest factors at stake, and that is especially so when the Judge
         has accepted that deportation would be unduly harsh in respect of a
         young child convicted, as part of the test of whether there are
         very compelling circumstances (which is a requirement, as per MS
         (s.117C(6): 'very compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019]
         UKUT 122, para 20).'

38. Mr. Vokes initially sought to advance a separate challenge, namely that
   the Judge erred in his assessment as to both insurmountable obstacles and
   as to the appellant's removal causing further instability within the
   family unit but upon being reminded by the Tribunal as to the operation
   of procedural rigour identified by Singh LJ in R (Talpada) v. Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841, at [67]-[69], he
   withdrew these submissions acknowledging that ground 2 was narrow in
   scope and did not encompass the argument he wished to advance.

39. The Tribunal confirmed in MS (s.117C(6): 'very compelling
   circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122 that in determining pursuant
   to section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act whether there are very compelling
   circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 in
   subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest in the
   deportation of a foreign criminal, the Tribunal must take into account,
   together with any other relevant public interest considerations, the
   seriousness of the particular offence of which the foreign criminal was
   convicted; not merely whether the foreign criminal was or was not
   sentenced to imprisonment for more than 4 years.

40. Section 117C(6) calls for a wide-ranging exercise. The effect of the
   Court of Appeal judgment in NA (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1 W.L.R. 207 is that the test
   of 'very compelling circumstances', which applies to all foreign
   criminals regardless as to sentence, does not operate differently between
   those sentenced to under 4 years imprisonment and those sentenced to at
   least 4 years. Consequently, as confirmed in MS, at [17], the
   ascertaining of what constitutes 'very compelling circumstances', such as
   to defeat the public interest, requires a case-specific analysis of the
   nature of the public interest:

         "17.   ... The strength of the public interest, in any particular
             case, determines the weight that must then be found to lie on
             the foreign criminal's side of the balance in order for the
             circumstances to be properly categorised as very compelling.
             It would, frankly, be remarkable if a person sentenced to four
             years' imprisonment for fraud had to demonstrate the same
             circumstances as a person sentenced to life imprisonment for
             multiple murders."

41. As observed above, the Judge noted at [20] of his decision the parties'
   agreement that ultimately the issue before him was whether very
   compelling circumstances arose so as to outweigh the public interest in
   the appellant's deportation. I am satisfied that the Judge assessed the
   seriousness of the appellant's offending at [25]; indeed, he expressly
   states that he undertook the task. Such consideration was sufficient for
   the purposes of section 117C(6). In such circumstances ground 2, which is
   founded upon a failure to weigh the seriousness of the offence, has no
   merit.

42. In any event, even if the Judge had erred in the manner asserted by the
   appellant, the grounds are silent as what factors should properly have
   been drawn in favour of the appellant as to the assessment of the
   seriousness of the offence in the proportionality exercise. When asked to
   identify specific factors Mr. Vokes accepted that he was unable to do so.
   Considering the matter in the round, the argument advanced before the
   Judge, as detailed at [15(iii)] of Counsel's skeleton argument dated 24
   November 2019, is that though the distribution of class A drugs was
   accepted to be a significant offence, it did not itself involve violence
   or sexual offending. However, when considering the weight to be given to
   seriousness, I observe that there is no challenge to the finding that the
   appellant chose to deal in drugs for profit. The sentencing judge
   identified the appellant as having a significant role in the street
   dealing of drugs, possessing an understanding of the scale of the
   operation in which he was involved and being in possession of 50 wraps of
   class A drugs when arrested. This was an offence which by its nature has
   an adverse impact upon society, particularly upon vulnerable persons. It
   is a serious offence in which the appellant knowingly engaged. It is
   further noted that the appellant's witness statement dated 4 July 2019
   provides no detail as to why the appellant undertook such offending. Nor
   did he seek to explain such activity in his oral evidence. He does not
   assert duress or very recent involvement in drug supply. I am satisfied
   that no reasonable judge considering the facts arising in this matter
   could conclude that the offence was not serious and so would enjoy little
   or no adverse weight in the proportionality exercise. In such
   circumstances, if the Judge had erred in the manner asserted by ground 2,
   such error would not be material.

43. Consequently, though the Judge did erroneously place weight upon public
   revulsion it was not a material error when considered in conjunction with
   the other findings made in this matter which are of such nature that no
   reasonable judge could find that very compelling circumstances arise
   under section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 6 December 2019, did not
   involve the making of a material error of law and is therefore upheld.
   The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

45. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
   these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
   indirectly identify the appellant and members of his family. This
   direction applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent.
   Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
   court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 7 August 2020

