
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01222/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2020                           |On 3 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                redwanul [h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Mavrontonis, Counsel, instructed by Farani
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal  by  the  Appellant  (hereafter,  "the  Secretary  of
    State") against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watson
    (hereafter, "the judge"), promulgated on 10  September  2019,  allowing
    the appeal of Mr [H] (hereafter, "the Claimant") against the  Secretary
    of State's decision of  8  January  2019,  refusing  his  human  rights
    claims.  The Claimant's appeal was linked together with  those  of  his
    mother and father (HU/01216/2019  and  HU/01219/2019).   Their  appeals
    were dismissed by the judge and  there  has  been  no  application  for
    permission to appeal against that aspect of her decision.

 2. The Claimant, a national of Bangladesh, was born on 6  July  2000.   He
    arrived together with his mother on 14 September 2011 at the age of  11
    in order to join his father who was already in this country as a Tier 4
    Student.  In due course an application for an extension of  the  family
    unit's leave to remain was refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed on
    6 March 2013.  The human rights claim leading to the decision now under
    appeal was made on 11 May 2018.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. For reasons clearly expressed, the judge concluded that the  Claimant's
    parents could not succeed in respect of their Article  8  claims,  both
    within the context of the relevant Immigration Rules  (hereafter,  "the
    Rules") and without.

 4. In respect of the Claimant, the judge concluded on the basis of reasons
    set out in at [27] that there would not be very  significant  obstacles
    to his reintegration into Bangladeshi society.  The judge moved  on  to
    consider whether  there  were  any  "exceptional  circumstances"  under
    GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM to the Rules.  At [37]-[46] the judge worked her
    way through the mandatory considerations set out under section 117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended,  and
    concluded that:

          i. the maintenance of  immigration  control  was  in  the  public
             interest;

         ii. the Claimant was fluent in  English  and  this  constituted  a
             neutral factor;

        iii. whilst the Claimant had not had recourse to benefits as  such,
             he had accessed free education and received treatment  on  the
             NHS and these facts counted against him;

         iv. the "little weight" criteria contained in sub-sections (4) and
             (5) of section 117B of the 2002 Act did  not  mandate  such  a
             reduction in weight to an individual's private life was in all
             circumstances.  As the judge put it, "Little weight is not the
             same as no weight", with reference to the  Court  of  Appeal's
             judgment in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 (it is of course  the
             judgment of the Supreme Court in that  case  that  one  should
             refer to, but that makes no material difference in the present
             case).

 5. In concluding that more weight should be  attached  to  the  Claimant's
    private life in light of the circumstances as a whole, the judge relied
    on a particular feature of the case, namely that the Claimant had  come
    to this country at the age of 11 and had remained here during what were
    described in [32] as "very important formative years" of his life.   In
    addition, the fact that a great majority of this time was spent  as  an
    overstayer was not the Claimant's fault and he should not be blamed for
    the conduct of his parents (with reference to the  general  proposition
    set out in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  On this basis, and within  the
    context of GEN.3.2, the judge concluded that the decision under  appeal
    was "unduly harsh" with regard to the Claimant.  The appeal was allowed
    on the basis of the private life Article 8 claim.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are set out under a  heading
    that the judge had made a "material misdirection of law on any material
    matter".  Despite this title, the substance of the  grounds  themselves
    do not in truth assert such a misdirection, but instead state that  the
    judge: "failed to identify" any exceptional circumstances in the  case;
    "failed to correctly undertake the proportionality  balancing  exercise
    in line with the statutory considerations outlined in section 117B"  of
    the 2002 Act; "incorrectly placed significant weight on the Appellant's
    [as the Claimant then was] private life"; and, finally, that there were
    no "exceptional features outlined by the judge" that would outweigh the
    public interest.

 7. Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  on  13
    December 2019.  In [3] of his decision, Judge O'Brien  categorised  the
    Secretary of State's challenge as  being  one  relating  to  inadequate
    reasons rather than a misdirection of law, a failure  to  take  matters
    into account, or a failure to make findings.

The hearing

 8. Ms Bassi confirmed that the Secretary of State was not putting  forward
    a perversity challenge.  She submitted that the Claimant's age was  not
    an adequate reason in the context of section 117B of the 2002 Act.  She
    submitted that the judge had failed to identify the Claimant's age  and
    surrounding circumstances as being an exceptional feature of the  case.
    I was referred to paras 25 and 26 of Miah (section  117B  NIAA  2002  -
    children) [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC), a case which she suggested contained a
    similar factual matrix to that of the present.

 9. Mr Mavrontonis relied on his Rule 24 response.  He submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds were unclear and did not in fact assert  a
    reasons  challenge.   He  emphasised  the  absence  of  any  perversity
    challenge.  He submitted that the judge had gone through the  mandatory
    considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act  with  care  and  her
    conclusions were sustainable.

10. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

11. Having considered the judge's decision as a whole and in the context of
    the grounds as put forward, I  conclude  that  there  are  no  material
    errors of law in the judge's decision.

12. The judge correctly directed herself in law in respect of the mandatory
    considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act, the  possibility  of
    an individual showing exceptional circumstances such  as  to  render  a
    decision disproportionate, and, importantly that  in  relation  to  the
    "little weight" criterion under the 2002 Act, a degree  of  flexibility
    is, as it were, built in (see para 49 of Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58).

13. When what is said at [45] and [47] is  read  in  conjunction  with  the
    finding at [32] concerning the Claimant's age at the time of arrival in
    the United Kingdom and the period spent in this country thereafter, the
    judge was in my  judgment  adequately  identifying  an  exceptional  or
    compelling feature of the case, contrary to what  is  asserted  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  The weight  attributable  to  that  feature  was  a
    matter for the  judge.   I  note  in  this  regard  that  there  is  no
    perversity challenge: in other words, it has not been asserted that  no
    reasonable judge could have placed sufficiently great weight upon  this
    feature so as to render the conclusion reached unsustainable.

14. In respect of Ms Bassi's reliance on Miah, it is worth  repeating  what
    has been said on many occasions: real  caution  must  be  exercised  in
    attempting to compare the facts of one case to those of another.  Cases
    such as the present are intensely  fact-sensitive.  Miah  does  however
    provide a point of note in terms of the general approach. At  para  24,
    the  Upper  Tribunal  observed  that  a  "child's  age   and   personal
    circumstances at the commencement of  the  period  under  scrutiny  and
    thereafter will  be  obviously  material  considerations."  That  lends
    support to the conclusions reached by the judge in the present case.

15. Contrary to what is said in  the  grounds,  the  judge  did  conduct  a
    balancing  exercise,  taking  into  account  the  mandatory   statutory
    considerations  together  with  other  factors  and  weighing  them  up
    holistically, as she was required to do.

16. The judge's decision may well be generous, but that does not of  itself
    render it legally erroneous.  In my judgment the  approach  adopted  by
    the judge, the conclusions reached, and the reasons set out in  support
    thereof, are sustainable and that the Secretary of  State's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 18 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
