
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01801/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 28 April 2021                 |On 10 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                          YVES CHRISTIAN NJAPOU MBA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M.  Mukulu, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff (hereinafter referred  to
         as the "FtTJ") promulgated on the 14 December 2020,  in  which  the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
         application dated 14 January 2020 was allowed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. Whilst this is the appeal by the Secretary of State,  I  intend  to
         refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      4. The hearing took place on 28 April 2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant and his partner who was able to see  and
         hear  the  proceedings  being  conducted.  There  were  no   issues
         regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical  problems   were
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Cameroon.  On the 7 November 2019 he
         made a human rights application in an application for leave to
         remain in the UK on the basis of his family life with his partner
         and on the basis of his private life.


      6. The application was refused in a decision made on the 14 January
         2020. The decision letter states that the appellant had made a
         human rights claim in an application for leave to remain in the UK
         under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules on the basis of his
         family life with her partner.

      7. The reasons given for refusing the application can be summarised as
         follows. The respondent considered his application under paragraphs
         R-LTRP of Appendix FM but considered that he could not meet the
         eligibility relationship  requirements (E-LTRP 2.1 of Appendix FM)
         because he had not demonstrated by sufficient evidence that he had
         been living with his partner in a relationship akin to marriage of
         the two years immediately preceding the application. Consequently,
         he could not meet the definition of a partner as defined in GEN 1.2
         of Appendix FM.

      8.  The appellant also could not meet the eligibility immigration
         requirement (paragraphs E-LTRP 2.1 -2.2) because his previous leave
         on a business visa ended on 24 April 2012 and he had been without
         valid leave in United Kingdom since that date and paragraph 39E did
         not apply. He was in the UK in breach of immigration laws and
         paragraph EX1 did not apply.

      9. The respondent considered whether the appellant would be exempt
         from meeting certain eligibility requirements of Appendix FM
         because paragraph EX1 applied.

     10. It was accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with his British partner. However the respondent did
         not accept that there were any insurmountable obstacles in
         accordance with paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM which means  "very
         significant difficulties which will be faced by the appellant or
         his partner in continuing their family life together outside of the
         UK, and which could not be overcome or entail very serious hardship
         for him and his partner".  The respondent considered that the
         relationship could continue in Cameroon as there were no children
         involved in the family life and any skills gained in the UK could
         be used in Cameroon to reintegrate. As an individual who had
         resided there for a considerable amount of time, he could aid his
         partner in the integration and the cultures and customs of life in
         Cameroon.  Therefore paragraph EX1 did not apply.


     11. His application was considered under the private life rules under
         paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted that the appellant was a
         national of Cameroon who had entered the UK on 27 December 2011. He
         had lived in the UK for 7  years and it was not accepted that he
         lived in the UK continuously for 20 years;  he was not between the
         ages of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for more than half
         his life and was over the age of 18 and therefore could not meet
         the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv) and (v).

     12.  As to paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not accept that
         there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into
         Cameroon if required to leave the UK because  he resided in
         Cameroon for more than half his life, arriving in the UK in 2011.
         It was noted that he resided in Cameroon for his childhood years
         prior to this date, totalling 28 years residing in Cameroon. It was
         considered that he would have retained cultural and linguistic
         connections to Cameroon during his time in the UK. He had set out
         in his application form that he spoke fluent French alongside
         English which is the main language spoken in Cameroon.
         Consequently, he failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration
         Rules.


     13. The respondent did not consider that there were any exceptional
         circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain and considered
         the issues that had been raised as to why it would be unjustifiably
         harsh for him to return to Cameroon. The respondent took into
         account his private life which was established at a time when he
         was not on a route to settlement and with no limited leave to
         remain and therefore could not have had a realistic expectation
         that relationships would be able to continue uninterrupted. Whilst
         it was claimed that he had established a private life in the UK and
         would find it difficult to return to Cameroon, the respondent
         considered that as he had never obtained leave to enter and remain
         in the UK since his expiry of the business visa in 2012 and this
         was not a route to settlement, he was fully aware when developing
         any private life or ties that he had no expectation that he would
         be able to remain indefinitely.

     14. It was noted that he commenced a relationship with a British
         national and had a relationship in the UK however it was believed
         the relationship could continue from or in Cameroon if she chose to
         move overseas to pursue the relationship. Furthermore, the
         appellant stated he had family members in Cameroon including a
         daughter (with whom he had no contact with) who would be able to
         provide him with accommodation and a family unit for emotional and
         other support. It was believed that the appellant and his partner
         could re-establish their relationship together in Cameroon.

     15. It was further noted that he would be familiar with the culture,
         customs, and language of that country and whilst it was
         acknowledged it may be initially difficult upon return, there were
         no exceptional circumstances which would  prevent him from re-
         establishing his private life in Cameroon.  It was considered that
         as an individual had spent the majority of his life in Cameroon,
         including all of his child, that those ties that he would establish
         would not have dissolved over a period of seven years. His
         linguistic ties remained.

     16. In support of the claim he provided no exceptional circumstances as
         to why he could not return to Cameroon and continue his
         relationship with his British partner. There was no evidence that
         he would struggle or adjust to life in Cameroon as it spent nearly
         all his life there.

     17. As to a fear of return raised in the representative's letter, an
         application form was provided to make an asylum claim. He was
         contacted by the asylum team to confirm if he wished to pursue the
         claim but no response was given. An asylum appointment was booked
         on 11 January 2020 and it was noted that he did not attend the
         appointment. Failure to attend the appointment and to pursue the
         claim cast doubt as to the veracity of the claim.

     18. Therefore the respondent did not find that there was any evidence
         to demonstrate that there were any" exceptional circumstances"
         established in his case.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     19. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Seelhof) on the 30
         November 2020.

     20. In a determination promulgated on the 14 December  2020,  the  FtTJ
         allowed the appeal on human rights grounds, having considered  that
         issue  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  compliance  with   the
         Immigration Rule in question and on Article 8 grounds.

     21. This was an appeal where the respondent did not appear nor was  she
         represented. The judge considered that the  respondent  had  chosen
         not to be represented and thus he satisfied himself that it  was  a
         matter of choice before determining that  it  was  appropriate  and
         fair to proceed in the circumstances (at [13]).

     22. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and also heard evidence
         from his partner and two witnesses who were in New Zealand. He also
         had a bundle  of  documentation  in  support  of  the  application,
         including witness statements for the appellant,  his  partner,  the
         appellant's partner's daughter, a friend of the appellant's partner
         and niece of the appellant's  partner.  There  were  further  water
         bills and payslips which confirmed that the appellant's partner was
         employed as a teacher earning well in excess of the minimum  income
         under the rules (at [11]).

     23. Having heard oral evidence from all of  the  witnesses  and  having
         considered the documentary evidence, the FtTJ  made  the  following
         findings at [20] -[ 27].

     24. By reference to  his  relationship  with  her  partner,  the  judge
         accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         his partner and that they had been living together continuously  in
         a relationship since 2013. The  FtTJ  stated,  "all  three  of  the
         supporting  witnesses  gave  credible  evidence  and  there  is  no
         plausible reason as to why the sponsor's daughter and  niece  would
         give supporting evidence  if  they  were  not  satisfied  that  the
         relationship was genuine  and  subsisting.  There  are  photographs
         which support the evidence of all  three  witnesses  regarding  the
         visits and the time together." (at [20]).

     25.  At  paragraphs  [21-[25]  the  FtTJ   addressed   the   issue   of
         "insurmountable obstacles"

     26. The FtTJ stated that he was not persuaded that the  risk  from  the
         appellant's family was such to justify finding that EX1(b) or EX  2
         was met and that if he had a plausible fear of family members, then
         was reasonable to expect him to have pursued an asylum claim  which
         he has not done.

     27. As to the circumstances of his British partner, at [22], the  judge
         stated, "I do not agree that  it  is  necessarily  unreasonable  to
         expect the appellant's partner to move to Cameroon. I  accept  that
         it would be difficult but the threshold in the rules is a very high
         one and as an experienced teacher I am  reasonably  sure  that  she
         would be very employable even in the  French-speaking  portions  of
         Cameroon".

     28. However the FtTJ concluded that the evidence was sufficient to meet
         the high test for insurmountable obstacles in paragraph  EX1(b)  of
         the rules for the reasons set out at paragraphs [23 - 25]. In those
         paragraphs read as follows:

             "23. However, at the current time, as  is  apparent  from  the
             foreign  office  advice,  there  is  no  Visa  route  for  the
             appellant's partner to join in Cameroon. It is  not  currently
             possible to apply  for  visit  or  spouse  visas  through  the
             embassy in the UK and visas are not  being  issued  on  entry.
             What that means is that at the current  time  the  appellant's
             partner is simply not able to travel to the country. Whilst  I
             acknowledge that the Covid 19 travel restrictions are  subject
             to review I am however required to consider the  circumstances
             as at the date of the hearing. Whilst there is  a  possibility
             that the restrictions could be  lifted  within  months  it  is
             equally possible that  Third  World  countries  who  may  have
             access to vaccines far late  in  the  West  will  continue  to
             impose restrictions for far longer.

             24. The absence of a legal  Visa  route  for  the  sponsor  to
             travel to Cameroon clearly meets the requirements  of  EX2  of
             Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The only  way  in  which
             family life could currently continue in Cameroon would  be  if
             the appellant's partner were to  attempt  to  travel  to  that
             country illegally. I consider that to be  a  very  significant
             obstacle and therefore the appeal should  be  allowed  as  the
             rules are effectively met as of the date I am considering this
             appeal albeit this will put the appellant on a 10  year  route
             to settlement.

             25. I note that the wording of EX1 (b) and EX2 is not such  as
             to confine me to considering the circumstances as at the  date
             of application and accordingly my findings do  mean  that  the
             rules are effectively met."

     29. At paragraphs  [26]-[27  ]  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
         proportionality of the appellant's removal under Article 8  of  the
         ECHR  but  concluded  that  it   would    be   a   disproportionate
         interference with his right to respect for private and family life.



     30. When considering the section 117  public  interest  considerations,
         the FtTJ that took into account that it  would  be  appropriate  to
         attach minimal weight to the family  life  rights  developed  which
         developed whilst his leave to  remain  in  the  UK  was  precarious
         however he stated, "I would also have to bear in mind the fact that
         the relationship is one which can justify the  grant  of  leave  to
         remain under  the  immigration  rules  as  the  couple  have  lived
         together for two years."

     31. The FtTJ took into account  that  the  appellant  spoke  reasonable
         English  and  that  this  did  not  "weigh  against  the  balancing
         exercise" and that the appellant's partner earned well in excess of
         the income threshold.

     32. The FtTJ stated at [27]:

             "Covid restrictions will undoubtedly place considerable burden
             on any attempts to travel to be in the same  country  or  even
             any attempt by the appellant to return to Cameroon in order to
             make an application for  entry  clearance.  Further  whilst  I
             would  not  have  found  that  there  would   be   significant
             challenges for the sponsor in integrating in  Cameroon  absent
             the legal  restrictions,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  will  be
             challenging for a  woman  of  her  age  to  adapt  in  a  very
             different country. In all the circumstances  of  this  case  I
             would allow the appeal on article 8 grounds outside the  rules
             had I not been satisfied that the requirements  of  the  rules
             were met."

     33. The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds "as  the
         requirements of Appendix FM of the immigration rules  are  met"  or
         "in the alternative, the appeal was allowed on  Article  8  grounds
         outside the rules."



     34. Permission to appeal was issued on the 29 December 2020 and on 21
         January 2021, permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Chohan
         stating:-

             "The grounds assert that the judge erred in giving inadequate
             reasons and erred due to a procedural irregularity.


             At paragraph 12 of the decision, the judge states that, "we
             consulted the foreign office travel guide on Cameroon". At the
             hearing, the respondent was not represented. It is not clear
             what the judge means by "we". It is further not clear whether
             the judge was referring to a document within the appellant's
             bundle or whether research was undertaken at the hearing. As
             such, this matter must be explored further.


             Accordingly, it is arguable that there has been a procedural
             error of law."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     35. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         -to -face hearing. Thus directions were given for a remote  hearing
         to take place and that  this  could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties  with
         the assistance of their advocates.

     36. Mr Walker on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal .

     37. There was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the appellant.

     38. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear and helpful  oral  submissions
         during the hearing.

     39. I intend to consider the  submissions  made  by  the  parties  when
         considering the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

Discussion:

     40. There are two grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State.
         Firstly that the FtTJ erred in failing to provide adequate  reasons
         for reaching his conclusion that EX 1 had been met and having found
         that insurmountable obstacles existed.  Secondly,  that  the  judge
         committed a procedural irregularity.

     41. Dealing with the procedural irregularity, it is  submitted  in  the
         written  grounds  that  at  paragraph  [12]  the  FtTJ  stated  "we
         consulted the foreign office travel guidance".

     42. The grounds go on to state that aside from the references  to  "we"
         calling the witnesses and hearing for the  witnesses  at  [14]  and
         [17] which denotes an arguable lack of independence, it  is  wholly
         unclear on what basis the FtTJ felt it appropriate to  perform  his
         own research at [12].

     43. The grounds go on to make reference to the  decision  in  AM  (fair
         hearing) [2015] UKUT 656  that  independent  judicial  research  is
         inappropriate and that if it were a  matter  that  the  judge  felt
         needed to  be  addressed,  fairness  dictates  that  the  issue  be
         canvassed and that both parties be allowed to  address  the  issue.
         Whilst there was not a presenting officer present at  the  hearing,
         the  grounds  assert  that  it  was  clear  that  given  the  judge
         considered the inability of the sponsor to travel to Cameroon to be
         determinative of matters under EX1 at [24]  that it  was  incumbent
         on the judge to enable both parties to address the matter.

     44. The grounds refer to paragraphs [23] and [24] and  that  the  judge
         concluded that the absence of a legal Visa route was  determinative
         of the matter but the judge failed to consider whether this  was  a
         temporary measure (not least the information was  accessed  in  the
         midst of a four week lockdown period). The only  evidence  referred
         to as that set out at [12]. At [23] the judge appeared to  consider
         the current limits of the Cameroon consulate facilities in  issuing
         visas beyond business and diplomatic applicants as dependent on the
         availability of vaccinations in Cameroon.

     45. The grounds submit that the evidence referred to at [12]  makes  no
         such link between these two issues and thus the judge was indulging
         in speculation and failed to give adequate reasoning with reference
         to the evidence. Furthermore, the consideration  that  Third  World
         countries would impose  restrictions  far  longer  due  to  delayed
         access to vaccines  was  also  based  on  speculation  and  without
         reference  to  any  evidence.  There   is   also   no   substantive
         consideration of anything beyond the ability to travel to Cameroon.

     46. In his oral submissions Mr Walker submitted that  by  reference  to
         the decision in AM (as  cited)  independent  judicial  research  is
         inappropriate in the absence of the other party.

     47. In addition he submitted  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether
         closure from the country was  on  a  temporary  basis  due  to  the
         current Covid restrictions.

     48. Mr Mukulu submitted that a relevant factor was that the  respondent
         did not attend the hearing. In the context where the respondent was
         not present and where it is  alleged  that  the  court  engaged  in
         unfairness, when considering the Surendran guidelines there was  no
         bias on the part of the judge. In the case where the respondent not
         attend it is not possible suggest that there was any unfairness and
         the submission suggested that the  judge  should  have  stayed  the
         hearing and then invited the presenting officer to make submissions
         on this evidence. That could not be correct.

     49. In any event he submitted, the decision in AM did  not  assist  the
         respondent. On the facts of this case, the judge was  dealing  with
         unprecedented circumstances namely a global  pandemic  and  he  was
         entitled to consider or take judicial notice of this.

     50. He further submitted that in the context of  the  circumstances  in
         which the hearing was conducted and to  elevate  this  to  judicial
         research was putting a gloss that did not accurately deal with  the
         circumstances. He  further  submitted  that  the  hurdle  that  the
         Secretary of State had to overcome to show that the hearing  should
         have been adjourned was  not  met  in  this  case  given  that  the
         Secretary of State had chosen not to  attend  the  hearing.  Had  a
         presenting officer attended, they would  have  been  able  to  make
         their input to the circumstances set out at paragraph 12. This  was
         a legitimate point raised by the  judge  and  he  was  entitled  to
         consider this.

     51. Therefore when looking at how this applied  to  the  decision,  the
         assessment made at paragraph 23 was open to him to make and he  was
         entitled to consider the  circumstances  as  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing.

    Ground 1: Procedural irregularity

     52. Dealing with  the  issue  of  procedural  irregularity,  I  am  not
         satisfied that the respondent has made out her grounds  that  there
         was any procedural irregularity that led to unfairness based on the
         conduct of the FtTJ concerned.

     53. Whilst the respondent submits that it is  wholly  unclear  on  what
         basis the judge felt appropriate to consider this  information,  it
         is plain from reading the decision that the issue  that  the  judge
         was required  to  decide  was  whether  there  were  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life outside of the  United  Kingdom.  Part  of
         that assessment would necessarily consider the circumstances in the
         country where it is stated family life should  be  established.  In
         this case Cameroon. As Mr Muluku  submitted  when  looking  at  the
         issue in the context of the circumstances, the information that the
         judge accessed during the court hearing was relevant to that issue.
         Furthermore, rather than  describing  this  as  "research"  it  was
         better  expressed  as  the  judge  having  taken  judicial   notice
         concerning the unprecedented global pandemic at  the  time  of  the
         hearing.

     54. I enquired of Mr Mukulu how that information came before the  court
         and he advised that the judge had raised the issue during the court
         hearing and this was addressed by the parties present.  That  seems
         clear by the reference to "we" at paragraph [12]. I do not consider
         that to be evidence in support of any allegation of bias or lack of
         judicial independence but merely to reflect the fact that the judge
         was considering along with the representative in  a  court  setting
         information that was pertinent to the decision he was  required  to
         decide.

     55. The grounds rely upon the decision of AM (fair hearing) [2015] UKUT
           656  to  demonstrate  that  independent  judicial   research   is
         inappropriate. I have considered that decision and as can  be  seen
         by a fair reading of it, the facts are entirely different. In  that
         case the Secretary of State made a number of  assertions  that  the
         judge had considered Internet research which he failed to  disclose
         the parties, the grounds of challenge asserted that by doing so the
         judge erred procedurally in forming a view on core elements of  the
         claim in advance of the hearing and that the  judge   had  concerns
         about the background material relied upon by  the  respondent.  The
         presidential panel found that  the  grounds  were  "unsubstantiated
         assertions" and  that  the  judge  did  not  engage  in  background
         research but it had  in  fact  accessed  the  footnotes  that  were
         entirely permissible.

     56. The points expressed in the decision and set out in the  head  note
         are said to be "general in nature given the unavoidable  contextual
         and fact sensitive nature of every case". In my  judgement,  whilst
         that decision provides  general  guidance  concerning  fairness  in
         proceedings relating to evidence, what is  equally  clear  is  that
         each  case  must  be  considered  on  its  own  particular  factual
         circumstances. When those are addressed here, it  is  plain  in  my
         judgement that the FtTJ properly raised the point  at  the  hearing
         which enabled the representatives present to take account of it and
         make submissions upon it. The decision in  AM  (as  cited)  is  not
         authority for the submission that if the judge felt a matter needed
         to be addressed that this should  have  been  canvassed  with  both
         parties in the circumstances where the respondent had chosen not to
         attend the hearing. In those circumstances I do not  consider  that
         it was incumbent on the judge to adjourn the hearing  and  then  to
         obtain the views of the respondent who had chosen not to attend the
         hearing.

     57. Furthermore, I do not consider that  the  judge  was  in  error  in
         considering this evidence. The grounds assert that the judge failed
         to consider whether this was a temporary measure as the information
         was accessed in the midst of a four-week lockdown. In my judgement,
         the FtTJ was entitled to consider evidence as at the  date  of  the
         hearing which is the time in which the human rights claim is to  be
         determined. The judge would have been in error to consider it as  a
         temporary measure on the basis that at some point in the future the
         circumstances might be different. Furthermore,  when  seen  in  the
         current circumstances the information set out at paragraph 12 still
         appears on the foreign office travel  guidance  on  Cameroon.  That
         being the case, the circumstances referred to at paragraph 12  were
         not temporary.

     58. Whilst the judge made reference to the ability to  issue  visas  as
         being dependent on the availability of vaccines,  I  do  not  think
         that this undermines the evidence that the judge relied upon. In my
         view was open to the judge to consider whether in the circumstances
         as at the date of the hearing the appellant and his  partner  would
         be able to establish family life outside of the United Kingdom.

     59. I therefore find no  error  of  law  on  the  basis  of  procedural
         irregularity or the failure to provide reasons by reference to  the
         absence of a legal Visa route.

Ground 2: adequacy of reasons:

     60. The grounds challenge  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FtTJ
         concerning the relationship between the parties  on  the  basis  of
         inadequacy of reasons.

     61. Firstly, the grounds seek to challenge the finding at [20].  It  is
         submitted that the judge failed to give adequate reasons as to  why
         the evidence of the relationship was accepted at "face value".

     62. The grounds assert  that  when  considering  the  evidence  of  the
         relationship, the judge stated that there was no  plausible  reason
         why the daughter of the sponsor and niece would support the  appeal
         if it were not a  genuine  relationship.  The  grounds  state  that
         "given that the witnesses were direct relatives of the  partner  of
         the appellant, there is a clear reason why their  evidence  is  not
         strictly independent". It is also asserted that the judge,  despite
         asking  why  there  was  a  lack  of  documentation  of   prolonged
         cohabitation at paragraph 17 - 18, failed to set out  the  evidence
         in  response  or  factor  this  into  the  consideration   of   the
         relationship.

     63. I am not satisfied that the FtTJ fell into error by failing to give
         adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion that the appellant and
         his partner had lived together since 2013 (finding at [20]).

     64. By reference to Appendix FM, the  respondent  considered  that  the
         appellant failed to establish that he resided with his partner in a
         relationship  akin  to  marriage  for  two  years  prior   to   the
         application (GEN 1.2).  However the FtTJ found that  the  appellant
         met GEN 1.2 for the reasons set out at paragraph [20]in view of the
         evidence that they had resided with each other since 2013 and based
         on the  evidence  of  three  supporting  witnesses  who  the  judge
         considered had given "credible evidence". That evidence was set out
         in witness statements and the oral evidence was summarised at [14]-
         [18]. The FtTJ was entitled to place weight upon evidence  that  he
         had heard and read from the witnesses  called  in  support  of  the
         claim. At [14] the judge referred to the  first  witness  who  gave
         evidence (the appellant's partner's  daughter)  who  had  confirmed
         that the letter she had provided  in  support  of  the  appeal  was
         truthful and that she had met the appellant as a  mother's  partner
         in December 2013 and it then stayed with them in the UK for most of
         the time between November 2015 until May 2017 when she left the UK.
         The witness also confirmed that she believed the relationship to be
         a genuine and subsisting one. The judge also made reference to  the
         second  witness  who  was  the  appellant's  partner's  friend  who
         confirmed that she visits  and  stays  at  the  appellant  and  his
         partner and had done so 2  to  3  times  a  year  since  2013.  Her
         evidence was to the best of  her  knowledge  and  belief  that  the
         appellant had lived with his partner since 2013. The  last  witness
         was the appellant's partners' niece  who  confirmed  that  she  had
         lived with the appellant and his partner between 2013 and  2017  in
         the UK again confirming that the relationship was a genuine one  at
         that the couple had lived together for more than  two  years.  Both
         the appellant and the appellant's partner  gave  evidence  and  the
         judge recorded at [17] that "I had some questions for him about why
         there were not more bills in his name" and at  [18]  also  set  out
         that the appellant's partner "explained why the appellant  had  not
         been on more recent bills." There  is  reference  to  this  in  the
         record of proceedings where the judge recorded the  evidence  given
         that the reason why there were not more  bills  from  the  electric
         company was because the rest of the bills had "come on line and she
         did not print them out". His partner was also asked why there  were
         no more recent electrical bills and she confirmed "I do  everything
         online. I did one copy of each bill with his name on it.  I  prefer
         not to waste paper." Further reference in the oral evidence  refers
         to the parties moving from one address to another.  There  is  also
         reference made by the judge to the photographs in the bundle  which
         supported the evidence of all three witnesses regarding the  visits
         and the time together.

     65. In my judgement, the FtTJ gave adequate and sustainable reasons for
         reaching his decision which were  referable  to  the  evidence.  In
         particular the FtTJ assessed the evidence of three  witnesses,  all
         of whom he found to be "credible witnesses", and all  of  whom  had
         provided evidence  particular  to  their  own  circumstances  which
         demonstrated that the appellant had lived with  his  partner  since
         2013. Whilst the respondent's grounds challenge the finding made at
         [20] that there was no plausible reason as  to  why  the  sponsor's
         daughter and niece would give supporting evidence if they were  not
         satisfied that the relationship was genuine said  subsisting,  that
         finding has to be seen alongside and in the light of  the  evidence
         that I have just referred to. The grounds are not made out that the
         judge failed to give adequate reasoning in support of  his  factual
         findings.

     66. I now turn to the final part of the  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
         respondent. It is submitted on behalf the respondent that  at  [27]
         when considering the matter under Article 8, the judge  found  that
         despite affording little weight to the relationship and that  there
         would not be significant challenges for the sponsor in  integrating
         in Cameroon, the judge found that it would be a challenge  for  the
         sponsor to adapt given her age. Mr Walker submitted that the  judge
         contradicted himself in finding  that  it  was  not  a  significant
         challenge but also a challenge significant enough to  outweigh  the
         attribution of  little  weight  and  an  absence  of  challenge  to
         integration. It is  therefore  submitted  that  the  reasoning  was
         wholly inadequate.

     67. Mr Mukulu on behalf  of  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  FtTJ
         properly considered the circumstances and  that  he  was  satisfied
         that this was a genuine and subsisting relationship that  had  been
         maintained for over the two-year period that was necessary  and  at
         the date of the hearing and when reaching his decision, the parties
         were not able to  travel  to  Cameroon  to  establish  family  life
         outside of the United  Kingdom  and  that  was  his  assessment  at
         paragraph 27 of the decision and that there  was  no  contradiction
         because the judge was placing weight  upon  the  inability  of  the
         sponsor to travel or to live in Cameroon as a result of  the  legal
         restrictions. Thus the judge gave adequate reasons for reaching the
         conclusion that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

     68. I have considered the respondent's grounds and the  challenge  made
         to paragraph 27.  The  grounds  do  not  mount  any  particularised
         challenge  to  the  issue  of  whether  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" beyond  criticism  of  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         material he considered at paragraph 12.

     69. I have not been addressed upon the relevant law by either advocate.
         However the relevant legal principles can be addressed as follows.



     70. Paragraph EX.1. reads as follows (so far as relevant):

             " EX.1. This paragraph applies if.

             (a) ...; or

             (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
             settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
             humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside
             the UK.

             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and which could not be
             overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
             applicant or their partner."

     71. The  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  considered  the  meaning  of  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" requirement  at  [43]  to  [45]  of  the
         judgment as follows:

             "43. It appears that the  European  court  intends  the  words
             "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the   non-national
             concerned. In some cases, the court has used other expressions
             which  make  that  clearer:  for  example,  referring  to  "un
             obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The Netherlands (2003) 36  EHRR  7  ,
             para 40), or to "major  impediments"  (  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The
             Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 , para 48), or to  "the  test  of
             'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major  impediments'"  (  IAA  v
             United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19,  paras  40  and  44),  or
             asking itself whether  the  family  could  "realistically"  be
             expected to move ( Sezen v The Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 30 ,
             para  47).  "Insurmountable  obstacles"   is,   however,   the
             expression employed by the  Grand  Chamber;  and  the  court's
             application of it indicates that it is a  stringent  test.  In
             Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,
             although the children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary
             school, were Dutch nationals who had  lived  there  all  their
             lives, had never visited  Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
             degree of hardship if forced  to  move,  and  the  applicant's
             partner was in full-time employment in  the  Netherlands:  see
             paras 117 and 119.


             44. Domestically, the  expression  "insurmountable  obstacles"
             appears in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the  Rules.  As
             explained in para 15 above, that paragraph  applies  in  cases
             where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
             is in the UK in breach of immigration laws and  requires  that
             there should be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
             that  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.  The   expression
             "insurmountable obstacles" is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as
             meaning "very significant difficulties which would be faced by
             the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner." That definition appears to me to be consistent  with
             the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
             As  explained  in  para  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
             introduced until after the  dates  of  the  decisions  in  the
             present cases. Prior to the insertion of that  definition,  it
             would nevertheless be reasonable to infer,  consistently  with
             the Secretary of State's statutory duty to act compatibly with
             Convention rights, that the expression was  intended  to  bear
             the same meaning in the Rules as in the  Strasbourg  case  law
             from which it was derived. I would therefore interpret  it  as
             bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2.


             45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"
             are treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under  the
             Rules in cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,
             interpreting the expression  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
             Strasbourg case law, leave to remain  would  not  normally  be
             granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain  under
             the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
             unless the applicant or their partner would face very  serious
             difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside
             the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
             serious hardship. Even in a case where  such  difficulties  do
             not exist,  however,  leave  to  remain  can  nevertheless  be
             granted outside the Rules in "exceptional  circumstances",  in
             accordance  with  the  Instructions:  that  is  to   say,   in
             "circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
             application would not be proportionate."


     72. As the Supreme Court also made clear, even where those requirements
         are not met, an  applicant  may  still  be  granted  leave  if  the
         consequences of removal result are "unjustifiably harsh".  However,
         as the Supreme Court went on to say when looking at  the  grant  of
         leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules,  this  will  only  arise  in
         exceptional circumstances.  The  rationale  for  that  approach  is
         explained at [54] and [55] of the judgment as follows:

             "54. As explained in para 49 above,  the  European  court  has
             said that, in cases concerned with precarious family life,  it
             is "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to
             the contracting states' right to control their borders, as  an
             attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited  weight  which
             is generally attached to family life established in  the  full
             knowledge that its continuation in the  contracting  state  is
             unlawful or precarious. The court has repeatedly  acknowledged
             that "a state is entitled, as  a  matter  of  well-established
             international law, and subject to its treaty  obligations,  to
             control the entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  and
             their residence there" ( Jeunesse, para 100). As the court has
             made clear, the Convention is not intended to  undermine  that
             right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
             by establishing a family life while present in the host  state
             unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fait
             accompli. On the  contrary,  "where  confronted  with  a  fait
             accompli the removal of the non-national family member by  the
             authorities would be  incompatible  with  article  8  only  in
             exceptional circumstances" ( Jeunesse, para 114).


             55. That statement reflects the strength of  the  claim  which
             will normally be required if the contracting state's  interest
             in immigration control is to be outweighed.  In  the  Jeunesse
             case, for example, the Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the
             applicant's unlawful presence  in  that  country  for  a  very
             prolonged period, during which she developed strong family and
             social  ties  there,  led  the  court  to  conclude  that  the
             circumstances were exceptional and that a fair balance had not
             been struck (paras 121-122). As the court put it, in  view  of
             the particular circumstances of the case, it was  questionable
             whether general immigration considerations could  be  regarded
             as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing   the   applicant
             residence in the host state (para 121)."


     73. In the case of Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 at paragraph  35  of
         that decision the Court of Appeal gave its view as to  the  correct
         interpretation of insurmountable obstacles.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

             "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of all
             to decide whether the alleged obstacle  to  continuing  family
             life outside the UK amounts to a very significant  difficulty.
             If it meets this threshold requirement, the next  question  is
             whether the difficulty is one which would make  it  impossible
             for the applicant and their partner to  continue  family  life
             together outside the UK.  If  not,  the  decision-maker  needs
             finally to consider whether, taking account of any steps which
             could reasonably be taken to avoid or mitigate the difficulty,
             it would nevertheless entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner (or both).


             37. To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case at
             para 43 called  'a  practical  and  realistic  sense',  it  is
             relevant and necessary in addressing these questions  to  have
             regard to the particular characteristics and circumstances  of
             the individual(s) concerned. Thus, in the present  case  where
             it was established by evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
             tribunal  that  the  applicant's   partner   is   particularly
             sensitive to heat, it was relevant for the  tribunal  to  take
             this fact into account in assessing the  level  of  difficulty
             which Mr Wilmshurst would face and the degree of hardship that
             would be entailed if he were required  to  move  to  India  to
             continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that  an
             obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India  is  shown
             to be insurmountable - in either of the ways  contemplated  by
             paragraph EX.2. - just by  establishing  that  the  individual
             concerned would perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and
             would in fact be deterred by it from relocating to India.  The
             test  cannot,  in  our  view,  reasonably  be  understood   as
             subjective  in  that  sense.  To  treat  it  as   such   would
             substantially dilute the intended stringency of the  test  and
             give an unfair and perverse advantage to  an  applicant  whose
             partner is less resolute or committed  to  their  relationship
             over one whose partner is ready to endure greater hardship  to
             enable them to stay together".


     74. I have given careful consideration   to  the  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the respondent, but I am satisfied that the FtTJ did  not
         err in law in  his  approach   when  considering  the  issue  of  "
         insurmountable obstacles" by reference to the material set  out  at
         [12] and then later analysed in his assessment at paragraph [23].

     75. There was no dispute that the appellant's partner was not a citizen
         of Cameroon. The relevant part  of  the  respondent's  guidance  at
         paragraph 23 states "the onus is on the applicant to show  that  it
         is not feasible for them or their family to enter or  stay  in  any
         other country for this to amount to an "insurmountable obstacle"".

     76. Thus the burden was on the appellant to demonstrate that it was not
         feasible to enter or stay in Cameroon for  this  to  amount  to  an
         "insurmountable obstacle". The evidence before the Tribunal and set
         out at [12] was sufficient to demonstrate that at the date  of  the
         hearing,  neither the sponsor or the appellant  would  be  able  to
         enter or stay there in order for family life to continue.

     77. The Court of Appeal in Lal  indicated that one has to look  at  the
         factors relied on in an objective sense rather than on the basis of
         what the appellant and/or the appellant's spouse perceive to be the
         difficulties and that when  determining  the  question  of  whether
         return would entail "very serious hardship" based on  the  evidence
         which was before the FtTJ (see paragraph [43] of the judgment).

     78. When looking at the decision as a whole, in my judgement  the  FtTJ
         gave adequate and sustainable reasons that were in accordance  with
         the relevant case law and evidence for reaching the  decision  that
         the circumstances relied upon by the appellant and the sponsor  did
         amount to an "insurmountable obstacles" when viewed cumulatively to
         family life being established  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  When
         paragraph [27] is read in context, there  is  no  contradiction  as
         asserted on behalf of the respondent. What the judge was  referring
         to was that whilst he would not have found there to be  significant
         challenges for the sponsor to integrate or in other words  to  live
         in Cameroon, as  a  result  of  what  he  described  as  the  legal
         restrictions this  was  sufficient  to  amount  to  a  "significant
         challenge". His reference to it being challenging for a "one of her
         age to adapt a very different country" was a finding that was  open
         to him but a fair reading of paragraph 27 indicates that  that  was
         not a "significant challenge".

     79. Those were a relevant factor when considering the issue on  Article
         8  grounds.  The  FtTJ   took  into  account  the  public  interest
         considerations set out in S117 and when applying section  117B  (4)
         and whilst he stated "little weight" should be given to  a  private
         life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established
         when the person is in  the  UK  unlawfully  (  the  FtTJ  stated  "
         precarious" but it was during his unlawful residence ) it  did  not
         mean that "no  weight"  should  be  given  in  the  proportionality
         balance.

     80. I have given careful consideration to the submissions  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant and have considered them in the context  of
         the evidence and the assessment made by the judge. Having done  so,
         I am satisfied that the judge did properly carry out an  Article  8
         assessment in accordance with the evidence and the  relevant  legal
         principles and gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching
         his decision.

     81. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8,  the  heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance
         between the due weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control  and  the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family  life.
         In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a court or
         Tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
         Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
         public interest as expressed in the relevant  rules  and  statutes:
         see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and see   R  (MM  and  others)
         (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
         10, the Supreme Court at [43].


     82. In my judgement the FtTJ correctly identified that when considering
         the public interest the appellant could meet the Immigration Rules
         under Appendix FM, for the reasons given. He was entitled to weigh
         in the balance on the appellant side, that the relationship was
         genuine and subsisting and had endured beyond the two-year period
         as at the date of the application and at the date of the hearing
         and where the judge found that there were  insurmountable obstacles
         for family life being established outside the UK. In the
         alternative, he found that the appeal should be allowed "outside
         the Rules". That was in accordance with the decision in Agyarko,
         that even when the requirements are not met ( although the FtTJ
         consider them to be so)  an applicant may still be granted leave
         "outside the Rules" on the basis of if the consequences of removal
         are "unjustifiably harsh".

     83. I observe that the FtTJ did not make any reference to the Chikwamba
         principle, that is, that there is no public interest in requiring
         him to leave the UK in order to make a successful application for
         entry clearance when the sponsor could show she earned over
         18,000. However, at [27] the FtTJ did make reference to the covid
         restrictions meaning that the appellant could not return to
         Cameroon to make an application for entry clearance.


     84. Whilst in Agyarko, a case in which the Chikwamba principle was not
         at issue, it is only said that that there "might" be no public
         interest in the removal of such a person and would  not necessarily
         give rise to a grant of leave, on the facts of this appeal, the
         FtTJ did find that the appellant's partner could meet the minimum
         income threshold and had provided evidence in support of this and
         thus was a relevant factor in the balance on the side of the
         appellant.


     85. In summary and when addressing the second ground advanced on behalf
         of the respondent, I am satisfied that the FtTJ properly undertook
         a proportionality assessment outside of the rules and applied it on
         the circumstances of the individual case that was before him
         carrying out a "fact sensitive assessment".

     86. The findings made by Judge Seelhof were neither irrational nor
         unreasonable. They may be viewed as generous but that does not make
         the decision one that was wrong in law. Whilst I would accept that
         the concluding paragraphs were not as clear as they could have
         been, when considering the decision as a whole it  was  open to the
         FtTJ to reach the conclusion  that there were insurmountable
         obstacles in the light of the restrictions to family life being
         established outside of the UK and that this was a genuine and
         subsisting relationship which had endured since 2013, alongside the
         sponsor's ability to be able to exceed the minimum income
         threshold, that  the refusal of the appellant's human rights  claim
         did constitute a disproportionate and unfair striking of the
         balance between the public interest and the rights protected  under
         Article  8 and was thus unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act.



     87. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did not make an error  on a point of law and the decision
         stands. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Notice of Decision.

     88. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  stands.
         The appeal is dismissed.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated   29 April 2021



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.
