
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01418/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2020                  |On 08 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                Florence [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mian, instructed by Mondair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Kenyan national who was born on 20  May  1969.   She
    appeals, with permission  granted  by  Judge  Scott  Baker,  against  a
    decision which was issued by Judge Barker ("the  judge")  on  17  March
    2020.  By that decision, the judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal of her human rights claim.

Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2003.  She  held
    entry clearance as a work permit holder  until  31  August  2004.   She
    sought leave to remain as a student before the expiry of her  leave  to
    enter but that application was refused in 2004  and  the  decision  was
    maintained on reconsideration.  There was  no  right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant decided to overstay.  A decade or so  later,  the  respondent
    issued her with a notice as an overstayer.  This prompted her  to  make
    an application to regularise her position in October  2015.   That  was
    refused but the decision attracted no right  of  appeal.   In  February
    2016, she made a further application, which was refused  in  May  2016,
    this time with an in-country right of appeal.

 3. The appellant appealed against this refusal.  Her appeal was  heard  by
    Judge Asjad, sitting in Birmingham, on 14 June 2019.  Judge Asjad heard
    evidence from the appellant and her partner, Mr H, and submissions from
    the representatives on each side.  It was contended, in substance, that
    the appellant enjoyed a family life with  Mr  H  and  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to that relationship continuing in Kenya.   It
    was submitted that Mr H's mental health had been poor for  many  years,
    largely due to violent and sexual abuse he had suffered as a child.

 4. Judge Asjad accepted that the appellant and Mr H were  in  a  committed
    relationship.  She reviewed the medical evidence  with  some  care  and
    although she accepted what she had been told about Mr H's past, she did
    not consider that his mental health condition was particularly  severe,
    or that he would be unable to access appropriate  treatment  in  Kenya.
    Nor did she consider there to be any reasons disclosed by the appellant
    herself which would prevent the couple living together in  her  country
    of nationality.  Having considered  the  provisions  of  s117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  Judge  Asjad  concluded
    that the public interest outweighed the Article 8 rights at  issue  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Asjad's
    decision, but permission was refused by the FtT (Judge Martins) and the
    Upper Tribunal (Judge McWilliam).  The appellant became  appeal  rights
    exhausted in March 2018.   Efforts  to  have  the  underlying  decision
    reconsidered failed in 2018 and, on 10 April 2019, the  appellant  made
    further submissions under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.   She
    relied, as she had before Judge Asjad, on her relationship  with  Mr  H
    and the central submission that his condition had deteriorated  to  the
    point that he could not live with her in Kenya.  The respondent was not
    persuaded.  The appellant appealed again.

 6. Judge Barker concluded that Mr H's condition had not reached the  point
    at which family life could not continue in Kenya.  The central question
    before me is whether that conclusion is vitiated by legal  error.   For
    the reasons which follow, I have come to the clear conclusion  that  it
    is, and that the decision of the FtT falls to be set aside.   In  order
    to explain that conclusion, it is necessary  to  examine  the  decision
    reached by the judge in some detail.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. At [2], the judge described the appellant's  immigration  history.   At
    [3]-[16], she set  out  relevant  legal  principles  from  statute  and
    authority.  At [17]-[20], she listed the documentary and oral  evidence
    before her.  At [21], she set out the judicial headnote from  Budathoki
    [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC), so as to frame the task she was to undertake  in
    the remainder of the decision.  At [24], the judge  listed  the  agreed
    facts about the appellant and her relationship with Mr H and the extent
    to which it was agreed that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    were met.  At [25], she stated that the  remaining  issues  centred  on
    paragraph EX1  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and whether  there  was  a  proper  claim  for  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

 8. At [26]-[34], the judge mentioned a number of further authorities which
    related to her  assessment  of  the  evidence  and  to  credibility  in
    particular.  She recalled the guidance given in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
    Imm AR 318 and Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1.  At [33]-[34], she mentioned
    Article 4 of the Qualification Directive and KB & AH (Pakistan)  [2017]
    UKUT 491 (IAC) (neither of which were relevant in  this  non-protection
    context).  At [35], the judge found that Article 8 was engaged  in  its
    family life aspect between  the  appellant  and  Mr  H,  and  that  the
    respondent's decision represented  a  'significant  interference'  with
    that protected right.

 9. At [36]-[59], the judge turned to the  main  question  in  the  appeal:
    paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM.  She recalled that there  was  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship but that  the  respondent  did  not  accept
    there to be insurmountable obstacles to its continuation in Kenya: [36]-
    [38].  For the appellant, it  was  submitted  that  there  had  been  a
    significant deterioration in Mr H's condition.  For the respondent,  it
    was submitted that nothing had changed since Judge Asjad's decision and
    that her decision should be regarded as determinative.

10. The judge noted that the appellant was  a  qualified  teacher  who  had
    spent much of her life in Kenya and that  she  was  familiar  with  the
    culture: [43].  In the following paragraph, she noted that the crux  of
    the case was the appellant's contention that Mr  H  required  her  full
    time care and that she would not be able to work and care  for  him  in
    Kenya.  She had no property in Kenya and  no  family  who  could  offer
    support.  Nor would he be able to receive free medical care there.   At
    [47], the judge said this:

         "It is a compelling argument that the Mr [H] would lose his  right,
         as a British citizen to free health services, if he were to  follow
         the appellant to Kenya, but I remind myself that  whether  he  does
         that would be his choice.  I am also conscious of the fact that the
         appellant can return to Kenya alone and apply for  entry  clearance
         to return as a spouse in the normal way."

11. The judge then analysed the medical evidence before  her.    She  noted
    that there was a report from a Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr  Singh.  She
    considered that report - dated 14 September 2018 - to paint a different
    picture to that claimed by the appellant and her husband.  She was also
    concerned by the age of the report and the fact that it was based on  a
    single meeting: [48].  Dr Singh had stated that Mr H  suffered  from  a
    moderate depressive disorder and from 'fleeting thoughts of suicide but
    denies any active intent or plans'.  This contrasted, the  judge  held,
    with the account given by the appellant and her partner, in which  they
    described suicide attempts, one of which pre-dated the meeting with  Dr
    Singh: [49].  The judge did not  go  behind  the  assessment  of  Judge
    Asjad, which was that Mr H had mental health problems as  a  result  of
    his abusive childhood, but she considered the extent of the illness  to
    be an important factor in her deliberations.

12. The judge was aware that there might be innocent reasons why  differing
    accounts emerged from the report of Dr Singh and the witness statements
    but she felt that the purpose of Dr Singh's assessment would have  been
    clear and that 'there has been a  significant  history  of  immigration
    applications': [51].  Whilst the judge  accepted  Dr  Singh's  analysis
    that it would be difficult and stressful for Mr H if the appellant  was
    removed, she did not accept that the difficulty crossed  the  threshold
    into paragraph EX1: [52].

13. Mr H told the judge that he did not agree with Dr Singh's analysis.  Mr
    Mian suggested that the GP was better placed to make an assessment  but
    that the judge should nevertheless bear  Dr  Singh's  opinion  in  mind
    insofar as it bore on the consequences of separating the appellant from
    Mr H.  The judge stated, understandably, that she struggled  'with  the
    implication that I should attach  more  weight  to  some  parts  of  Dr
    Singh's report than other parts.': [54].

14. The judge held that the evidence given by the appellant and her husband
    was contradictory and inconsistent.  The GP stated in  a  letter  which
    was nearly three months old  that  Mr  H  suffered  from  'considerable
    depression and anxiety' with 'daily panic attacks'.  The GP also stated
    in his letter that Mr H's mood was 'not controlled', whereas Mr  H  had
    told the judge that his medication had stabilised and  that  it  worked
    'to a degree': [54]-[55].  Mr Mian had referred to other documents  but
    they pre-dated the GP's letter and added nothing.  The GP  may  have  a
    deeper knowledge of Mr H but Dr Singh was an expert in his field: [56].
     At [57]-[58], the judge drew her analysis together with the  following
    conclusions:

         "[57] In my  judgment,  given  that  the  appellant's  husband  has
         currently stabilised his condition  with  medication  that  he  can
         obtain in Kenya if he chooses to move with the appellant, and  that
         there is no evidence that counselling of the type he  is  currently
         waiting for cannot be provided in Kenya, I am  not  satisfied  that
         there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's reintegration
         in Kenya.  The appellant will be able to  provide  support  to  her
         husband through modern technology if he chooses to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom, or in person if her chooses to go  with  her.    In
         any event, he will be able to continue with medical  treatment  and
         engage counselling services as planned.

         [58] I see no reason to go behind the decision of Immigration Judge
         Asjad, and do  not  find  that  Mr  Hartwell's  mental  health  has
         deteriorated significantly since then."

15. The judge then considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (very significant obstacles to re-integration).  She  noted  that
    her earlier  findings  were  equally  relevant  to  this  part  of  her
    decision.  She acknowledged that there might be some  initial  hardship
    on return but she considered the appellant to  be  well  qualified  and
    able to obtain employment despite her lengthy absence: [62].   She  did
    not find that Mr H's condition  had  deteriorated  significantly  since
    Judge Asjad's decision.  She noted the conclusion  of  the  FtT  (SEC),
    that Mr H was entitled to Personal Independent Payment  by  reasons  of
    his mental health issues but he  could  remain  in  the  UK  and  would
    receive adequate support in the appellant's absence: [63].

16. The judge's analysis of Article 8 ECHR  appears  at  [65]-[72]  of  her
    decision.  Although Article 8 ECHR was engaged,  the  judge  considered
    there to  be  matters  which  weighed  against  the  appellant  in  the
    balancing  exercise.   It  was   significant   that   'the   evidential
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are not  satisfied':  [67].   The
    appellant was  not  financially  independent  although  she  did  speak
    English.  Her immigration status had been precarious since 2004 and she
    attached little weight to her private life and the relationship  formed
    with the sponsor.  Since the relationship had been in place  for  seven
    years, however, the judge did attach some weight to it: [70].  At [71],
    the judge stated that Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] 1  WLR  1420  was  of  no
    application because there were  no  children  involved.   She  did  not
    accept that any separation of  appellant  from  husband,  temporary  or
    otherwise, would be disproportionate.  Having considered the case as  a
    whole, the judge considered the interference proposed by the respondent
    to be a proportionate one: [72]-[74].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and discursive.  It was so  difficult
    to discern the legal errors asserted by the author of the grounds  that
    I asked Mr Mian, at the outset of his submissions, to provide me with a
    concise statement of the grounds of appeal.  He was unable  to  do  so,
    whether at the outset of his submissions or at all.  He made  extensive
    reference to the judge failing to attach the correct weight to  various
    pieces of evidence and he asserted throughout  that  the  judge  should
    have made certain findings.  When I observed  that  these  were  merely
    disagreements with the findings reached, he seemed  unable  to  express
    his arguments in a way which asserted any legal error on  the  part  of
    the judge.  Drawing  together  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  oral
    submissions he made, however, it seems that the challenges he sought to
    advance were as follows:

      i) In doubting that the sponsor's mental health  had  deteriorated  to
         the extent claimed, the judge failed to take  account  of  relevant
         material in the  form  of  a  Community  Mental  Health  Assessment
         ("CMHA") dated 1 August 2018.

     ii) In concluding that there were inconsistencies in the account of the
         sponsor's mental health, the judge failed to put matters of concern
         to the appellant or the sponsor, thereby  falling  into  procedural
         error.

    iii) The treatment  of  the  GP's  letter  was  irrational  in  all  the
         circumstances.  The only rational conclusion - on the  totality  of
         the evidence, including the FtT(SEC)'s  decision  -  was  that  the
         sponsor's condition had deteriorated.

     iv) The judge had failed to consider whether the sponsor would actually
         be able to receive adequate treatment and support in  Kenya,  given
         what was said about the cost of such treatment.

      v) The judge had  failed  to  consider  other  relevant  matters  when
         assessing whether the sponsor could relocate  to  Kenya,  including
         the support and stability available in the UK.

     vi) The judge had misdirected herself in law in relying throughout  the
         decision on the  ability  of  the  sponsor  to  choose  whether  he
         accompanied the appellant to Kenya; that was not the question posed
         by EX1 or Article 8 ECHR.

    vii) The judge misdirected herself in law  in  distinguishing  Chikwamba
         [2008] 1 WLR 1420 on the sole basis that  there  were  no  children
         involved.

18. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge's decision was properly open  to  her
    and that it contained no legal error.  He accepted that the  judge  had
    not referred in terms to the CMHA but it had plainly been in mind  when
    she concluded at [56] that the other medical reports added  nothing  to
    the assessments undertaken by the GP and Dr Singh.   Nothing  more  was
    required.  The judge had reached a sustainable conclusion regarding the
    claimed deterioration in  Mr  H's  mental  health.   It  had  not  been
    incumbent on the judge to put matters of concern to  the  appellant  or
    her husband; these were obvious matters of contradiction and it was for
    the appellant to deal with them.  The judge's  treatment  of  the  GP's
    letter was adequate in all the circumstances.  The letter was brief and
    the substance of it had been taken fully into account by the judge.  It
    was relevant to note that the  GP's  letter  contained  entirely  self-
    reported symptoms and was deserving of little weight for  that  reason:
    JL (China) [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) refers.

19. The decision of the FtT(SEC) was not  binding  and  it  was  not  clear
    whether Mr H had, in truth, been entitled to PIP all  along;  the  fact
    that his entitlement had been accepted by the  FtT(SEC)  did  not  mean
    that there had been a change in  his  condition.   There  had  been  no
    documentary evidence to show that there would be  a  cost  for  Mr  H's
    treatment in Kenya and, in any event, it was perfectly  reasonable  for
    the judge to conclude that she would be able to find work as a  teacher
    and support them both.  Ultimately, as the judge found,  the  appellant
    and the sponsor had a choice to make and the facts of  this  case  came
    nowhere near the very serious hardship required by EX2.  GM (Sri Lanka)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 was distinguishable on its facts as there  are  no
    children in the instant appeal and the  test  was  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of family life  in  Kenya.
    It was imperative to recall what had been said in Kaur [2018] EWCA  Civ
    1423 about Chikwamba and Agyarko [2017] 1 WLR 823: if the appellant was
    certain to be granted entry clearance upon return,  that  might  reduce
    the weight ordinarily attached to immigration control.  There had  been
    insufficient evidence before the judge to show that  there  were  other
    material matters which were relevant to  the  assessment  of  paragraph
    EX1.

20. Mr Mian replied.  He continued to  rely  on  the  submission  that  the
    matters at [48]-[51] of the judge's decision should have  been  put  to
    the appellant and the sponsor.  It was not correct to characterise  the
    GP's letter as one which was based entirely on  self-reported  symptoms
    with no analysis of the same.  The GP had prescribed very  high  levels
    of medication, which illustrated his analysis of the claims made by  Mr
    H.  It was clear that the sponsor  had  not  received  PIP  before  the
    FtT(SEC)'s decision and that he had not made a previous application for
    it. It was relevant to recall that the sponsor could not receive PIP or
    NHS treatment if he was not  in  the  UK.   There  was  no  documentary
    evidence of what was  available  in  Kenya  but  it  was  necessary  to
    consider what the appellant had said about it.  The judge had erred  in
    relying on choice.  GM (Sri Lanka)  was  of  general  application.   In
    relation to  Chikwamba  and  Younas  [2020]  UKUT  129  (IAC),  it  was
    necessary to consider that the sponsor suffered from significant mental
    health problems.

21. In terms of relief, Mr Mian submitted that the evidence was  clear  and
    that the appeal fell  to  be  allowed  without  more.   I  reserved  my
    decision.

Analysis

22. I am satisfied that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  in  law  in  two
    respects.  Firstly, in stating at [47] and [57] that the sponsor had  a
    choice over whether he could join the appellant  in  Kenya,  the  judge
    corrupted her assessment of paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM with a legally
    irrelevant consideration.  That paragraph, read alongside EX2, requires
    a decision maker to  consider  whether  it  would  cause  very  serious
    hardship for an applicant or their sponsor  to  continue  their  family
    life  outside  the  UK.   The  assessment  which  is  required   is   a
    hypothetical one - of placing the couple in the country in question and
    considering whether the obstacles they would face there can properly be
    described as insurmountable. It is no answer to that question that  one
    party might choose to undertake that journey or to remain in the United
    Kingdom.  That clarification was provided in authorities concerned with
    EX1(a) (qualifying children)[1] but the same hypothetical analysis must
    necessarily apply in a case concerned  with  the  partner's  relocation
    under EX1(b).

23. Secondly, the judge misdirected herself  in  law  in  her  approach  to
    Chikwamba.  The absence of children was insufficient  to  disapply  the
    principle in that case, which was most succinctly stated by  Lord  Reed
    at [51] of Agyarko:

         "If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
         unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at
         least if an application were made from outside the UK,  then  there
         might be no public interest in his or her  removal.  The  point  is
         illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department."

24. The application of that principle is not dependent upon the presence or
    absence of children, albeit that it might be easier in a case involving
    children to show that it is not proportionate to expect  an  individual
    to return to apply for entry clearance.

25. Ultimately, however, these legal misdirections come to  nought  if  the
    findings of fact made by the judge provide a sound basis, on  a  proper
    application of  the  law,  to  dispose  of  the  appeal.   Despite  the
    determined submissions made by Mr  Tufan  in  defence  of  the  judge's
    decision, I am satisfied that she fell into error in her  consideration
    of  whether  there  exist  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family   life
    continuing in Kenya.  In addition to the error  I  have  identified  at
    [18] above, it is quite clear that the judge left material matters  out
    of account in her analysis of that  question.   She  did  not  consider
    whether the withdrawal of the Personal Independence Payment as a result
    of leaving the United Kingdom would lead to very serious hardship.  Nor
    did she consider - in a case in which it was accepted that the  sponsor
    is in need of medication and counselling on the NHS - whether he  would
    be able in reality to  afford,  and  therefore  to  receive,  similarly
    effective treatment in Kenya.   Rather  than  answering  that  question
    squarely, the judge resorted to a conclusion  that  the  sponsor  could
    choose whether or not to relocate.

26. There are also difficulties with the judge's assessment of  the  extent
    of Mr H's mental health problems, although I reject  a  number  of  the
    criticisms advanced by Mr Mian.  It is not correct as a matter  of  law
    to state that it was incumbent on the judge to forewarn  the  appellant
    and the sponsor regarding her concerns about the consistency  of  their
    evidence with the report of Dr Singh.  Dr Singh made  no  reference  to
    actual suicide attempts, whereas their statements did.   This  was  the
    sort of obvious contradiction considered in cases such  as  Maheshwaran
    [2002] EWCA Civ 173 and WN  (DRC)  [2004]  UKIAT  213.   As  Ouseley  J
    explained at [28] of the latter decision, an applicant is not  entitled
    to regard such a point as uncontroversial merely  because  it  has  not
    been raised by the judge;  it  is  for  the  represented  applicant  to
    grapple with such points and  a  failure  to  do  so  risks  the  judge
    attaching significance to the contradiction.  Nor do I accept that  the
    judge's  conclusions  on  the  medical   evidence   were   tainted   by
    irrationality.

27. What is unfortunately clear,  however,  is  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to take account of material evidence in reaching the conclusion
    that the sponsor's mental health problems were not as serious as he and
    the appellant claimed.  The hearing took place in March 2020 and it was
    an odd feature of this case that much of the mental health evidence was
    rather older than that.  What  was  not  that  old,  however,  was  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Social Entitlement Chamber).  That
    decision was reached on 16 December 2019.   The  FtT's  conclusion  was
    that the sponsor was entitled to the daily living component of Personal
    Independence Payment at the standard rate because he  had  difficulties
    in five areas: preparing food, managing therapy of monitoring a  health
    condition, washing and bathing, dressing and  undressing  and  engaging
    with other people face to face.  The reasons for that  conclusion  were
    as follows:

         "By reason of mental health issues Mr [H] is significantly limited,
         in particular in the activities detailed above.  As  a  result,  Mr
         [H] qualifies for the above award of Personal Independence Payment.
          In reaching its decision the Tribunal placed  particular  reliance
         upon our assessment of all the evidence  available  to  use  today.
         The Tribunal was satisfied that the case could be dealt with fairly
         and justly in the absence of the appellant who had elected  not  to
         attend an oral hearing."

28. The judge did not make reference to this award  in  her  assessment  of
    whether paragraph EX1 applied.  She only turned to it in her assessment
    of the separate question posed  by  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   It  was
    certainly a relevant matter for her to consider  in  assessing  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Kenya,
    however,  and  to  whether  or  not  there  had  been   a   significant
    deterioration in Mr H's mental health.  Mr H did not receive PIP before
    this decision.   His  application  for  it  had  been  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions in December 2018  and  it  was
    only in December 2019 that that decision was set aside by the FtT.  The
    fact that the Tribunal reached that conclusion  and  that  the  sponsor
    then started to receive PIP must, to my mind, provide  some  indication
    that there had been a decline in his mental health since  the  decision
    of Judge Asjad.  In failing to consider it as part of her  analysis  of
    that contention, I am satisfied that the judge fell into further  legal
    error.

29. The judge also erred in failing to make anything other than  a  passing
    reference to the Community Mental Health Assessment which  appeared  at
    pp44-48 of the appellant's bundle.  Again, this was a surprisingly  old
    document (having been printed on 1 August 2018) but the judge  was  not
    entitled to discount it in the manner she did at [56].   The  CMHA  was
    compiled by a Nurse  called  Korleki  Henson  and  provided  importance
    evidence regarding the sponsor's mental health in the period  following
    Judge Asjad's decision.  The report suggested that he had attempted  to
    take overdoses on a number of occasions; that he had made  preparations
    to take an overdose of paracetamol shortly before the report; and  that
    the appellant was sufficiently concerned about  his  suicidal  ideation
    that she had removed all knives from the house.  Insofar as  the  judge
    seized upon the difference between the  report  of  Dr  Singh  and  the
    evidence given by  the  appellant  and  his  wife,  the  CMHA  provided
    relevant evidence which tended to suggest (I  put  it  no  higher  than
    that) that the sponsor had stated  to  other  healthcare  professionals
    that he had  rather  more  than  the  'fleeting'  thoughts  of  suicide
    described in Dr Singh's report.

30. I consider the judge to have fallen into further legal error in failing
    to consider the GP  records  which  appear  at  the  very  end  of  the
    appellant's bundle before the FtT.  Whilst she was  obviously  entitled
    to view the short and largely unreasoned letter  from  the  GP  with  a
    degree of circumspection, the context in which that letter  was  to  be
    assessed was provided by the GP  records  which  appear  at  pp222-235.
    Those records extended to 29 January 2020 and showed relatively regular
    trips to the GP  practice,  during  which  mental  health  issues  were
    clearly to the fore.  The final entry -  dated  22  January  2020,  for
    example, recorded that the sponsor was being 'eaten alive'  by  anxiety
    surrounding the  appellant's  immigration  status;  that  he  had  been
    experiencing  suicidal  thoughts;  and  that  he  had  burned   himself
    intentionally.  The previous month, December 2019,  shows  the  sponsor
    claiming that his mood had 'dipped' and that he was trying and  failing
    to secure counselling services which would assist.   At  the  start  of
    2019, there is  a  record  showing  that  his  dose  of  mental  health
    medication had been increased and that he was feeling better  but  that
    he still had 'bad days and panic attacks'.  Again, whilst this material
    was not determinative of the question which  concerned  the  judge  (of
    whether the appellant and the sponsor  were  simply  manufacturing  the
    deterioration in his mental health  to  bolster  their  case),  it  was
    certainly relevant material for the  judge  to  take  into  account  in
    answering that question.  She failed to take it into account,  properly
    or at all.

31. Ultimately, therefore, I am not satisfied that the  judge  conducted  a
    lawful assessment of whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  the
    continuation of family life in Kenya.  In  concluding,  at  [58],  that
    Judge Asjad's finding on that issue should stand, the judge misdirected
    herself in law and failed to take relevant evidence into account.  That
    central question in the appeal must be re-examined.

32. I am not content to proceed in the manner  suggested  by  Mr  Mian  and
    simply to remake the decision on the evidence which is presently before
    me.  Much of that evidence was old when the FtT considered it and it is
    certainly too old now.  Whilst I am acutely conscious of the  assertion
    that the ongoing uncertainty surrounding  the  appellant's  immigration
    status is worsening the sponsor's mental health, the fact is that I  do
    not have the up-to-date evidence which is required  to  establish  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of  family  life
    in Kenya.  More up-to-date evidence  is  necessarily  required  on  the
    subject.  That evidence must, at the very  least,  encompass  a  recent
    assessment of the sponsor's mental health, together with details of his
    medication  regime  and  other  treatment  and   documentary   evidence
    concerning the availability of that treatment in Kenya.

33. Although I have reflected carefully on Mr Mian's submission that  there
    is, in reality, only one proper answer in this case, I do not  consider
    him to be correct in that submission.  Whilst it seems likely that  the
    sponsor continues to  be  significantly  mentally  unwell  due  to  the
    frankly horrific experiences he endured as a child, the extent  of  his
    mental health problems and the treatment he requires for those problems
    remain live issues in respect of which  there  must  be  a  proper  and
    lawful assessment.  Nor, for the  reasons  given  by  Mr  Tufan,  do  I
    consider this to be necessarily a case in which the Chikwamba principle
    entitles the appellant to succeed.  Assuming that the  sponsor  remains
    in receipt of PIP, it seems certain that the appellant would be granted
    entry clearance as a spouse upon making such an application.  But  that
    does not necessarily remove the public  interest  in  her  taking  that
    course.  She has overstayed for significantly more than  a  decade  and
    may not meet the in-country Immigration Rules.  I  cannot  exclude  the
    possibility that a judge who finds that she does not meet  those  Rules
    could properly conclude that she  must  return  to  Kenya  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance.

34. In all the circumstances, therefore, I conclude that  the  decision  of
    the FtT is vitiated by legal error and that it must  be  set  aside  in
    full.  The appropriate course - given the scope of the enquiry which is
    required - is for the appeal to be remitted to be heard afresh  in  the
    FtT by a judge other than Judge Barker.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.   The  decision  of
the FtT is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  FtT  to  be  heard
afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.
                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             05 January 2021
                                                     -----------------------
[1] SSHD v AB & AO [2019] EWCA Civ 661; [2019] 1 WLR 4541, for example.

