
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/01394/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 December 2018                |On 11 December 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               ROHIT AGGARWAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs M A Hodgson (counsel) instructed by West Ham
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Solly  promulgated  on  23/07/2018,  which  dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 03/10/1986 and  is  a  national  of  India.  On
12/12/2017 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Solly ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  16/10/2018  Judge  Shimmin
gave permission to appeal stating


      1. The appellant seeks permission to appeal against  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Ms G C Solly promulgated on  23  July  2018,
      dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse leave to remain as a partner.


      2. It is arguable that the Judge did not  give  consideration  to  the
      best interests and welfare of the child of the couple and  this  could
      amount to a material error of law.


      3. It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  that  the
      appellant's partner could not move to live with the appellant in India
      because he is an Indian national  of  Hindu  religion  and  she  is  a
      Pakistani Muslim.


      4. The appellant alleges that the Judge  has  not  correctly  assessed
      proportionality under article 8 but has not specified  how  the  Judge
      has erred in this regard.


      5. Grounds for permission to appeal  are  required  to  "identify  the
      alleged error or errors of law in the decision"  (rule  33(5)(b),  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014) but in this case they  do  not  do  so  with  any
      clarity. It is the duty of the appellant to clearly state the  grounds
      of appeal and I find, other than above, the appellant  has  failed  to
      clearly detail his arguments.


      6. I grant permission on the grounds identify at paragraphs  2  and  3
      above.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms  Hodgson  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
argued that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's child and that the Judge failed to  fully  appreciate  that  the
appellant's wife is a Pakistani Muslim who has been granted  refugee  status
in the UK and cannot move to India.

(b) Ms Hodgson took me to [39] of the decision and told me that, there,  the
Judge's finds that the child will remain in custody of its  parents  if  the
appellant is removed. She told me that finding fails to take account of  the
child's best interests. She reminded me that the child is dependent  on  his
mother, who has been granted refugee status. She  drew  an  analogy  between
the family reunion policy contained in the immigration rules.  She  told  me
that the Judge had failed to consider Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD  2008  UKHL  and
failed to properly  evaluate  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  make  an
application for entry clearance from India.

(c) Ms Hodgson to me to [37] of the decision and told me that the Judge  has
failed to take account of background materials. She referred me to EX.1  and
Gen3.2 of the immigration rules. She urged me to set the decision aside

6. (a) For the respondent Mr Clarke lodged the Home  Office  country  policy
and information note - India: religious minorities, dated May 2018. He  told
me that the Judge sets out adequate  reasons  for  his  decision,  and  that
consideration of the refugee family reunion policy is  entirely  irrelevant.
He reminded me that the appellant's child is  not  a  qualifying  child.  He
told me that the Judge gave full consideration to risk on return.  He  dwelt
on the statistical reports of religious violence in India, and  reminded  me
that India has a population of 1.3 billion, calculating that  the  incidence
of religiously motivated killings amount to 0.0023% of the population.

(b) Mr Clarke took me from [26] to [42] of the decision.  He  told  me  that
the Judge applied the correct test in law and that the Judge's  fact-finding
exercise cannot be faulted. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

7. (a) The facts in this case are that the appellant entered  the  UK  as  a
tier 4 student  in  May  2011.  Leave  was  extended  until  May  2015,  but
curtailed from 1 August 2014. In  June  2015  the  appellant's  partner  was
granted refugee status conferring leave to remain until 25 June 2020.

(b) On 12 October 2015 the appellant and his  partner  were  married  in  an
Islamic ceremony. The have been living together since June 2013.  They  have
one child who was born in the UK in May 2016. The child  is  not  a  British
citizen.

(c) The appellant is an Indian Hindu. His wife is  a  Pakistani  Muslim  who
cannot return to Pakistan.

(d) In 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK to  complete
his studies. The respondent refused that application  in  August  2014.  The
appellant appealed unsuccessfully. His appeal was dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 16 February 2016. His appeal  rights  were  exhausted  on  23
November 2016.

8. Between [6] and [11] of the decision the Judge takes correct guidance  in
law. At [11] of the decision the Judge specifically directs herself  to  the
need to consider the best interests of the appellant's child.

9. Between [12] and [15] the Judge summarises  the  appellant's  immigration
history. Between [16] and [25] the Judge rehearses the evidence  she  heard.
Between [26] and [50] the Judge sets out her findings of fact.

10. Between [33]  and  [36]  the  Judge  correctly  applies  the  Devaseelan
principles  when  considering  the  appellant's   claim   that   there   are
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK  or  that
there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  because  of   his
interfaith, mixed race, marriage. At [37] the Judge bemoans the  absence  of
directly relevant background  material.  At  [39]  the  Judge  "specifically
considered" the interests of the appellant's child. The Judge's findings  at
[39] are consistent with what is said by Lord Carnwath at  paragraph  18  of
KO(Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] WLR 5273

    On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges,  it  seems  to  me
    inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the  parents,
    apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,  since  it  will
    normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.

11. What the appellant cannot escape is  that  between  [26]  and  [36]  the
Judge rejects the appellant's account (that he has come into  conflict  with
his family of origin because of his marriage), and rejects  the  appellant's
account that his wife cannot accompany him to India. The Judge  gives  clear
reasons for her findings.

12. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

13. The Judge then goes on to consider article 8  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal.
After taking guidance in law she summarises her findings at [51] and [52].

14. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge had the  best
interests of the child at the forefront of  her  mind  and  that  the  Judge
considered whether or not  it  is  possible  for  the  appellant's  wife  to
accompany him to India. The Judge gives clear reasons for  her  conclusions.
The grounds of appeal are just a disagreement with the  adequately  reasoned
conclusions reached by the Judge and an attempt to re-litigate a case  which
has been competently Judicially determined.

15. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the  evidence.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's   fact-finding
exercise. In reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little  more  than  a
disagreement with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found  them
to be. The appellant might not like the conclusion that  the  Judge  arrived
at, but that conclusion  is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal
equation. The correct test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law.

16.    The decision does not contain a material error of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

17.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 23 July 2018, stands.

Signed
                   Date  21 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


