
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/01647/2018
                                                               HU/01649/2018
                                                               HU/01650/2018
                                                               HU/01651/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 3rd December 2018   On 19th December 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [H]
                                  TANYA [S]
                                   [A H1]
                                   [A H2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs (Counsel, instructed by Universal
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal against the refusal of their human rights claims
    were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul in a decision
    promulgated on the 13th of August 2018. The Judge found that the First
    Appellant had used deception in her TOEIC test. In addition the Judge
    found that the family could be expected to live in Bangladesh and that
    that would not be contrary to the best interests of the children having
    regard to their having been born in the UK and the length of residence.

 2. The grounds of appeal argue that the Judge erred in respect of the
    approach taken to the First Appellant's TOEIC test and the finding of
    deception. It is also argued that the Judge erred in respect of the
    finding that the Second Appellant had used deception in obtaining a
    work permit. It is also asserted that the Judge did not adequately
    address the issue of reasonableness under section 117B(6).

 3. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings. Both parties
    maintained their respective positions. For the Appellants it was
    submitted that the approach of the Judge to the shifting burdens was
    unclear with particular reference to paragraphs 34 and 35 of the
    decision. There was no analysis of the First Appellant's oral evidence
    on the issues and no evidence of continuity linking the First Appellant
    to the voice recording.

 4. The finding against the Second Appellant was not coherent. There had
    been no information on the obtaining of the work permit and no basis
    for the finding made which had not been explained. It was argued that
    the errors fed into the findings in respect of the best interests of
    the children under section 117B(6). It was accepted that the third
    ground was weaker but there were problems, the children were born when
    the adults were entitled to access NHS services by virtue of their
    leave.

 5. For the Home Office it was maintained that the findings on the TOEIC
    were sustainable. In paragraph 35 it was clear that the Judge had in
    mind where the burden lay and rejected the evidence in relation to
    taking the test, paragraph 29 was relevant. The Home Office had more
    reservations on the work permit issue and tacitly accepted that more
    reasons should have been given.

 6. This appeal raises unusual points in terms of consequences. Following
    from KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 how the Appellants came to be without
    leave is not relevant to the assessment to be made under section 117B
    and section 55. However, findings of dishonesty can have different
    consequences. Firstly, a finding of deception by an Appellant may
    legitimately affect the assessment of the credibility of claims made
    about the situation that an Appellant and their family may face on
    return. Secondly such a finding in relation to an immigration matter
    will affect any future application for leave to enter the UK that an
    Appellant may wish to make. For those reasons it is incumbent on a
    Judge to make sustainable findings on the proper legal footing.

 7. The most significant error in this decision is the approach of the
    Judge to the Second Appellant's work permit. The burden was on the
    Secretary of State to show that that had been obtained by deception. If
    the Judge wished to raise this as an issue, and the Judge would have
    been entitled to do so, then the parties ought to have been given an
    opportunity to address the issue calling evidence if it was felt
    appropriate. That could have led to an adjournment but the parties do
    not appear to have been given an opportunity to consider the point. In
    any event the reasoning in the decision is unclear and it is not
    obvious that the correct standard or burden had been applied.

 8. With regard to the TOEIC test whilst it appears that the Judge had the
    appropriate test in mind and there was evidence that would clearly
    cause concern and call for an explanation the analysis of the First
    Appellant's oral evidence was lacking. This is perhaps less clear cut
    than the work permit issue but it is no less significant for the
    Appellants. Given the lack of analysis of the evidence overall I am
    satisfied that the approach set out in the decision was flawed and
    cannot stand.

 9. On the basis of the above findings the decision has to be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. The above findings are
    aggravated by the Judge's approach in paragraph 41. The Appellants were
    entitled to access NHS services when the children were born and the
    points made against them in this part of the case have no merit. The
    findings in paragraph 40 are not erroneous - the cost of education in
    Bangladesh is not a factor that would make return unreasonable. The
    test to be applied is whether there are circumstances in the UK that
    would make the child Appellants removal unreasonable. The guidance in
    KO will have to be applied having regard to what is relevant given that
    the starting point is that the adult Appellants have no independent
    right to remain in the UK and the children's best interests are to
    remain with their parents in the family unit. The case of NS (Sri
    Lanka) considered as part of KO makes that clear.

10. In the circumstances I find that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal contains a number of legal errors which make the decision
    unsustainable. The Appellants are entitled to proper and sustainable
    findings on the issues where deception was found. Independently of
    those issues the adults have no basis to remain in the UK and so the
    focus is on the children's circumstances and the consequences of their
    removal and those will have to be assessed in the light of the current
    guidance.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be
heard by a Judge other than Judge N M Paul. No findings are preserved and
the decision is to be remade de novo.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing these appeals I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th December 2018

(c) Crown copyright 2018
