
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01916/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 16 March 2021                   |On : 26 March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              ashok chatterjee
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, instructed by Schneider Goldstein
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there was no  prior  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face-to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded as
      25 December 1992, although he claims his correct date of birth  is  25
      December 1994. He has been given  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the
      respondent's decision to refuse his private life human rights claim.

   3. The appellant claims to have arrived in the UK  in  1996.  He  claimed
      asylum on 7 April 2011 on the basis that he did  not  know  anyone  in
      India. His claim was refused and certified as clearly unfounded on  31
      May 2011. On 13 July 2011, the appellant made an application for leave
      to remain on the basis of 14  years'  long  residence,  but  that  was
      refused on 13 September 2011. The appellant then made various  further
      submissions between April 2014 to June 2016, all of which  were  based
      largely upon his medical condition, kidney disease,  and  subsequently
      colon cancer, all of which were refused under  paragraph  353  of  the
      immigration rules on 2 June 2014, 3 July 2015 and  26  September  2016
      respectively, as the respondent did not consider the threshold  for  a
      claim on Article 3 or 8 grounds had been met. The appellant's  claimed
      residence prior to 2009 was not accepted and therefore the  respondent
      considered that the requirements for leave to be granted on the  basis
      of long residence had not been met.

   4. The appellant's most recent submissions, made on  30  May  2019,  were
      again based upon the appellant's kidney problems and colon cancer,  as
      well as his long residence of over 20 years in the UK.  It was  stated
      in those submissions that the appellant currently suffered from severe
      chronic stage 3 kidney disease, hypertension and proteinuria.  It  was
      stated that the appellant's mother passed away  at  the  time  of  his
      birth, that he had no siblings and that his father was a  drug  addict
      and an alcoholic and had abandoned him in 2009.  His  kidney  problems
      started in 2009. On 1 February 2011 he attempted to  kill  himself  by
      jumping out of the window but was  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the
      police. He claimed asylum shortly afterwards on 7  April  2011,  after
      being encountered by the police and social services, on the basis that
      he did not know anyone in India, but his claim was  refused,  as  were
      his subsequent submissions. On 19 May 2016 he  was  diagnosed  with  a
      serious form of bowel cancer. It was submitted that the appellant  was
      supported by friends in the UK but had no one to support him in India.



   5. The appellant's submissions were supported  by  medical  evidence  and
      letters from friends and were treated by the  respondent  as  a  fresh
      human rights claim. A decision refusing that claim  was  made  by  the
      respondent on  17  January  2020.  In  that  decision  the  respondent
      considered that the suitability provisions in  S-LTR.4.4  applied,  as
      the appellant had failed to pay an outstanding litigation debt to  the
      Home Office, and that S-LTR.4.5 applied  on  the  basis  that  he  had
      failed to pay NHS charges totalling �9009. The  respondent  considered
      further  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant had resided in the UK continuously for  20  years  and  that
      there were no very significant obstacles to integration in  India  for
      the purposes of paragraph  276ADE(1),  nor  exceptional  circumstances
      outside the immigration rules. The respondent did  not  consider  that
      the appellant's medical condition reached the Article 3  threshold  as
      there was treatment available in India and did not consider that there
      was a risk of suicide sufficient to meet the Article 3 threshold.

   6. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  came
      before First tier Tribunal Judge  Brannan  on  22  October  2020.  The
      appellant gave oral evidence before the judge.  The  judge  noted  the
      appellant's own evidence that he still had bowel cancer and was  on  a
      waiting list for  dialysis  but  also  noted  the  evidence  from  his
      oncologist and nephrologist which stated that  his  bowel  cancer  had
      been successfully treated and he remained under observation every  six
      months and that he had stage III kidney disease which did not  require
      dialysis. The judge permitted further medical evidence to be submitted
      after the hearing to resolve the inconsistency in the evidence.

   7. With regard to the appellant's cancer, the judge did not consider that
      the Article 3 threshold was met, as the appellant was in remission and
      was receiving nothing more than monitoring. With regard to the  kidney
      disease the judge noted that the medical evidence  confirmed  that  he
      did not require dialysis or any day-to-day treatment and  again  found
      that the Article 3 threshold was not met. The judge  also  had  before
      him evidence of the appellant's mental health problems which confirmed
      that he had major depressive disorder  with  mood-congruent  psychotic
      features and stated that the appellant contemplated suicide frequently
      and that his friends in the UK were protective factors. Judge  Brannan
      accepted that the appellant suffered from a form of depression but did
      not accept that the consequence of  his  removal  to  India  would  be
      suicide and did not accept that the Article 3 threshold was met.

   8. As for Article 8, the judge noted the appellant's  evidence  that  his
      father did not send him to school  but  sent  him  to  other  people's
      houses to work and  that  he  would  often  accompany  his  father  to
      building sites where his  father  worked.  He  noted  the  appellant's
      account of having been abused as a child when sent to people's  houses
      and, having observed the appellant breaking down  in  tears,  accepted
      his evidence as sincere. The judge noted the  circumstances  in  which
      the  appellant  came  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities,   when
      encountered working illegally on a building site and then being  taken
      in by social services until assessed as an adult. He had attempted  to
      jump out of a window when put in a hotel by social services as he  was
      not allowed to leave and was not being fed. The judge had  before  him
      witness statements from three of the appellant's friends  who  claimed
      to have known the appellant at various  periods  of  time.  The  judge
      accepted that the appellant had established a private life in  the  UK
      but did not accept that he had been  living  in  the  UK  continuously
      prior to 2009 and did not accept  that  there  were  very  significant
      obstacles to his integration in India. The judge considered  the  pros
      and cons in relation to proportionality and concluded  that  the  cons
      outweighed the pros and that therefore the respondent's  decision  was
      proportionate. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      four grounds: that the judge had given inadequate consideration to the
      medical evidence and had failed to make findings on certain aspects of
      the  appellant's  mental  health  conditions  including  the  risk  of
      suicide; that the judge had failed to give sufficient  reasons  as  to
      why the appellant's mental and physical health conditions did not meet
      the test for demonstrating very significant obstacles  to  integration
      in India; that the judge failed to make findings of fact  on  material
      issues  relevant  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account,
      including his account  of  abuse  as  a  child;  and  that  there  was
      inadequate consideration of the  witness  statements  from  the  three
      witnesses.

  10. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 22 July  2020  on
      the grounds that it was  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in
      failing to fully appreciate the severity of the appellant's depression
      and the difficulties it would cause him in his country of origin, when
      considering the issue of very significant obstacles to integration and
      in the proportionality assessment. The other grounds were found not to
      be arguable.

  11. The matter then came before me and both parties  made  submissions  on
      the error of law matter.

  12. Mr Fazli submitted that the judge had failed to make findings  on  the
      appellant's mental health condition. Given the opinion of Dr Goh  that
      the appellant was suffering from  a  major  depressive  disorder  with
      psychotic features, the judge's finding that  the  appellant  suffered
      from "a form of depression"  was  wholly  inadequate.  The  judge  was
      silent on the psychotic elements of the appellant's condition and  his
      past suicide attempt and made no findings on the  report  of  auditory
      hallucinations. Those matters, and the high risk of harm  referred  to
      by Dr Goh were material to the judge's  assessment  and  also  to  the
      question of long residence. The judge failed to  give  proper  reasons
      why the appellant's  conditions  did  not  meet  the  test  for  'very
      significant obstacles' and did not follow the  test  in  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. The  judge
      failed to take into account the abuse  the  appellant  suffered  as  a
      child, failed to make a finding on whether the abuse had occurred  and
      failed to consider how the appellant  could  integrate  into  life  in
      India after the experiences he had had. The judge failed  to  consider
      that the abuse suffered by  the  appellant  could  have  affected  his
      linguistic abilities and that was relevant to the assessment of length
      of residence in the UK. The judge erred by discounting the  weight  to
      be given to the three witnesses' statements just because they were not
      present at the hearing.

  13. Ms Cunha accepted that the judge had made no finding on the abuse when
      considering  the  question  of  'very  significant   obstacles',   but
      submitted that there was limited evidence before him  in  that  regard
      and that he otherwise went through all the evidence and  was  entitled
      to conclude as he  did.  The  judge's  decision  on  very  significant
      obstacles took account of the guidance in Kamara  and  Parveen  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  932  and
      considered the medical evidence. The medical evidence did  not  assess
      the appellant as being  a  suicide  risk.  The  judge  considered  the
      medical opinions and was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Article  3
      threshold was not met. The judge was entitled to accord less weight to
      the statements of the witnesses because they were not present  at  the
      hearing. The judge's decision was a safe  one  and  the  grounds  were
      simply a disagreement.

  14. Mr Fazli reiterated the points previously made in response.


Discussion and conclusions

  15. I have to agree with Ms Cunha that when the judge's  findings  on  the
      medical evidence are carefully considered alongside the evidence  that
      he actually had before him, the challenges  made  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal essentially amount to little more than a  disagreement.  It  is
      relevant to note that the grounds make no  challenge  to  the  judge's
      findings on Article 3 in relation to the appellant's physical  medical
      condition, namely his kidney disease and  colon  cancer.  Indeed,  the
      judge provided the appellant with an opportunity  to  produce  further
      evidence and undertook a  careful  assessment  of  all  the  evidence,
      reaching conclusions in that regard, at [25] to [28]  and  [84],  that
      were fully and cogently reasoned and were properly open to him.

  16. The challenge in the  grounds  is  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the
      appellant's mental health condition, asserting that he  did  not  give
      proper consideration to the medical evidence and to the full extent of
      the appellant's condition. However, again I agree with Ms  Cunha  that
      the judge was only able to make findings on the  evidence  before  him
      and that that evidence was clearly limited.

  17. The first report of  1  October  2019,  from  Dr  Sawa,  a  consultant
      psychiatrist at the Private Therapy Clinic, referred to the absence of
      a mental health history and to the appellant  expressing  feelings  of
      low mood with suicidal thoughts for the past two weeks but  having  no
      intentions or plans for acting on those thoughts and just  wanting  to
      feel better. The report confirmed no evidence of psychotic experiences
      and referred to the  appellant  suffering  from  "moderate  depressive
      episode  with  somatic  symptoms",  meaning  that  his   psychological
      problems were caused by overly focussing  on  his  physical  problems.
      There was no mention of the appellant having been abused as a child or
      of having psychological problems on such a basis.

  18. The second report dated 19 February 2020 was from Dr Goh,  a  clinical
      psychologist, and was based  upon  a  75  minute  interview  with  the
      appellant which also concluded that his current episode of  depression
      appeared to have been triggered by  his  medical  conditions.  Dr  Goh
      referred to the psychological testing being brief. He opined that  the
      appellant presented with psychological symptoms  that  were  "strongly
      suggestive of a psychological disorder", referring to  the  depressive
      symptoms appearing  to  be  accompanied  by  some  psychotic  features
      following the appellant's reference to some auditory hallucinations at
      night, but he made no formal diagnosis of psychosis. At page 15 at the
      end of his diagnostic table, he confirmed that the symptoms  were  not
      explained by conditions  such  as  schizophrenia  or  other  psychotic
      disorders. Dr Goh referred to the appellant's expression  of  suicidal
      ideation, but noted that there was no intention of carrying that  out.
      Contrary to the assertion in the grounds of appeal,  Dr  Goh  did  not
      refer to the appellant having attempted suicide twice, but  he  stated
      that the appellant reported two near suicide attempts in  2019  -  the
      grounds at [4] misquote the evidence. Again there was  no  mention  of
      any abuse as a child and, in fact, the report  referred  at  paragraph
      4.1 to the  appellant  denying  any  form  of  trauma  or  significant
      incidents during his childhood, other than having  been  abandoned  by
      his father.

  19. In light of that evidence, I do not consider the judge's assessment at
      [29] to [33] to be materially lacking and I  do  not  agree  with  the
      assertion that the judge underestimated or disregarded the severity of
      the appellant's  depression.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  draw  the
      conclusions that he did from the lack of  evidence  of  any  treatment
      being received in the UK, the lack of evidence of inability to  access
      relevant  medication  in  India  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of  the
      friendships which Dr Goh considered to be the protective  factors  for
      the appellant, and to assess the expert evidence in that context.  The
      judge considered the risk of suicide but concluded that  the  evidence
      did not demonstrate a risk giving rise to an Article  3  breach.  That
      was a conclusion the judge was perfectly  entitled  to  reach  on  the
      basis of the limited evidence before him.

  20. The same applies in regard to the judge's consideration  and  findings
      on the issue of 'very significant  obstacles  to  integration',  where
      again Mr Fazli criticised the judge for  failing  to  include  in  his
      assessment the psychotic elements of the appellant's  depression,  the
      hallucinations and the abuse he suffered as a  child,  but  again  the
      evidence before the judge was  limited  and  the  findings  made  were
      entirely within the limitations of  that  evidence.  Contrary  to  the
      assertion made  by  Mr  Fazli,  the  judge  did  not  take  an  overly
      simplistic view of the test in Kamara and  did  not  merely  focus  on
      prevention, in the context of return to India, but at [65],  [66]  and
      [83] to [84] he clearly carefully considered the  appellant's  ability
      to integrate into society in India, taking account of his physical and
      mental problems, and properly applied the relevant test.

  21. Mr Fazli's challenge, in the third ground of appeal, is to the judge's
      approach to the issue of the abuse suffered by the  appellant  in  his
      assessment of his credibility and length of residence in the  UK,  his
      linguistic abilities and his mental health problems, and in regard  to
      his ability to integrate into life in India. The grounds refer at [21]
      to the judge accepting  the  appellant's  evidence  as  "sincere"  but
      failing to make findings on the impact of the abuse on the appellant's
      evidence  and  his  private  life.  However,  as  Ms  Cunha   properly
      submitted,  it  was  not  for  the  judge  to  make  findings  on  the
      psychological impact of the abuse when there was  no  expert  evidence
      before him in that regard. The judge took the matter into  account  in
      making his findings to the extent that he could, but as he pointed out
      at [56] to [58], there was no evidence from professionals to assist in
      making his assessment.

  22. Finally, Mr Fazli criticised the judge for giving only limited  weight
      to the statements of the witnesses whose evidence  sought  to  confirm
      the appellant's account of his length of residence in the UK.  However
      the judge was perfectly entitled to accord the weight that he  did  to
      those statements and he gave full and proper reasons for doing  so  at
      [59].  Contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the  grounds,   the   judge's
      consideration of the statements formed part of a rounded assessment of
      the evidence of the appellant's length of  residence  in  the  UK,  in
      accordance with the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed, from [48] to [61],  and
      the  judge  provided  full  and  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting   the
      appellant's claim to have resided in the UK  for  the  lengthy  period
      stated.

  23. In all of the circumstances it seems to me that the  judge's  decision
      is a  sound  and  comprehensive  one  including  a  full  and  careful
      assessment of the evidence and clear and cogent  findings.  I  do  not
      find any material errors of law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set
      aside. On the evidence  before  the  judge,  the  conclusion  that  he
      reached was one which was fully and properly open to him.



DECISION

  24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  18 March 2021


Appellant UT appeal, Dismissed to Appellant & Allowed to SOS
