
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02739/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 25 March 2021                           |On 28 April 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     OG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, counsel, instructed by Dylan Conrad
                    Kreolle Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.

Although neither party requested an anonymity direction,  given  the  issues
relating to the appellant's  partner  and  her  background,  I  consider  it
appropriate to make such a direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Dempster ("the judge") promulgated on 8  October  2020  in
         which she dismissed the human rights appeal of OG ("the appellant")
         against a decision of the respondent dated 6 February 2020 refusing
         the appellant's human rights claim.

      2. The appellant is a national of Morocco who was  born  in  1995.  He
         entered the UK as an accompanied child  visitor  on  1  July  2008.
         Applications made by him as  a  child  of  a  settled  person  were
         refused, but the appellant was granted Discretionary Leave from  15
         March 2010 to 15 March 2013. The appellant  made  subsequent  human
         rights applications, but these were refused and  an  appeal  before
         judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio  was  dismissed  on  25  June
         2016.

      3. The human rights application giving  rise  to  the  decision  under
         appeal in the present proceedings was made on 15 November 2019  and
         was based on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  RH,  a  British
         citizen. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with RH, or  that  RH  met  the
         definition of 'partner' in Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         because they had not lived together for at least two years  at  the
         date of the appellant's application. The respondent also  initially
         relied on the Suitability requirements in refusing the application,
         although no reliance was placed on this at the appeal hearing.  The
         appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The judge had before  her  a  145-page  appellant's  bundle  and  a
         supplementary  bundle  containing,  inter  alia,  a  Mental  Health
         Assessment conducted by an NHS Foundation Trust on 9 July  2020  in
         respect of  RH.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  both  the
         appellant and RH.

      5. Having set out the relevant legal framework and principles applying
         to human rights appeals, and having directed herself in respect  of
         the Devaseelan guidelines (Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702) in
         respect of the 2016 decision of Judge  Adio,  the  judge  concluded
         that the appellant would not face 'very significant  obstacles'  to
         his  integration  in   Morocco,   with   reference   to   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. Using Judge Adio's findings
         as a starting point, and based on the further evidence before  her,
         the judge found that the appellant could speak Arabic, that some of
         his half-siblings retained property in Morocco that could  be  used
         by the  appellant,  that  the  appellant  would  receive  financial
         support from his family in the UK if removed to Morocco  (at  least
         in the short term), that the appellant retained contact with people
         in Morocco, and that there would be no problems preventing him from
         integrating back into  Moroccan  society.  No  challenge  had  been
         raised in respect of these findings.

      6. The judge then considered the relationship  between  the  appellant
         and RH. The judge was satisfied that the appellant and RH were in a
         genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  and  that  they  had   been
         cohabiting since at least June 2018.

      7.  From  [45]  to  [54]  the  judge  considered  whether  there  were
         'insurmountable obstacles' preventing the  appellant  and  RH  from
         living in Morocco.  The  judge  set  out  RH's  disturbing  history
         noting, inter alia,  that  her  parents,  who  at  that  time  were
         residing in the UK, separated in 2006 (when RH was  6  years  old),
         that she was taken to Morocco by her  father,  that  she  had  been
         physically abused by her  father  and  step-mother,  that  she  was
         forced to give up her schooling  at  the  age  of  12  and,  having
         refused to marry a much older man, ran away from her father's  home
         when she was 14 years old. She had been homeless and had been raped
         on several occasions when living on the  streets.  She  managed  to
         find work in  a  factory  and  slept  on  the  factory  floor.  She
         eventually obtained  the  assistance  of  the  British  Embassy  wo
         arranged for her return to the UK in October 2016 when she  was  16
         years old. She was placed in foster care on  her  return  and  then
         later in supported accommodation until she reached the age of 18.

      8. At [47] the judge summarised part of  an  assessment  completed  by
         social services on 9 November 2016 in respect of RH, and noted RH's
         evidence  that  she  had  attempted  suicide  on  three  occasions,
         although only two were documented. The judge noted that one suicide
         attempt resulted in RH's attendance at hospital on 27 October  2017
         and that she had been  referred  to  Child  and  Adolescent  Mental
         Health Services (CAHMS) as  she  had  been  struggling  and  needed
         additional support, although  RH  failed  to  attend  a  number  of
         appointments and her case was  closed  (the  judge  quoted  from  a
         letter sent to RH dated 31 January 2018 noting how the  author  was
         struck by RH's resilience and focus).

      9. At [48] the judge referred to  RH's  most  recent  overdose  on  11
         February 2020  when  she  ingested  48  paracetamol  tablets.  RH's
         evidence was that she had taken the overdose  after  the  appellant
         had been told that he had been refused leave to remain.  The  judge
         recorded the medical records which stated that RH "was  emotionally
         stressed, denied any intentions for suicide."  At  [49]  the  judge
         noted that  RH  was  not  currently  receiving  any  medication  or
         counselling (she had been referred for some therapies in  the  past
         but found they had not helped, and had previously  been  prescribed
         medication). The judge noted RH's evidence  that  her  relationship
         with the appellant provided her with the stability and support  she
         needed and that she relied on  him  emotionally.  The  judge  noted
         that, when asked what she would do if the appellant had  to  return
         to Morocco, RH became too distressed to answer.

     10. At [50] the judge noted RH's evidence that she could never, because
         of her experiences in Morocco, return to live there,  and  at  [51]
         the judge noted RH's response, when asked if she would feel safe if
         she returned to Morocco with the appellant, that the police do  not
         do anything and would not assist if there was a dispute between her
         and her step-mother, and that RH could not put her foot in Morocco,
         "not even for one second."  At  [52]  the  judge  recorded  further
         evidence from RH  relating  to  a  report  entitled  "Looked  after
         Children Health Recommendations and Action Plan" dated 19  December
         2017 which stated, under the heading "Enjoy and Achieve/Education",
         "[RH] would like to be a vet, or  something  to  do  with  animals,
         especially dogs, [RH] also stated that if things do  not  work  out
         for her in the UK, she  will  return  to  Morocco,  where  she  was
         certain she would do really well at work." The judge rejected  RH's
         explanation that she had told  this  to  her  social  worker  in  a
         "threatening way" as this did not fit contextually with the rest of
         the document. The judge  found  that  RH  "was  not,  at  least  in
         December 2017, expressing the view that she could never  return  to
         Morocco."

     11. At [54] the judge stated:

             "I have considered whether there are insurmountable  obstacles
             to the family life continuing between the sponsor [RH] and the
             appellant if the latter was to return to Morocco  when  it  is
             said, on behalf of the appellant that the sponsor simply could
             not go to that country. I have had regard to the case of Lal v
             SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925. Whilst I have huge sympathy for the
             sponsor, on the evidence, I do not accept  her  evidence  that
             she can never return to Morocco for the reason she has  stated
             in evidence. I accept  that  her  previous  observation  about
             returning to Morocco was said almost two years  prior  to  the
             date of the appellant's application but there was nothing that
             I have seen in the evidence provided to me  that  the  sponsor
             had previously adopted the position in respect of a return  to
             Morocco that she now urges in her evidence before the Tribunal
             and in support of the appellant's claim. In the absence of any
             other evidence, such as psychological or medical which I would
             anticipate would have been readily available, whilst I  accept
             that a return to Morocco could be difficult and would  require
             a period of readjustment, and indeed that she might prefer  to
             continue her relationship  in  the  UK,  I  do  not  find,  on
             balance, that there would  be  very  significant  difficulties
             faced by the appellant and the  sponsor  in  continuing  their
             family life together outside the UK.  Accordingly,  I  do  not
             find that insurmountable obstacles exist."


     12. The judge then  proceeded  to  consider  whether  the  respondent's
         decision would constitute a disproportionate interference with  the
         appellant's Article 8  private  and  family  life  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules. Adopting the approach set out in  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 27, the judge considered the public interest factors in s.117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  noting  that
         the  appellant's  relationship  with  RH  commenced  when  he   was
         unlawfully present in the UK. At  [65]  the  judge  reiterated  her
         finding that the relationship between the appellant  and  RH  could
         continue in Morocco as both were fluent Arab speakers and both  had
         knowledge of the country and culture. The  judge  again  indicated,
         for reasons  that  she  had  already  given,  that  there  were  no
         insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing outside the
         UK. At [66] and [67] the judge noted that the  appellant's  removal
         would disrupt the private life relationship between  the  appellant
         and his family in the UK, and that if RH chose  not  to  return  to
         Morocco with the  appellant,  this  could  bring  to  an  end  this
         relationship as there would be difficulties in maintaining  it  for
         any time. At [68] the judge noted that if RH refused  to  accompany
         the appellant to Morocco it would remove her from the support  that
         he provided to her.

     13. At [70] the judge concluded:

             "Balancing these competing factors, I find those in favour  of
             the appellant's removal, and the disruption of his family  and
             private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  that  would  involve,
             outweigh those in favour of him maintaining  his  private  and
             family life in the UK. I do not find that there are compelling
             reasons to offset the  considerable  public  interest  in  the
             removal of the appellant for all the reasons stated above.  He
             cannot meet the requirements of the Rules. The appellant is  a
             fluent Arabic speaker who spent the first 13 years of his life
             in Morocco. His family retained property there and  there  was
             nothing to suggest that he is ill-equipped  to  cope  in  that
             country and culture. I find he  will  be  returning  with  the
             support of his family. He will be  able  to  maintain  contact
             with his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find,  on  the
             evidence, that there is no reason why  the  relationship  with
             the sponsor cannot continue in Morocco and  whereas  I  accept
             that re-location might be difficult, and may take a period  of
             readjustment, I do not find any exceptional circumstances such
             that maintenance of the respondent's decision  would  lead  to
             unjustifiably harsh consequences."


     14. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     15. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed to consider the
         appellant's Article 8 rights in conjunction  with  RH's  Article  3
         ECHR rights. There did not seem to be any correlation  between  the
         19 July 2020 Mental Health Assessment  to  the  assessment  of  the
         "objective" assertions made by RH concerning her suicidal  ideation
         and attempts. There were little or no findings in relation to  RH's
         assertions, detailed at [45] and [46] of the decision, that went to
         her vulnerability and suicidal ideations. The  judge  was  said  to
         have failed to place weight on RH's evidence that  she  would  feel
         unsafe in Morocco, and the judge took into  account  an  irrelevant
         consideration by placing weight on the 2017 report  which,  it  was
         claimed, "could not possibly  override  the  most  updated  medical
         evidence dated 9 July 2020." It was additionally claimed  that  the
         judge failed to take account of the seriousness of the overdose  of
         48 paracetamol tablets.

     16. In granting permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson
         stated,

             "Whilst the weight to be attached to the evidence is primarily
             a matter for the First-tier Tribunal, it is arguable  in  this
             case that the Judge has placed too much weight on the evidence
             from 2017 in contrast to the evidence from 2020; has failed to
             consider the likely impact on the sponsor of  the  Appellant's
             removal (on the accepted basis that she  will  not  return  to
             Morocco) and overall it is arguable that the findings are  not
             in accordance with the weight of the evidence,  in  particular
             as to the sponsor's vulnerability."


     17. In his oral submissions at the 'error of law' hearing  Mr  Moriarty
         submitted that there was  a  paucity  of  findings  in  respect  of
         evidence that post-dated the 2017 report, and  that,  although  the
         judge referred to the July 2020 Mental Health  Assessment  and  the
         overdose in January 2020, there  was  no  subsequent  reasoning  in
         respect of either of them. The inference from [54] of the  decision
         was that there was nothing after the 2017 report that could lead to
         a contrary conclusion in respect of  RH's  suicidal  ideation,  and
         that the judge failed to take account of the July 2020  Assessment.
         The judge therefore failed to 'factor in' these considerations into
         her Article 8 assessment. At the very least  the  judge  needed  to
         show a reasoned engagement with the consequences of the overdose in
         January in 2020 and the observations in the July 2020 Mental Health
         assessment.

Discussion

     18. Contrary to the assertion by Upper Tribunal Jackson in the grant of
         leave to appeal, whilst it was RH's evidence that she did not  wish
         to return to Morocco, there was no accepted basis  that  she  would
         not return to Morocco. The judge's assessment at  [52]  makes  this
         quite clear. In that paragraph the judge considered a "Looked after
         Children Health Recommendations and Action Plan" dated 19  December
         2017 and made a factual finding  that  RH  had  not,  at  least  in
         December 2017, expressed the view that she could  never  return  to
         Morocco. During that assessment RH stated that if  things  did  not
         work out for her in the UK she would return to Morocco.  The  judge
         gave clear and cogent reasons  for  rejecting  as  incredible  RH's
         explanation for what she said in the  19  December  2017  document.
         This finding has not been challenged.

     19. The grounds contend that the judge relied on the  2017  report  and
         did not consider the July 2020 Mental Health Assessment which post-
         dated the 2017 report. It is important however to  appreciate  that
         the judge relied on the 2017  document,  which  was  not  a  mental
         health assessment, for  what  RH  told  her  social  workers  about
         returning to Morocco. The Mental Health  Assessment  dated  9  July
         2020 noted  that  RH  had  been  referred  for  the  Assessment  by
         Hillingdon Talking Therapies on 8 June 2020. RH reported  that  she
         had a "hard past" and that she was more settled with the appellant,
         and that she requested a report from mental health services as  she
         claimed she could not survive without the appellant. Under  a  sub-
         heading "Risks" reference was made to RH's previous  overdoses  and
         her claim that, although she did not presently  have  any  suicidal
         thoughts or plans, this would change if the appellant had to  leave
         the UK. In the  section  headed  "Discussion  of  care,  support  &
         treatment options with RH  and  their  views  and  goals",  it  was
         observed that RH wanted a letter to provide to the Home  Office  to
         support the appellant's application to remain in  the  UK.  It  was
         noted that the appointment with RH was a "one off  assessment"  and
         that it was "not possible to address all the  issues  requested  as
         this would require a much longer  period  of  engagement."  It  was
         suggested to RH that once her current stressor  had  been  resolved
         and she was feeling less emotional she should engage in counselling
         regarding her past. Under the heading "Care Plan" it was noted that
         RH could self-refer to Hillingdon Talking Therapies or LINK  should
         she require counselling, that she had been provided  with  relevant
         phone numbers of a community mental health  resource  centre,  that
         she was not on any medication, and that there  were  no  plans  for
         another review. The initial assessment did not indicate that RH had
         any social care needs that required further assessment.  Under  the
         heading "Full Assessment" it was  noted,  with  reference  to  RH's
         mental state, that she had bad dreams and woke thinking  about  bad
         experiences  in  Morocco,  that  her  mood  was  subjectively   and
         objectively distressed and emotional, and that  she  did  not  like
         meeting new people as she thought they may do bad  things  to  her.
         The "impression" of RH referred to her history  and  that  she  was
         currently very emotional at the prospect  of  the  appellant  being
         returned to Morocco  and  that  she  would  harm  herself  if  this
         happens. "No immediate risks identified but ongoing risk to self in
         the face of personal stressors." The July 2020 assessment  did  not
         give any diagnosis for RH, it did not assess any risk  she  had  of
         suicide or self-harm, and it did not consider the impact on  RH  if
         she had to choose to relocate to Morocco in order to  maintain  her
         relationship with the appellant.

     20. A holistic assessment of the decision  shows  that  the  judge  was
         demonstrably aware of RH's traumatic history and the reasons why it
         would be difficult for  her  to  return  to  Morocco.  The  judge's
         reference at [54]  to  the  absence  of  psychological  or  medical
         evidence must be considered in its specific context. The paragraphs
         from [45] to [54] of the judge's decision fall  under  the  heading
         "Insurmountable Obstacles" and focus  on  whether  the  appellant's
         relationship with RH could continue in  Morocco  in  light  of  her
         previous experiences in that country [45]. The specific  focus  was
         therefore on whether there was evidence of insurmountable obstacles
         preventing RH from accompanying the appellant to Morocco.  Properly
         understood,  the  judge's  assertion   as   to   the   absence   of
         psychological or medical evidence was by reference  to  RH's  claim
         that she would not wish to return to Morocco.  In  this  sense  the
         judge's observation was accurate. There  was  no  psychological  or
         medical evidence that  specifically  considered  how  returning  to
         Morocco would impact  on  RH's  mental  wellbeing.  The  judge  had
         already found that, at least in December 2017, RH had  expressed  a
         positive view  about  returning  to  Morocco.  As  I  have  already
         indicated, this factual finding was  not  challenged  and  was  one
         rationally open to the judge for the reasons given by her at  [52].
         At [54] the judge specifically factored in the length of time  that
         passed from  RH's  assertion  as  recorded  in  the  'Looked  After
         Children Health Recommendations and Action Plan'  in  reaching  her
         conclusion that there were no insurmountable obstacles.

     21. Although there was no  further  specific  reference  to  RH's  most
         recent overdose in February 2020 after [48], the decision, read  as
         a whole, does not indicate  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  the
         overdose into consideration or that she ignored the consequences of
         the overdose. She specifically mentioned  it  at  [48],  under  the
         "Insurmountable   Obstacles"   heading,   when   considering    the
         possibility of RH relocating to Morocco,  and the evidence  of  the
         overdose itself does not  indicate  that  it  occurred  because  RH
         feared returning to Morocco (the In-patient Discharge Summary dated
         12 February 2020 indicated  that  RH  "denied  any  intentions  for
         suicide" and that  there  were  no  safeguarding  concerns  and  no
         community support arranged by the hospital). The 9 July 2020 report
         is framed by reference to RH being separated from the appellant and
         does not consider or mention the possibility  of  her  accompanying
         him to or joining him in Morocco. The judge was demonstrably  aware
         of the circumstances of the overdose as she made specific reference
         to the medical notes and she took account of RH's  explanation  for
         the comment in the Discharge Summary that RH "denied any intentions
         for suicide" (that she was too scared to tell  the  hospital  staff
         that she wanted to die). The judge also noted that, at the date  of
         the hearing, RH was not receiving any counselling or medication.

     22. As acknowledged  by  Mr  Moriarty,  the  July  2020  Mental  Health
         Assessment was relatively limited. It did not consider  or  comment
         on the possible consequences for RH should she choose  to  relocate
         to  Morocco  in  order  to  maintain  her  relationship  with   the
         appellant, and it did not give any detailed assessment of any level
         of risk of suicide or self-harm facing  RH.  The  judge  took  full
         account of RH's traumatic history and the  judge  was  entitled  to
         rely on what RH said in December 2017 together with the absence  of
         any medical evidence that RH would be at high risk  of  suicide  if
         she accompanied the appellant back to  Morocco,  to  conclude  that
         there would be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family  life
         relationship continuing in Morocco. The judge was entitled to  take
         this  finding  into  account  in  her  Article  8   proportionality
         assessment. The decision does not disclose an error on a  point  of
         law requiring the decision to be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The human rights appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the respondent and to the  appellant.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   19 April 2021

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

