
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02197/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 June 2017                        |On 30 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Kevin Lusala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Lusala in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup promulgated on 27 March 2017 in which he  allowed
    the appeal of Kevin Lusala against a decision to deport him as a result
    of his criminal offending.  The criminal offending is not in issue.   I
    shall refer to Mr Lusala as the appellant as he was in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The decision letter makes clear that the  appellant  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 21 December 1996.  On 6 November 2000 he was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain as a dependant  of  his  mother.   She  had
    entered the United Kingdom in 1996, shortly before  the  birth  of  the
    appellant, and the appellant's grant of leave was  made  in  line  with
    that of his mother.  In due course he was granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 29 May 2014.  By that time he would have been nearly 18 years
    old.

 3. Unfortunately the appellant's life in the United Kingdom, where he  has
    remained throughout his life, has been marred by a number of  offences.
    On 11 November 2011, when the appellant was  aged  13  or  14,  he  was
    convicted of burglary and given eighteen months' detention in  a  youth
    facility.  On 30 November 2015 he was convicted of robbery  and  breach
    of  a  conditional  discharge  and  was  sentenced   to   ten   months'
    imprisonment and finally on 22  February  2016  at  South  East  London
    Magistrates' Court he was convicted of  possession  of  a  knife  in  a
    public place and was sentenced to eight weeks' imprisonment and it  was
    on the strength of that last conviction of  eight  weeks'  imprisonment
    that a decision was made to make a deportation order.   That  was  duly
    made in the form of a decision to make such an order on  5  March  2016
    and that triggered the right of appeal which can of course  be  allowed
    on the basis that his removal would violate his protected  private  and
    family life.

 4. By way of opening, it must be said that the appellant was born  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He will be 21 at the end of this year  and  has  spent
    his entire life in the United Kingdom living with his family  for  most
    of the time, if not all of the time.  There  were  a  series  of  other
    offences which are mentioned in the deportation decision  but  they  do
    not seem to have featured significantly in  the  consideration  of  his
    criminal offending.

 5. The first thing to consider are the grounds of appeal.  It is  said  by
    the Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal that the judge did  not
    fully take into account the  fact  that  the  case  was  subject  to  a
    consideration of what is now Section 117C of  the  2002  Act.   Section
    117A to C was inserted into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 by operation of Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   This
    provides in Section 117C additional considerations which the  court  is
    required  to  take  into  account  when  in  cases  involving   foreign
    criminals.  A foreign criminal is  defined  in  Section  117D(2)  as  a
    person who is not a British citizen and who has been convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom of an offence and who has been sentenced to a period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months or  has  been  convicted  of  an
    offence that has caused serious harm or is a persistent offender.

 6. The appellant was indeed sentenced to a period of youth custody  for  a
    period of eighteen months but that does not constitute, in my  view,  a
    period of imprisonment and consequently he has no been sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least twelve  months.   The  offences  for
    which he has been convicted have not  apparently  caused  serious  harm
    apart from the harm that necessarily arises to the community  when  any
    offending takes place.

 7. So, looking at the convictions as they were  recited  in  the  decision
    letter, the first offence of burglary, where he  was  sentenced  on  11
    November 2011, was an offence where  he  entered  a  dwelling  where  a
    person was subjected to a threat of violence but there is  no  evidence
    to suggest  that  this  resulted  in  serious  harm.   The  offence  of
    possessing a knife was an offence which was explained by the  judge  in
    some detail and he was sentenced to eight weeks'  imprisonment.   That,
    too, does not suggest it was an offence that resulted in  serious  harm
    and the period of  imprisonment  for  the  offence  of  robbery  on  30
    November 2015 for which he was sentenced to  ten  months'  imprisonment
    suggests that this was not an offence which resulted in serious harm.

 8. In those circumstances I do not consider that he falls within those two
    limbs of the definition of a foreign criminal.  It  therefore  requires
    consideration of whether or  not  he  is  a  persistent  offender  and,
    looking at the decision to deport, it appears to be the three  offences
    to which I have referred that prompted the decision to deport and  they
    do not, in my judgment, satisfy the requirement of being  a  persistent
    offender.  He has been in the United Kingdom for twenty years  and  has
    these three convictions.

 9. That does not seem to me to amount to persistent offending in the sense
    described in the Act.  Accordingly I am not satisfied that he did  fall
    within the definition of a foreign criminal and consequently is subject
    to the additional considerations set out in Section 117C.   Instead  he
    was subject to the considerations  in  Section  117B,  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases, but that  seems  to  have  been
    considered by the judge by his adopting paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A as
    his guidance.

10. The second point made in the grounds of appeal is that the  judge  said
    in paragraph 61 of the determination:

     "I have  no  hesitation  in  finding  the  appellant  is  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the UK".

     In doing so he made reference to the fact that the  appellant  was,  in
    his judgment, a young Londoner.  It is said that such a description  is
    not appropriate  as  a  consideration  when  one  comes  to  deal  with
    deportation.

11. However, the fact is that the applicant has always lived in the  United
    Kingdom; indeed, as far as we are aware, he has always lived in London.
     That is where his parents, at  least  his  mother,  lived.   In  those
    circumstances it is not an  inapt  description  to  call  him  a  young
    Londoner.  I do not say that it advances matters much but  it  gives  a
    flavour of the individual.  There is no suggestion that he lived within
    a particularly  close-knit  community  of  DRC  citizens  or  that  his
    religion or ethnic considerations separate him from a large section  of
    the community as sometimes occurs where individuals  have  a  religious
    faith or a place in a community  which  is  somewhat  remote  from  the
    mainstream of British life.

12. It seems to me that the issue of integration has to be viewed sensibly.
     Since he knows no other community, I think  the  judge  was  right  in
    saying that he was integrated in the United Kingdom.

13. I take, however, exception to the judge's comment that it was a mark of
    his integration that

     "...he also integrated with young people in London as is evidenced  all
         too plainly by his offending with others".

     It cannot possibly be said  that  it  is  a  mark  of  an  individual's
    integration that the individual resorts  to  a  group  of  hoodlums  or
    criminal offenders.  That is not what the concept of integration means.
     In the context of this type of case,  integration  involves  embracing
    the best qualities of  a  community.   It  does  not  involve  criminal
    offending.  Nevertheless that criminal offending,  alone,  cannot  stop
    the appellant being integrated into a community if he has had no  other
    community.  For these reasons I think the decision of the judge  cannot
    properly be criticised in the way asserted.

14. It is also said in the grounds of appeal that the  judge  made  another
    error in relation to finding that there were significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into the DRC.  The fact is that  there  are  obstacles.
    He has never been to the DRC.  He does not speak Lingala or French.  He
    is not familiar with the community there.  There is nothing to  suggest
    that, in the United Kingdom, he has, as it were, acquired a distinctive
    DRC background in the way he has been brought up.  Nevertheless, if the
    offending had been serious enough then he would be returned to the  DRC
    and he would have to make of it what he will.   The  obstacles  in  his
    integration into the DRC may well be significant but they would not  be
    so significant as to prevent his return to the DRC, were the  offending
    serious enough.

15. Having disposed of the grounds of appeal, I note the approach that  was
    adopted by the judge  in  the  determination.   He  recorded  that  the
    appellant's brother attended the hearing.  He noted  that  Miss  Hudson
    was a witness who spoke in his favour.  She met the appellant  in  2013
    and they began a relationship with each other in 2015.  She  says  that
    they would like to marry.

16. The judge took into account the fact that the  criminal  offending  was
    committed (at least in the early years) whilst he was  a  minor.   That
    was a matter which is of significance when considering the criteria set
    out in the decision in Maslov  in  which  it  acknowledges  that  young
    people are often involved in criminal misbehaving at an early age  but,
    with the  acquisition  of  greater  maturity,  outgrow  that  tendency.
    Consequently criminal offending whilst committed  when  very  young  is
    often viewed less seriously than it would be in an  older  person.   In
    this context the judge considered  what  Miss  Hudson  had  to  say  in
    relation to the influence that she might be able to exert over him.

17. It was for these reasons therefore  that  the  judge  made  an  overall
    assessment that it would not be proportionate to require him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

18.  In  my  judgment,  that  was  a  conclusion  properly  open  to   him.
    Accordingly I do not find that the judge erred in law in  the  decision
    that he made.  Needless to say, it is not what I make  of  the  correct
    outcome that is significant.  It is whether or not the  judge  made  an
    error of law and I am not satisfied that he did.  For these  reasons  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.  The  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup will stand.  The  appeal  of  the  appellant,  Mr
    Lusala, is allowed.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

                            [pic]

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

