
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02760/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2021                      |On 20 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              mr Qaisar Mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Turner, instructed by Prime Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kinch, promulgated on 1  October  2020,  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made  on  5  February
    2020 to refuse his application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom
    and to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's case is that he  has  acquired  ten  years'  continuous
    residence,   as   defined,   and/or   that   his   removal   would   be
    disproportionate given  that  he  maintains  a  relationship  with  his
    children in the United Kingdom.

Long Residence

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 9 October 2008 with a
    student visa valid until 15  January  2010.   An  application  made  to
    extend that on 11  January  2010  was  refused  as  the  fee  had  been
    declined; further application made on 14 May 2010  was  granted  on  14
    June 2010.

 4. The appellant was then granted leave to remain as a Tier  1  Post-Study
    Worker until 6 July 2013, applying on that date for leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, an application refused on 10 February 2014.  His
    appeal against  that  decision  was  lodged  within  time  but  it  was
    dismissed on 13  August  2015.   An  application  and  then  a  renewed
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused,
    the latter being made on 15 January 2016.   On  15  February  2016  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur although
    that  decision  was  originally  refused  it  was  reconsidered   after
    administrative   review   and   again   refused.    Following   further
    administrative review, further reconsideration included a challenge  by
    way of judicial  review.   Finally,  the  appellant's  application  was
    granted on 21 September 2017, granting him leave  to  remain  until  21
    September 2020.

 5. The respondent refused the case on the grounds that the  appellant  had
    not had ten years' continuous leave to remain owing to:-

      a) his lack of lawful residence between 15 January 2010  and  14  June
         2010;

      b) between 15 January 2016 and 21 September 2017.

 6. The respondent considered also that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  noting  a  lack  of  evidence  of  his
    relationship with Asma Qaisar and a lack of evidence to demonstrate his
    sole parental responsibility for his children  who  were  not,  in  any
    event British citizens settled in the United Kingdom or living here for
    at least seven years.  She also concluded that the need to maintain the
    integrity of the Immigration Rules outweigh the possible effect on  the
    appellant and the children having to re-establish a  life  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  She considered also that the applicant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.

 7. On appeal, it was accepted that, given that it was now  more  than  ten
    years since the absence of leave in 2010, the sole  issue  was  whether
    the appellant had had continuous leave to  remain  notwithstanding  the
    break between 15 January 2016 and 21 September 2017.

 8. The appellant's case is that as the  notice  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision had not been served until 19  January  2016,  the  application
    made on 15 February 2016 was within  the  28-day  period  permitted  by
    Section  276B(v),  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  was  based  on  the
    application of Juned Ahmed v SSHD [2019] UKUT 10 and  R  (Masum  Ahmed)
    [2020] EWCA 1070.  The judge found that:

      i) the law regarding the  correct  interpretation  of  paragraph  276B
         meant that the appellant did not have ten years' continuous  lawful
         residence and could not therefore satisfy paragraph  276B(i)(a)  of
         the Immigration Rules [28];

     ii) the only evidence the appellant had  produced  in  support  of  his
         assertion that he was in regular contact with the children was in a
         form of a letter from Mr Arshad Hussain [33]; and,

    iii) taking  the  appellant's  case  at  its  highest  his  contact  and
         financial contribution to the children appeared to be on an ad  hoc
         basis [34];

     iv) there was no other documentary evidence in support of the claim  to
         take an active role in the  children's  upbringing  [35]  and  that
         evidence of  contact  and  financial  provisions  could  have  been
         provided;

      v) the appellant had not shown he had an active role in his children's
         life or that he has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with them [36];

     vi) the appellant had not shown that there were  significant  obstacles
         to his reintegration into Pakistan;

    vii) there were no exceptional circumstances in this case  that  refusal
         of leave to remain would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
         for him;

   viii)  little weight would be given to his private life given it has been
         established when his status was precarious [45];

     ix) the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence  to  demonstrate
         he has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
         children given they had not lived with him since 2016.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in her approach to paragraph 276B in the light of  Hoque  and
    Others v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 and that, on a proper application of
    paragraph 276B, the requirement for continuous residence  in  paragraph
    276B(i)(a), the gap in the appellant's continuity of  residence  failed
    to be disregarded; and, that  the  judge's  conclusions  regarding  the
    appellant's family life  with  his  children  were  irrational  even  a
    failure to make  proper  findings  as  to  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant or his credibility.

10. On 14 November 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission.

The Law

11. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are, as  both  parties
    accept, paragraphs 276A and 276 B.

12. In Hoque, Underhill LJ set out the  relevant  provisions  of  paragraph
    276B, adding letters [A] to [C]:



         "8.  Paragraph 276B provides (so far as material for our purposes):



                  "The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
                  leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom are that:

                  (i)(a)[1] he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom.

                  (ii) having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                  reasons why it would be undesirable for him  to  be  given
                  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground   of   long
                  residence, ... and

                  (iii) the applicant does not fall for  refusal  under  the
                  general grounds for refusal.

                  (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                  of the English language  and  sufficient  knowledge  about
                  life in the United Kingdom ... .

                  (v) [A] the applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of
                  immigration laws, [B] except that, where paragraph 39E  of
                  these Rules applies, any  current  period  of  overstaying
                  will  be  disregarded.  [C]   Any   previous   period   of
                  overstaying  between  periods  of  leave  will   also   be
                  disregarded where -

                      (a) the  previous  application  was  made  before  24
                      November 2016 and within 28 days  of  the  expiry  of
                      leave; or

                      (b) the further application was made on or  after  24
                      November  2016  and  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
                      applied."

             I have  inserted  the  letters  [A]-[C]  before  each  of  the
             elements  in  sub-paragraph  (v)  so  as  to  make  subsequent
             reference to them easier."

13. At [35], he also wrote this:

         "35.     It follows that we are faced with a choice between, on the
             one hand, giving element [C] no  effect  and,  on  the  other,
             treating its placing within paragraph 276B as a drafting error
             and applying it as if it qualified sub-paragraph (i)  (a).  In
             my view we should choose the latter. It is  unfortunately  not
             uncommon for tribunals and courts  to  have  to  grapple  with
             provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  which  are  confusingly
             drafted, but it is our  job  to  try  to  ascertain  what  the
             drafter intended to achieve and give effect to it  so  far  as
             possible. In this case it is clear from  its  terms  what  the
             intended effect of element [C] is, but it has been put in  the
             wrong place. Treating it as if it  appeared  in  sub-paragraph
             (i) (a) does violence to the drafting structure, but I do  not
             believe that that is a sufficient reason not to give effect to
             it."

14. Adopting the methodology for analysing these provisions as used by  the
    Court of Appeal in Hoque, this is not a case in which the  requirements
    of 276B(v) identified as [A] and [B] are relevant.  That is because, as
    the respondent accepts, the appellant was not in the United Kingdom  in
    breach of the laws as he had leave when the application  was  made  and
    continues to do so under  Section  3C  of  the  1971  Act  nor  was  he
    currently overstaying.    The  sole  issue  is  therefore  whether  any
    relevant period of overstaying fell within the terms of paragraph  39E,
    that is, was any application for further leave made within 28  days  of
    leave lapsing.

15. On that basis, it is  evident  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.

16. Mr Clarke submitted that, however, in this case although the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in its assessment of paragraph 276B(v), this was not
    material because on any view, the appellant's overstaying exceeded  the
    permissible 28 days.  This was because his leave had ended on the  date
    at which the Upper Tribunal had  made  its  decision  to  refuse  leave
    because leave was extended for the purposes of Section 3C of  the  1971
    Act only whilst an appeal was pending and the definition of  an  appeal
    pending were such that it came to an end (Section 104 of the 2002  Act)
    not when the decision was served but the decision was made.

17. Miss Turner submitted that the  error  was  material  as  it  had  been
    accepted or conceded by the Secretary of  State  that  the  application
    made on 15 February 2016 had been made within time.  This she submitted
    was on the basis of concessions  made  during  the  settlement  of  the
    judicial review action in 2017 and/or that this has  been  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State in not holding the point against  the  appellant
    when granting him leave to remain in 2017.

18. Given that the relevant document was not  before  me  I  adjourned  the
    hearing, having heard an argument on all issues, giving  the  appellant
    seven days in which to provide the relevant documents.

19. The relevant documents were provided, as were further submissions which
    were  served  on  the  respondent.  Directions  were  made  giving  the
    respondent the opportunity to respond.

20. On 6 April the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal in the  following
    terms:

         "It is noted that the singular period in issue in this  appeal,  is
         the period between 15/1/16 (when A's PTA to  the  UT  was  refused)
         until 15/2/16 (when A  submitted  his  Tier  1  application).  Upon
         consideration of the "Leave Extended by 3C"  policy  guidance  that
         was in effect at the material time that the application of  15/2/16
         was considered and the provision that,

             "The  effective  date  on  which  a  decision  on  appeal   or
             permission to appeal is finally  determined  is  the  date  on
             which the appellant recieives notice of the determination from
             the Tribunal. This is deemed to be  received  2  working  days
             aftger postage unless the appellant can prove otherwise.

         It is conceded by the Secretary of State that A is deemed  to  have
         received refusal of the PTA to the UT on  19/1/16.  Notwithstanding
         the wording of 3C of th e1971 Act, it is accepted that the material
         period for the purposes of 276B was therefore less than 28 days.

         As a consequence, the Secretary of State accepts  that  A  benefits
         from 276B(v) in that "any previous perioed of  overstaying  between
         periods of leave will also be disregarded where  - (a) the previous
         application was made before 24 November and within 28 days  of  the
         expiry of leave...."

         It is therefore  accepted  that  A  has  accrued  10  years  lawful
         residence for the purposes of 276B.  in  these  circumstances,  the
         Upper Tribunal is respectfully invited  to  allow  the  Appellant's
         appeal"

21. In the light of this concession, and for the reasons set out  above,  I
    am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside on the basis that ground 1
    is made out.

22. As regards ground 2, the submission  made  here  is  that  the  judge's
    decision was irrational.  That is  a  high  threshold  to  meet  and  I
    consider that the submission that the  judge  had  failed  properly  to
    assess  the  evidence  before  her  simply  comes  nowhere  near   that
    threshold.  It is evident that the judge  did  take  into  account  the
    evidence of Mr Hussain and gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons  for
    not attaching much weight to it.  It was open to the judge  to  observe
    that there was simply no documentary  evidence  to  back  up  what  the
    appellant said with regard to his children.  This is not a question  of
    whether the judge did not believe him the appellant or  not,  it  is  a
    question of whether the appellant's unsupported evidence was sufficient
    to show that he is in contact with his children.  It was reasonable  to
    expect that evidence to be provided in the circumstances and he did not
    do so.  This was not a case just of whether there was  contact  but  it
    was as to the quality of that contact, its duration and frequency.   It
    was for the appellant to prove his case and it cannot  be  argued  that
    the judge erred in not asking the appellant to produce the evidence and
    accordingly, I consider that ground 2 is not made out.

23. I turn next as to whether the appeal should be remade without the  need
    for a hearing. There has been no correspondence  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors since the respondent's concession of 6 April 2021 which  was
    served on them. In all the  circumstances,  and  bearing  in  mind  the
    overriding objective, I am satisfied that it would  be  appropriate  to
    remake the decision  without  a  further  hearing  given  it  will  not
    prejudice the appellant.

24. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds on
    the  basis  that  the  appellant  has  met  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules. Following the principles set out in TZ(Pakistan) and
    PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109,  and  the  concessions  made  by  the
    respondent, I am satisfied that the  decision  to  refuse  leave  is  a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's article 8 rights and I allow
    the appeal on that basis.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing it on human rights grounds

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 18 May 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

