
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02837/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2020                  |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             B Z S (Afghanistan)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant applied to enter the UK for settlement with her son,  who
    is a recognised refugee in the UK.  The  ECO  refused  her  application
    because she did not fall within any of the categories of family members
    within the rules (a spouse, partner, or child under 18).  The  ECO  was
    not satisfied that she had family life for article 8 purposes with  the
    sponsor, but even  if  she  did,  the  decision  was  proportionate  to
    effective immigration control.

 2. FtT Judge Monson dismissed the appellant's appeal by a  decision  dated
    19 October 2019.  At [14], he recorded that the appellant  acknowledged
    that she could not meet the rules for family reunion  or  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  At [20 - 21], he found that there was family life,
    but that the circumstances were such that the  proportionality  balance
    was not in the appellant's favour.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds  of  (1)
    failure to consider evidence (2) error on proportionality  (3)  failure
    to apply EU law and (4) failure to consider the UNHCR handbook.

 4. FtT Judge Gumsley refused permission on 26 March 2020.

 5. The appellant applied to the UT, on the same grounds.

 6. On 22 May 2020, UTJ McWilliam granted permission on  grounds  2  and  4
    only, finding it arguable that  the  judge  did  not  factor  into  the
    proportionality assessment that this was a family reunion  application,
    the sponsor was a refugee, and the appellant was  part  of  his  family
    unit before he came  to  the  UK.   She  had  applied  along  with  the
    sponsor's wife and children, whose applications were granted.

 7. The UT set directions with a view to deciding  without  a  hearing  (a)
    whether the FtT erred in law and  (b),  if  so,  whether  its  decision
    should be set aside.  Parties were also given the opportunity to submit
    on whether there should be a hearing.

 8. Neither party has sought a hearing.  The UT may  now  decide  questions
    (a) and (b) without one, in terms of rules 2 and 34.

 9. The appellant has filed submissions, dated 21 June 2020.  Her  line  of
    argument on ground (2) is that visits and communications are not family
    life; the correct question was "whether it is proportionate to  prevent
    reconstitution of the family unit the refugee was compelled  to  flee";
    it was an error to fail to take into consideration the refugee context;
    and proportionality required consideration of whether family  life  can
    continue in the state of origin, which in the  case  of  a  refugee  it
    cannot.

10. On ground (4), the UNHCR Handbook is cited on "the wider  principle  of
    the family unit"; at [185], "In  practice  ...  aged  parents  ...  are
    normally considered if they are living in the same household".   It  is
    said that the judge failed to consider that principle, and to  consider
    the case in its proper  context  of  the  UK's  obligation  to  provide
    refuge.

11. The respondent's submissions refer to the FtT's finding that while  the
    position is not optimal,  the  appellant  has  care  and  support,  and
    further funding would be available to  her  if  needed.   The  line  of
    argument is that the judge factored in all relevant  factors,  positive
    and negative; was well aware of the prior  family  situation;  was  not
    obliged to set out a  particular  section  of  the  Handbook;  and  the
    grounds are only a disagreement about weight, which was  a  matter  for
    the judge.

12. I find that the appellant's grounds and  submissions  do  not  disclose
    that the FtT's decision involved the making of any error on a point  of
    law.

13. Although the FtT  found  pre-flight  family  life  to  exist,  for  the
    appellant,  unlike  core  family  members,  that  does  not   translate
    automatically into a right to enter the UK.  The rules, and policy, are
    not the complete  answer  either,  but  they  aim  to  draw  the  lines
    consistently with article 8.  The appellant accepted that she  did  not
    succeed under refugee family reunion rules and policy, or  under  other
    rules and policies for extended family  members,  including  those  for
    adult dependants.

14. It would be an error to  hold  that  visits  and  communication  are  a
    satisfactory alternative way to continue family life; but the FtT  made
    no such error.  It accepted that the outcome was not optimal, and  that
    the appellant missed the sponsor and his family.  It was not  an  error
    to  consider  visits  and  communications  as  part  of  the  balancing
    exercise.

15. It is wrong to suggest that the judge  overlooked  the  refugee  family
    reunion context.  This clearly appears at [1, 4, 5, 7, 8] and,  indeed,
    pervades the decision.

16. The judge took the case as being all about the appellant not being able
    to live in her previous family unit in Afghanistan, and whether she had
    a right to do so in the UK.  That was the essential question.   It  was
    not, as put at [14] of the appellant's submissions, whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life in Afghanistan.  There  clearly
    were such obstacles, but the proposition for the  appellant  goes  much
    too far.  If so, every refugee extended  family  member  would  have  a
    right of entry, without reference to any other considerations.

17. The judge did not err by failing to  cite  a  paragraph  of  the  UNHCR
    Handbook to which he was not referred.

18. The submissions on ground (4) are correct in saying that  wider  family
    members "are considered and that the UK  has  "chosen  to  provide  for
    their admission"; but that admission is subject, in the first place, to
    conditions set by rules and policy.

19. The judge at [20] was persuaded, unlike the respondent, that there  was
    family life.  At [21], and in the decision as a whole,  he  struck  the
    proportionality balance, noting factors both positive and negative.  He
    left nothing relevant out of account, and fell into no  error  of  law.
    The grounds and submissions resolve, as the respondent submits, into no
    more than disagreement over where the judge struck that balance.

20. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

21. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  It is doubtful  whether  that  is
    necessary, but neither party has addressed the  matter.   Anonymity  is
    maintained herein.




    Hugh Macleman


    10 November 2020
    UT Judge Macleman









                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

