
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02586/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 11 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           chandra bahadur gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss O'Callaghan, instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Chandra Bahadur Gurung, was born on 2 July 1984 and is a
    male citizen of Nepal.  The appellant's parents (his father is a former
    Gurkha) came to the United Kingdom to live when the appellant was about
    25 years old.  He is now aged 32 years.  He applied for  settlement  in
    the United Kingdom with his parents but this was refused by a  decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 16 July 2015.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes)  which,
    in a decision which was promulgated on 14  March  2017,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing at Field House on 28 November 2017,  Mrs  Fijiwala,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, conceded that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by error of law.  The judge had failed
    to adopt a structured approach to the evidence when deciding whether or
    not there existed family life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  ECHR
    between the appellant and his parents in the United Kingdom.  The grant
    of permission complains that the judge failed to engaged with the  case
    of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 although that  is  somewhat  unfair  to  the
    judge given  that  that  judgment  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  not
    promulgated until 28 April 2017, more than a month after the First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  Having said that, many of the issues  discussed  by
    the Court of Appeal in Rai  are  relevant  in  the  instant  case  and,
    insofar as the Court of Appeal decision  was  a  clarification  of  the
    existing law, it appears that Judge Parkes erred in his  assessment  of
    family life.

 3. No interpreter was available before the Upper Tribunal and  there  will
    need to be a further fact-finding  exercise  which  is  best  conducted
    before the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now remitted.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  14
    March 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Parkes)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 3 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane








