
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/02548/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |                Decision & Reasons          |
|                                |Promulgated                                 |
|On 7 August 2018                |                On 1 October 2018           |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE - SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DRJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (the claimant):  Mr A Maqsood, Counsel, ICS Legal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal is against the refusal dated 4 January 2016  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to grant the claimant, a citizen of Jamaica where  he
    was born in June 1966, entry clearance as the partner of ED, a  British
    citizen born in 1969 (the sponsor).  The refusal was on the  basis  was
    that the claimant's exclusion from the United Kingdom was conducive  to
    the public good under paragraph S-EC1.4 of Appendix FM  with  reference
    to his conviction of a criminal offence on 4 March 1966 in  the  United
    States  of  America  for  which  he  was  sentenced   to   ten   years'
    imprisonment.  The Entry Clearance Officer was however  satisfied  that
    the  relationship,  financial  and  English  language  requirements  of
    Appendix FM had been met.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer also considered the case under Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention.  He accepted there may be family life with
    the  sponsor  but  nevertheless  considered  that  his   decision   was
    proportionate.  Although the claimant had previously visited the United
    Kingdom (in 2014) each application was assessed afresh and on  its  own
    merits.  No satisfactory reason had been advanced why the sponsor would
    be unable to travel to Jamaica and why they could not marry in  another
    country.  The decision was justified by the need to maintain  effective
    immigration and border control.  No exceptional circumstances had  been
    raised and the application therefore did not fall for a grant of  entry
    clearance outside the Rules.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan allowed the appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.  Judge O'Connor's decision finding error of law is annexed; in
    essence, he concluded that  the  FtT  had  not  set  out  with  any  or
    sufficient clarity the path between the findings made and the  ultimate
    outcome of the appeal.

 4. The background circumstances are set out in paragraph  12  of  the  FtT
    decision:

         "12. The Appellant's claim is set out in the application  submitted
             on a day between 3 July  2015  and  25  August  2015,  in  the
             grounds of appeal and  in  his  witness  statements  dated  25
             October 2016 and 24 May 2017.  It is supported by the  witness
             statements and oral evidence of the sponsor and her older son.
              The witness statements and oral evidence of the  sponsor  and
             her older son.  The claim was  amplified  by  the  Appellant's
             representative's oral submissions.  In short the Appellant met
             the sponsor in 1987 and resumed their acquaintance in  January
             2011.  Since then the sponsor has visited him in  Jamaica  and
             he has visited her and her sons in the  United  Kingdom.   The
             sponsor finds it difficult to support her  two  sons,  one  of
             whom is profoundly death [sic] and both  of  whom  suffer,  or
             have suffered, from mental ill health.   Given  the  lapse  of
             time since the Appellant's conviction, his good  record  since
             his release from imprisonment, the education and employment he
             has undertaken and the strong relationship  he  has  with  the
             sponsor and her two sons he does not represent a risk  to  the
             community and should be admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
             support the Appellant and her sons.  The sponsor  cannot  join
             the Appellant in Jamaica because her sons require her support,
             they are all settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  her  sons
             require her support,  they  are  all  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom and her younger son refuses to travel to Jamaica."

 5. The FtT also made findings of fact which have not been disputed by  any
    response Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedures  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  These findings  are  captured  in  UTJ  O'Connor's  decision  at
    paragraph 5:

         "5.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was heard by Judge R
             Sullivan on 12 June 2017 and allowed in a decision promulgated
             on 7 July.  The  FtT  concluded  that  the  refusal  of  entry
             clearance led to a breach of Article 8 and, in  so  doing,  it
             made the following pertinent findings;

               i) the claimant visited the United Kingdom lawfully between 9
                  October 2014 and 21 November 2014;






              ii) the claimant and sponsor share a family  life,  they  care
                  for one another and have committed to marry [13];


             iii) the sponsor shares  a  family  life  with  her  two  adult
                  children [14];


              iv)  both  of   the   sponsor's   children   have   continuing
                  relationships of importance  with  their  father  -  there
                  having  been  a  deliberate  attempt  by  the  sponsor  to
                  withhold  relevant  and  important  information  from  the
                  Tribunal in this regard [15];


               v) the sponsor  has  a  history  of  low  mood,  anxiety  and
                  depression  and,  as  of  the  date  of   the   First-tier
                  Tribunal's  decision,  was  suffering  from  anxiety   and
                  insomnia for which  she  has  received  medical  treatment
                  [18];


              vi) the claimant's presence in the  UK  would  not  allay  the
                  sponsor's anxieties, or solve  her  insomnia.   It  would,
                  though, help her cope practically, particularly  when  she
                  is overtired [18];


             vii) the sponsor's son (AD)  has  suffered  depression  in  the
                  past, although he currently requires no treatment in  this
                  regard.  AD does not require the  claimant's  presence  to
                  continue his progress or to  support  him  more  generally
                  [19];


            viii) the sponsor's other son (SD) is profoundly deaf and relies
                  on British sign language to communicate.  He has  suffered
                  from  psychosis,  anxiety  and  depression,  his  symptoms
                  fluctuating from time to time.  As of 22 May 2017, he  had
                  a diagnosis of 'psychotic disorder'.  He receives  medical
                  support,  has  a  dedicated  support  worker  and  a  care
                  coordinator but is, nevertheless, heavily reliant  on  the
                  sponsor [20];


              ix) the claimant's presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not
                  required for SD's health to improve or for SD to return to
                  education.  SD has been making progress and has meaningful
                  support from other sources.  The  sponsor  would  find  it
                  easier to support SD if the claimant was present [20];


               x) it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to  require  the
                  sponsor to move to Jamaica with her children [21]."

 6. Neither Ms Isherwood nor Mr Maqsood sought to dissuade us from treating
    these findings as  our  starting  point.   Prior  to  the  hearing  the
    Secretary of State provided material in relation  to  the  decision  to
    grant the claimant a visit visa in 2014 and the information held in the
    United Kingdom in relation to the claimant's conviction in  the  United
    States that was referred to in the  refusal  decision.   The  following
    emerges from this new material:

      i) The claimant disclosed his deportation from the  United  States  in
         his visit visa application.  This is acknowledged in  the  copy  of
         the decision refusing entry clearance for that visa dated  29  July
         2013.






     ii) There may have been a  misunderstanding  over  the  effect  of  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal against the
         refusal of the visit visa.  An internal minute dated 27 August 2014
         picks this aspect up:


             "Nancy, this case was allowed only to the extent that  it  was
             remitted back to the ECO for reconsideration and it  was  this
             decision that we did not challenge.  If you  do  not  wish  to
             issue then you would have the option to re-refuse.  But  given
             the judge's recommendation the ECO would now need to  consider
             Article 8. Kind regards Lisa Spoke to ECM - as  allowed  under
             Article 8, unable to justify a refusal under Article 8."


    iii) A visa was issued on 27 August 2014.




     iv) The  United  States  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  was
         contacted after an interview of the sponsor on 5  October  2015  to
         verify the claimant's immigration history.  Their response  was  in
         these terms:




             "The Conviction date provided in my initially  [sic]  response
             came from the Immigration deportation records.   It  does  not
             specify which charge it relates to or the state in  which  the
             conviction  was  obtained.   He  had  multiple  drug   related
             convictions, one in 1991 in New Jersey; some  others  in  Ohio
             where he was charged utilizing the name P, M A and P, P.  I am
             not permitted to provide any  details  so  hope  this  general
             information helps."




         Ms Isherwood confirmed that this was the full response from DHS.




      v) According to one of four case abstracts from the United States  the
         claimant has used an alias M P. His address is given  as  Dover  in
         New Jersey. A case numbered 92000932 was initiated on 5 July  1992.
         A despatch date is recorded as 29 November 1995  and  the  sentence
         date as 2 August 1996,  with  the  reason  added  "guilty  plea  as
         charg".  A further abstract refers to  the  initiation  of  another
         case numbered 92000006 against the claimant on  30  December  1991.
         The despatch date is  given  as  9  November  1992  with  the  same
         sentence date of 2 August 1996.  The reason given is "guilty jury".



     vi) The additional  abstracts  provide  material  in  relation  to  the
         offences.  As to case number 92000932 (the  charge  for  which  the
         claimant pleaded  guilty)  the  offence  was  the  manufacture  and
         distribution  of  CDS-heroin/meth/LSD  for  which  there   was   an
         incarceration length of five years  and  parole  ineligibility  for
         three years.  As to case number 92000006, (the charge for which the
         claimant was found guilty by  a  jury)  the  recorded  offence  was
         distribution on/near school property/bus.  The sentence length  was
         five years and again ineligibility for parole for the  first  three
         years.


    We deduce from the material at (iv) to (vi) above that the claimant was
    convicted of the manufacture and/or distribution of what would be known
    as Class A drug offences in the United Kingdom and was found guilty  by
    the jury of distribution on or near school property or a (school bus).


 7. The sponsor gave evidence.  She  was  distressed  because  one  of  her
    brothers, a businessman had been shot on 18 July.  We ensured that  she
    had a break during the course of questioning by Ms Isherwood  and  only
    proceeded with her assurance and confirmation from Mr Maqsood that  she
    was fit and able to give evidence.  During that evidence, she confirmed
    that she had been told by the claimant that he had used an alias in the
    United States.   She understood the offences led to the one  conviction
    which she saw as cumulative.  The claimant  had  informed  her  of  his
    convictions from "day one".   She was not aware of other convictions.

 8. The sponsor further confirmed that when her sons travelled  to  Jamaica
    with their biological father they saw the claimant.  Her  parents  live
    in Jamaica, cared for by one of her surviving four brothers although he
    is currently in hospital.  The sponsor has  continued  to  suffer  ill-
    health attributed to low blood pressure and panic attacks.   A  further
    source of stress is her recent understanding that her elder son Alex is
    no longer attending college.  He spends his life on his computer.   Her
    younger son was particularly anxious over the possibility of her  going
    to Jamaica following her brother's death to help her  elderly  parents.
    She has no family in the UK apart from her  children.  The  sponsor  is
    employed by the NHS on flexible terms.  She has  visited  the  claimant
    two occasions since their relationship developed from 2011.  The  first
    was in January 2013 and the second in August 2016, on each occasion the
    duration was some three to four  weeks.   To  complete  the  evidential
    picture of visits,  the  chronology  by  Mr  Maqsood  in  his  skeleton
    arguments shows that the claimant came here on  the  visit  visa  on  9
    October and left on 21 November 2014.

DISCUSSION

 9. As acknowledged by the parties the current Rules are  relevant  to  our
    consideration of this case under Article 8  in  the  light  of  section
    85(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which
    provides:

         "4.  On an appeal under section 82(1)... against  a  decision  [the
             Tribunal] may  consider  ...  any  matter  which  [it]  thinks
             relevant to the substance of the decision, including  evidence
             ... a matter arising after the date of the decision."

10. An important issue at the heart of this appeal is the assessment of the
    public interest in regulating  the  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  of
    foreign nationals who have been convicted of a crime outside the United
    Kingdom.  At the time of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  of  4
    January 2016 paragraph S-EC.1.4. of  Appendix  FM  of  the  version  of
    Immigration Rules in force since 22 December  2012  (HC  760)  provided
    that:


             "The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive  to
             the public good because they have:


          a) been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years; or


          b) been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months
             but less than 4 years, unless a period of 10 years has  passed
             since the end of the sentence; or


          c) been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 12  months,
             unless a period of 5 years has passed since  the  end  of  the
             sentence.


         Where this paragraph applies, unless refusal would be  contrary  to
         the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating
         to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal  will
         be outweighed by compelling factors."

11. There  is  no  dispute  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  correctly
    considered that the claimant's  offending  in  the  United  States  was
    caught by 1.4.(a).

12. Mr Maqsood has helpfully charted in his amended skeleton  argument  the
    history of changes in the Rules relevant to this case from the date  of
    decision to the present as follows:

         "3.  Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC  309  dated  07
             December 2017 amended para 1.4. from 11 January 2018 above  by
             providing that:

                  "In paragraph  S-EC.1.4.,  delete  "Where  this  paragraph
                  applies, unless refusal would be  contrary  to  the  Human
                  Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol  Relating
                  to the Status of Refugees, it will only be in  exceptional
                  circumstances that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
                  refusal will be outweighed by compelling factors."

         4.   At the same time the same  paragraph  was  also  deleted  from
             paragraph 320(2). Explanatory memorandum to the  statement  of
             changes in immigration rules presented  to  Parliament  on  07
             December 2017 (HC 309) provides that:


                  "7.5.    The last part of paragraph 320(2) in Part  9  was
                      introduced on 22 November 2012 (HC 760).  The  policy
                      intention was to emphasise  the  public  interest  in
                      refusing to permit a person convicted of  a  criminal
                      offence to enter the UK. That  remains  an  important
                      policy aim, but it was not the intention to create  a
                      separate  public  interest  test  to  the  now   well
                      established public interest test that must  be  taken
                      into  account  in  the  assessment  of  human  rights
                      claims. This section of paragraph 320(2) is therefore
                      being deleted, together with the other  instances  of
                      this paragraph in Appendix  Armed  Forces  (paragraph
                      8(d)),  Appendix  FM  (in  paragraph  S-EC.1.4)   and
                      Appendix V (in paragraph V3.4)."

         5.   Paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules provides that:


                      ""conviction" means conviction for a criminal offence
                  in the UK or any other country."

         6. Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 290 dated  20  July
            2017 inserted  exceptional  circumstances  (including  GEN.3.2.)
            paragraph in general requirements. HC 290 provides that  changes
            set out in this statement shall take effect from 10 August  2017
            and will apply to all decisions made  on  or  after  that  date.
            GEN.3.2. provides that:


                  "(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4),  where  an  application
                      for entry clearance or leave to enter or remain  made
                      under this Appendix, or an application for  leave  to
                      remain which has otherwise been considered under this
                      Appendix, does not otherwise meet the requirements of
                      this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules,  the  decision-
                      maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-
                      paragraph (2) apply.

                  (2)  Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the  decision-
                      maker must consider, on the basis of the  information
                      provided  by  the  applicant,   whether   there   are
                      exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal
                      of entry clearance, or leave to enter  or  remain,  a
                      breach of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
                      Human Rights, because such refusal  would  result  in
                      unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  applicant,
                      their partner, a relevant  child  or  another  family
                      member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that
                      information would be affected by a decision to refuse
                      the application.

                  (3)  Where the exceptional circumstances  referred  to  in
                      sub-paragraph (2) above apply, the applicant will  be
                      granted entry clearance or leave to enter  or  remain
                      under,  as  appropriate,  paragraph  D-ECP.1.2.,   D-
                      LTRP.1.2., D-ECC.1.1., D-LTRC.1.1.,  D-ECPT.1.2.,  D-
                      LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-ECDR.1.2."


         7. The explanatory memorandum to HC 290 provides that:




                    1. The Supreme Court judgment in MM (Lebanon) &  Others
                       upheld the lawfulness under Article 8 (the right  to
                       respect for private and family life) of the European
                       Convention on Human Rights  of  the  minimum  income
                       requirement for entry clearance or leave  to  remain
                       as a partner or child under the  family  Immigration
                       Rules in Appendix FM and of the basis,  set  out  in
                       Appendix FM-SE (specified evidence), on  which  that
                       requirement must generally  be  met.   However,  the
                       judgment found (a) that other  reliable  sources  of
                       earnings  or   finance,   beyond   those   currently
                       permitted under those Appendices,  should  be  taken
                       into account in circumstances where refusal  of  the
                       application could otherwise breach  Article  8;  and
                       (b) that Appendix FM did not give direct  effect  to
                       the Secretary of State's duty under  section  55  of
                       the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to
                       have  regard,  as  a  primary  consideration,  to  a
                       child's best interests in  an  immigration  decision
                       affecting them.


                    2. The changes set out in this statement  are  intended
                       to give effect to those  findings.   In  particular,
                       they insert new general provisions  in  Appendix  FM
                       (paragraphs GEN.3.1. to 3.3.) which:

                           Require  the  decision-maker,  in  the  specified
                           circumstances, to consider  whether  the  minimum
                           income requirement is met if the other sources of
                           income, financial support or funds set out in the
                           new paragraph 21A of  Appendix  FM-SE  are  taken
                           into account.  The  specified  circumstances  are
                           that, firstly, the minimum income requirement  is
                           not otherwise met and, secondly,  it  is  evident
                           from the information provided  by  the  applicant
                           that there are  exceptional  circumstances  which
                           could render refusal of the application a  breach
                           of  Article  8  because  it   could   result   in
                           unjustifiably   harsh   consequences   for    the
                           applicant, their partner or a child under the age
                           of 18 years who it is evident would  be  affected
                           by a decision to refuse the application;

                           Require the decision-maker, where an  application
                           for entry clearance or leave to  remain  made  or
                           considered under Appendix FM does  not  otherwise
                           meet the relevant requirements of the Immigration
                           Rules, to go on to consider, on the basis of  the
                           information provided by  the  applicant,  whether
                           there are exceptional circumstances  which  would
                           render refusal of the  application  a  breach  of
                           Article   8   because   it   would   result    in
                           unjustifiably   harsh   consequences   for    the
                           applicant or their family. This brings  the  test
                           of  proportionality  under  Article  8  into  the
                           Rules. That test was previously  applied  by  the
                           Secretary  of   State   (through   guidance)   in
                           considering whether to grant  leave  outside  the
                           Rules on Article 8 grounds. The substance of  the
                           test was upheld by the Supreme Court in Agyarko &
                           Ikuga v the Secretary  for  the  Home  Department
                           [2017] UKSC 11.   These  changes  mean  that  the
                           Immigration  Rules   now   provide   a   complete
                           framework   for   the   Secretary   of    State's
                           consideration   on   Article   8    grounds    of
                           applications under  Appendix  FM  by  a  partner,
                           child, parent or adult dependent relative; and"

13. Mr Maqsood has also provided extracts from the respondent's guidance to
    his caseworkers as follows:

         "13. Page 21 of the Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as  a  Partner  or
             Parent): 5-Year  Routes  October  2017  instructions  provides
             that:


             "In considering the suitability criteria under  paragraphs  S-
             EC.1.2. to S-EC.1.5. of  Appendix  FM,  decision  makers  must
             refer to the Criminality Guidance:


             . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)


             . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)"

         14.      Page 14  of  71  of  the  Respondent's  Guidance:  General
             grounds for refusal Section 2 -  version  29.0  Published  for
             Home Office staff on 11 January 2018 provides that:


                  "However,  on   rare   occasions   the   most   compelling
                  circumstances may  arise  in  which  it  is  necessary  to
                  consider making an exception despite the mandatory  nature
                  of  paragraphs  320(2),   S-EC.1.4,   AF8(d)   and   V3.4.
                  Exceptions  will  fall  into  one  of  the   following   3
                  categories


                   . failing to grant entry would be a breach  of  the  UK's
                     obligations under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
                     Rights (ECHR)
                   . there are exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  entry
                     must be granted despite the conviction
                   .  an  applicant's  conviction  is  for  an  offence  not
                     recognised in the UK"


         ...


         16.  Page 20 of General grounds for refusal  Section  1  -  version
             29.0 Published for  Home  Office  staff  on  11  January  2018
             provides that:


                  "Sentences of 4 years or more imprisonment


                  If the applicant was convicted of an offence and sentenced
                  to at least 4 years you must  refuse  entry  clearance  or
                  leave to enter. You can make  a  mandatory  refusal  under
                  paragraph 320(2)(b) and S-EC1.4(a) in Appendix  FM  and  V
                  3.4(a) of Appendix V of the Immigration Rules, see related
                  links.


                  There is no time limit on how long the  Home  Office  will
                  take into account a conviction in this category.


                  However, you must consider if  there  are  any  compelling
                  factors which amount to an exceptional  reason  why  entry
                  clearance should be granted. For further information,  see
                  below, exceptional cases."

         17.  Page 21 of General grounds for refusal  Section  1  -  version
             29.0 Published for  Home  Office  staff  on  11  January  2018
             provides that:


                  "Exceptional cases


                  Section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
                  Act  2002  provides  that  the  deportation   of   foreign
                  criminals is in the public interest for  the  purposes  of
                  Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
                  (ECHR). Similarly, it is also in the public interest  that
                  foreign criminals are prevented from  entering.  It  is  a
                  fundamental aim of  Home  Office  policy  to  protect  the
                  public in the UK.


                  However,   on   rare   occasions   the   most   compelling
                  circumstances may  arise  in  which  it  is  necessary  to
                  consider making an exception despite the mandatory  nature
                  of  paragraphs  320(2),   S-EC.1.4,   AF8(d)   and   V3.4.
                  Exceptions  will  fall  into  one  of  the   following   3
                  categories:


                    . failing to grant entry would be a breach of the  UK's
                      obligations under the ECHR
                    . there are exceptional circumstances that  mean  entry
                      must be granted despite the conviction


                      .an applicant's conviction  is  for  an  offence  not
                      recognised in the UK"

14. Mr Maqsood maintains that the claimant is not  a  foreign  criminal  as
    defined in statute and he also provides an extract  from  further  Home
    Office guidance as follows at paragraph 20 of his amended skeleton:



         "20. The Appellant is clearly not a foreign criminal as defined  in
             the statutes. The Respondent's guidance: Criminality:  Article
             8 ECHR cases Version 6.0 published for Home Office staff on 22
             February 2017 provides on page 13 that:

                  "Deportation on the basis of convictions abroad


                  Where deportation is pursued solely on the basis of one or
                  more overseas conviction, the person liable to deportation
                  will not meet the definition of a foreign criminal set out
                  at section 117D(1) of the  2002  act  and  will  not  fall
                  within any of the criminality thresholds at paragraph  398
                  of the Immigration Rules. This means  the  claim  will  be
                  considered outside the Immigration Rules,  but  the  rules
                  must be used as a guide, because they reflect Parliament's
                  view of the balance to be struck between  an  individual's
                  right to private and family life and the public interest.


                  Where a subsequent Article 8 claim is successful,  because
                  an exception to deportation is met or  because  there  are
                  very  compelling  circumstances,  limited  leave  will  be
                  granted outside the Immigration Rules  for  a  period  not
                  exceeding 30 months, subject to  such  conditions  as  the
                  Secretary of State deems appropriate. The period of  leave
                  to be granted, and any conditions to be attached  to  that
                  leave, must be determined on a case-by-case basis."

15. Sections 117A and 117D(2) of the 2002 Act  (relevant  to  this  appeal)
    provide:

         "Section 117A.  Application of this Part


         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


               a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and


               b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                  Rights Act 1998.



         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


               a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and


               b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C
         ...


         117D.  Interpretation of this Part


         ...


         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a)  who is not a British citizen,


             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and


             (c)  who-

                 (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                    least 12 months,


                 (ii)  has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                    serious harm, or


                 (iii) is a persistent offender.


                 ..."

16. In essence, Mr Maqsood's  case  is  that  taking  the  changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules, read with the  respondent's  guidance,  a  different
    approach to the weight to be given to the public interest where someone
    has been convicted abroad from the assessment of  the  public  interest
    where the conviction has been in the UK is required.  Had the intention
    been to apply the "in-country" deportation standards by an  analogy  to
    the admission rules, the amendments to the Rules would have  stated  so
    in the accompanying memorandum. He argues that the correct approach  is
    to see whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest where there has been foreign offending rather than very
    compelling circumstances as would be the  case  for  domestic  criminal
    offending.

17. In Entry Clearance Officer (United States  of  America)  v  MW  (United
    States of America) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 1273 the Court of Appeal  gave
    guidance as to the approach to  be  taken  when  applying  the  earlier
    version of  paragraph S-EC.1.4. of Appendix FM (set out in paragraph 10
    above).  The respondent in the case had been convicted in  2005  of  an
    offence for which he received a sentence of imprisonment of four years.
     Further offending led to another conviction in May 2008 for  which  he
    was sentenced to sixteen months'  imprisonment.   His  application  for
    entry clearance was based on his relationship with a  British  national
    whom he met in 2012. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal.   The
    Entry Clearance  Officer  was  unsuccessful  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

18. The court referred to Hesham Ali (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  16   and
    considered  that  the  provisions  in  the  Rules  "do   represent   an
    authoritative statement of public policy, broadly consistent  with  the
    2007 Act and the "new Rules", and as such must be considered  carefully
    (and expressly) by a Court or Tribunal considering a case to which they
    apply" (paragraph 35 of the judgment of the court).

19. After expressing concern over the clumsiness of the concluding sentence
    in the version of S-EC.1.4., the court held at [37]:

         "In our view the intention behind S-EC.1.4. was  to  emphasise  the
         public interest in maintaining refusal.  The intended  meaning  was
         that compelling factors will usually be required  to  outweigh  the
         public interest in maintaining refusal.  That  is  consistent  with
         the approach in deportation cases.  In  MF  (Nigeria),  this  court
         emphasised that in considering the deportation of foreign criminals
         where the provisions of paragraph 399 and 399A do not  apply,  then
         "very compelling reasons will be required to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation" (paragraph  43).   We  consider  that  the
         policy here must carry similar weight, and the emphasis  marked  by
         the phrase "very compelling reasons" is appropriate.  It  would  be
         surprising if the policy in  regard  to  those  living  abroad  but
         seeking to enter the United Kingdom were to be  more  liberal  than
         the policy affecting those already resident here."

20. The Court of Appeal  however  explained  in  [39]  that  there  may  be
    circumstances relevant to a Human Rights Convention claim when applying
     the policy:

         "39. However, we accept that there may be important distinctions in
             the application of the policy, as Miss Revill has argued.   In
             a deportation case,  the  UK  conviction  and  sentence  arise
             within a familiar  legal  system,  and  can  be  taken  to  be
             reliable indicators of the severity of  the  criminality,  and
             thus the degree of public interest in deportation.   In  cases
             of application for entry, the  same  does  not  apply  in  all
             cases.  The illustration arose in argument that, in  a  number
             of countries, homosexual acts  lawful  here  are  regarded  as
             criminal and can be vitiated with imprisonment for four  years
             or longer.  Such circumstances might well  be  relevant  to  a
             Convention or asylum claim."

21. As was the position before the Court of Appeal, no  such  circumstances
    arise in  the  case  before  us.   The  UK  criminalises  drug  related
    activities of the kind for which the claimant was convicted.

22. The disappearance of the reference to  the  Human  Rights  and  Refugee
    Conventions in the concluding paragraph to S-EC.1.4 in the changes made
    in December 2017 was matched by it resurfacing  in  GEN.3.2.  with  the
    consequence disappearance of a reference to compelling factors and  the
    substitution of a reference to "unjustifiably harsh consequences".   Mr
    Maqsood argues that the provisions in GEN.3.2. cannot be  construed  to
    be providing a distinct threshold specifically for Article 8  admission
    cases where criminality is involved compared to the threshold  where  a
    non-criminal  background  applicant  fails  to  meet  the  requirements
    illustrated by reference to those who have litigation debt or NHS debt.



23. Mr Maqsood is correct that the claimant is not a  foreign  criminal  as
    defined in Part 5 of the 2002 Act.  He seeks to distinguish MW  (United
    States of America) on the basis that the Secretary of State has not, in
    the revisions to the Rules, expressed the same intention with reference
    to very compelling reasons.  He further argues that the conclusions  in
    MM (Uganda) & Anor v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617 exclusively  focusses  on
    the situation of foreign criminals liable for deportation.   He  argues
    that the same approach  is  not  relevant  to  cases  where  a  foreign
    national seeking entry committed crimes abroad.

24. It is correct that the provisions of the Rules considered by the  Court
    of Appeal in MM (Uganda) in section  117C  and  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules refer to the phrase "unduly harsh" as to  the  impact
    on a partner or child affected by deportation.  Laws  LJ  concluded  at
    [23] to [25]:

         "23. The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and  (2)  the  need  for  proportionate  assessment   of   any
             interference with Article 8  rights.   In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach to the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of foreign  criminals,  is  especially
             vouched by Parliament in  section  117C(1).   Section  117C(2)
             then provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  "The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal."

         24.   This  steers  the  Tribunals  and   the   Court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or partner will be unduly harsh.   In  the  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   "unduly   harsh"
             provisions  from  their  context.   It  would  mean  that  the
             question of undue hardship would  be  decided  wholly  without
             regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in
             the particular case.  But in that case the  term  "unduly"  is
             mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in a given  case.   In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history.

         25.  The issue is not advanced with respect either by the terms  of
             the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance   in   the   Immigration
             Directorate Instructions or the learning on  the  use  of  the
             term "unduly harsh" in  the  context  of  internal  relocation
             issues arising in refugee law.  The IDIs are not a  source  of
             law and the asylum context of internal  relocation  issues  is
             far removed from that of Rules 398 to 399 ..."

25. In our  judgment  the  principle  established  in  MW  (United  States)
    continues to be applicable notwithstanding the changes  to  the  Rules.
    The reference in GEN.3.2 to "unjustifiably harsh consequences" does not
    mean that less weight is to be given where a conviction  in  a  foreign
    country is the inhibiting factor to entry unless the conviction was  in
    circumstances of the kind considered by the court in MW (United States)
    in [41].  We conclude that, by analogy, the principles  established  in
    MM (Uganda) apply equally to situations where the public interest is to
    be evaluated where a foreign national  with  a  conviction  is  seeking
    entry.  The justification for harsh consequences must be  by  reference
    to the conviction in question.  Whilst GEN.3.2. applies  to  all  cases
    where an application for entry clearance or leave to  enter  or  remain
    which does not meet the requirements of the Rules, it does  not  follow
    that a less rigorous approach applies to those seeking entry  who  have
    been convicted of crimes abroad when deciding the weight to be given to
    the public interest in the article  8  proportionality  exercise.   The
    Rules read with the guidance to staff and  the  explanatory  memorandum
    cannot be understood to  indicate  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    decided that less weight is to  be  given  to  foreign  offending  when
    compared with convictions arising in the UK.

26. We turn now to the circumstances of the claimant's offending.  We  give
    little weight to the sponsor's confused evidence over her understanding
    of the claimant's convictions.   She was invited to recall what she had
    been told by the claimant and we accept that he had  told  her  of  his
    conviction at some point prior to his application  for  a  visit  visa.
    Furthermore, we do not give any weight to the claimant's silence in the
    application under Appendix FM on the fact of his deportation  from  the
    United States.  This is because he indicated in his earlier application
    for a visit visa that he had been deported as  revealed  in  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer's  decision.   The  application  under  Appendix  FM
    required him at question 28 to say whether he had been  "...  deported,
    removed or otherwise required to leave any country including the UK  in
    the last ten years?".  The  claimant's  statement  dated  24  May  2017
    explains that he was returned from the  United  States  to  Jamaica  in
    2006.  The application under Appendix FM was made between 3 July and 25
    August 2015.  It refers to the  claimant  having  been  issued  with  a
    passport by Jamaica on 10 June 2005.   It  does  not  state  where  the
    passport  was  issued.   The  extracts  referred  to   above   indicate
    eligibility by the claimant for parole after a period of  time  and  it
    appears to us this is likely to have happened.  Taking account  of  the
    date of issue of the passport we think it likely that the claimant  was
    returned to Jamaica in 2005 or earlier.

27. The claimant's statement dated 24 May 2017 explains that in 1994 he was
    living in Columbus, Ohio. He frequented a  Caribbean  restaurant/record
    store. In February or March 1994 he agreed to accompany the  restaurant
    managers to a play after closing hours.  On reaching their home address
    where the managers planned to get dressed, he  was  surrounded  by  the
    police, ordered out of his car, handcuffed and placed  in  one  of  the
    escort cars.  The same happened to his co-accused after the police  had
    gone into their house.  At no time were any drugs or its  paraphernalia
    found on him nor was he part of any sale or of distribution  of  drugs.
    The claimant was later informed that undercover agents  and  informants
    had purchased drugs from the restaurant/record  store  which  had  been
    made whilst he was there on numerous occasions.  He  was  charged  with
    conspiracy  to  possess  and  distribute  "a  control  substance"   and
    initially pleaded not guilty.  The indictment stated that he had  known
    about the activities at the store and had not reported it.  Further  he
    was a look-out person.  He was refused  a  plea  deal  offered  by  the
    prosecutor but changed his mind on appointment of  the  jurors  in  the
    light of the government's conviction rate. He pleaded  guilty  and  was
    sentenced to 10 years imprisonment at a minimum security facility.

28. In a further witness statement dated 10 October 2017  (in  anticipation
    of his appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal),  the  claimant  refers  a  case
    against him in February 1993 and to legislation described as  mandatory
    sentencing guidelines which the sentencing judge was  required  to  use
    without discretion suggesting a minimum of ten years.

29. It appears to us that the date in the abstract (at [6(v)] above)  is  a
    reference to earlier proceedings in New Jersey  (with  case  initiation
    dates of 30 December 1991 and 7 May 1992) in  which   the  claimant  is
    recorded to have  pleaded  guilty  to  the  first  indictment  for  the
    manufacture  or  distribution  of  CDS-heroin/meth/LSD.   It  is   also
    recorded that he was found guilty by the jury on a second indictment of
    distribution on or near a school property or bus. He was sentenced  for
    both of offences on 2 August 1996.

30. The position is not entirely clear but we find that  the  claimant  was
    convicted of drug related offences on two occasions; once  on  his  own
    evidence when he was living in Columbus, Ohio and on  earlier  occasion
    in New Jersey when he was living in Dover. We are certain that  he  was
    sentenced to 5 years on each indictment in New Jersey in 1996  although
    it is not clear whether the sentences were concurrent  or  consecutive.
    We do not have independent evidence of the sentence passed in  relation
    to the admitted Ohio convictions when it is possible the  claimant  was
    already serving these earlier sentences.  In any event we find that the
    claimant has not been  candid  about  the  extent  and  nature  of  his
    offending during his time in the US.  The time that  has  passed  since
    the claimant's offending is considerable but nevertheless he  is  still
    caught by S-EC.1.4. in the light of the length of imprisonment of  over
    four years.  In our judgment the absence of  candour  by  the  claimant
    reduces the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  passage  of  time  in  the
    proportionality exercise.  The public interest in  excluding  him  from
    the UK remains high reflected in the sentences passed.

31. The finding by the First-tier Tribunal that the sponsor shares a family
    life with the claimant has been preserved.  The intensity of the family
    life needs to be considered  in  the  context  of  the  proportionality
    exercise.  The claimant and sponsor have  seen  little  of  each  other
    since 2011.  We consider it significant that the claimant did not  stay
    for the duration of the period for which his visit visa was granted  in
    2014 although we accept that it may have  been  work  commitments  that
    required him to return to Jamaica.  All in all,  they  have  seen  each
    other for a total of some eleven weeks since 2011.  We are in no  doubt
    however that the sponsor is fond  of  the  claimant  but  although  his
    presence in the United Kingdom would be  ideal  to  help  her  and  the
    sponsor's sons lead their lives, it cannot be said that his presence is
    essential.  The relationship between the claimant and  sponsor  is  one
    which has developed over a distance with occasional meetings; we expect
    would flourish were the claimant be granted entry clearance. It is very
    different however from a relationship between a cohabiting couple.

32. The First-tier Tribunal did not find family life between  the  claimant
    and the sponsor's two children.  We are bound to  give  weight  to  the
    sponsor's deception in respect of the role of their  biological  father
    in their lives.  We do still do not have as full a picture as we  would
    like.  Whilst we are considering proportionality on the basis that  the
    claimant has a good relationship with the two  sons  we  also  consider
    proportionality on the basis that it is not  open  to  the  sponsor  to
    relocate to Jamaica in the light of the  continuing  demands  that  her
    sons make on her as well as her own career as found by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

33. All the above factors need to be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    familiar Razgar steps.  We  are  satisfied  that  family  life  remains
    engaged between the claimant and sponsor in this case to  a  degree  of
    private life between the claimant and her adult children.  Although  we
    have expressed reservations about the intensity  of  that  family  life
    nevertheless we are satisfied that the decision of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer was sufficient for the Convention to be engaged.  There  is  no
    dispute that the decision is lawful  and  for  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining immigration control.  In the light of the acknowledgment by
    the Entry Clearance Officer of  the  eligibility  requirements  of  the
    Rules having been met,  the  proportionality  exercise  must  therefore
    focus on the suitability requirements owing to the criminal  offending.
    That offending was very serious having regard to  its  nature  and  the
    length of sentences passed.  There  is  a  strong  public  interest  in
    excluding someone with such a background from the UK.

34. We have considered how the public interest is to  be  assessed  in  the
    light of the grant of the  visit  visa.   Mr  Maqsood  submits  in  his
    skeleton that the  claimant  had  a  legitimate  expectation  that  his
    application  would  not  be  jeopardised  by  his  history  which   was
    "previously known" and did not  result  in  a  refusal.   Ms  Isherwood
    submits in her skeleton argument that the visa grant did not  create  a
    legitimate expectation that the "current" application would be granted.
    In  our  view  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  there  was  a
    misunderstanding by the Entry Clearance Manager of the  effect  of  the
    FtT decision allowing the appeal.  We cannot rule out that  he  or  she
    considered the  offending  was  not  sufficient  to  refuse  the  visit
    application. Nevertheless we have found that the claimant has not  been
    honest about the extent of his offending  and  this  case  concerns  an
    application for settlement in the UK rather than a temporary visit. The
    lack of candour by the claimant and his evidence that seeks to diminish
    the seriousness of his  offending  are  relevant  to  the  weighing  of
    positive pull of the grant of the visit visa.  We do not consider  that
    any legitimate expectation was created by the visit  decision  and,  in
    our judgment, whilst some  weight  should  be  given  to  this  aspect,
    overall it does not materially affect matters.   This  remains  a  case
    where there is an absence of very compelling  circumstances  sufficient
    to defeat the public interest. We give due weight to the nature of  the
    family and private life at stake in this case however for  the  reasons
    we have given above, these are not strong  components.   The  potential
    for the passage of time since offending to  be  a  positive  factor  is
    counteracted by the claimant's lack of candour and his downplaying  the
    extent and nature of his offending.  Even if we were persuaded that the
    lower standard for the  assessment  of  the  public  interest  that  Mr
    Maqsood has argued applies is the right approach, we would come to  the
    same conclusion. Either way we are satisfied that on any  analysis  the
    decision to refuse the claimant entry clearance  is  proportionate  and
    does not breach article 8.

DECISION

By way of summary therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
aside for error of law.  We remake the decision and dismiss  the  appeal  by
the claimant against the refusal of entry clearance.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 24 September 2018

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



ANNEX

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/02548/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 November 2017                       |                                   |
|Dictated: 3 November 2017                |                                   |
|                                         |...................................|
|                                         |....                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Sheffield
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     DRJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, instructed by ICS Legal

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the claimant  herein
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the claimant or any member  of  the  claimant's  family.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I refer herein to DRJ as 'the claimant'.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on June 1966.   He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 4 January 2006,  refusing  him  entry  clearance  -  such
    application having  been  founded  on  his  relationship  to  ED  ("the
    sponsor"), a British citizen.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") provided the following  summary  of
    the reasons for refusing entry clearance:

         "Your exclusion from the UK is conducive to the public good under S-
         EC1.4 of Appendix FM because:

         .    Records held in the United Kingdom indicate that you have been
             convicted of a criminal offence on 04.03.1996  in  the  United
             States of America for which you were sentenced to imprisonment
             for ten years.

         .    You have therefore been convicted of an offence for which  you
             have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least
             four  years,  I  therefore  refuse  your   application   under
             paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules
             (S-EC.1.4.(a))."

 4. The ECO also considered Article 8 ECHR, concluding that the application
    did  not  identify  any  exceptional  circumstances   requiring   entry
    clearance to be granted.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was heard by Judge R Sullivan
    on 12 June 2017 and allowed in a decision promulgated on  7  July.  The
    FtT concluded that the refusal of entry clearance led to  a  breach  of
    Article 8 and, in so doing, it made the following pertinent findings:

      i) the claimant visited the United Kingdom lawfully between 9  October
         2014 and 21 November 2014;

     ii) the claimant and sponsor share a family life,  they  care  for  one
         another and have committed to marry [13];

    iii) the sponsor shares a family life with her two adult children  [14];



     iv) both of the sponsor's children  have  continuing  relationships  of
         importance with their father -  there  having  been  a  deliberate
         attempt  by  the  sponsor  to  withhold  relevant   and   important
         information from the Tribunal in this regard [15];

      v) the sponsor has a history of low mood, anxiety and depression  and,
         as of the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, was suffering
         from anxiety and  insomnia  for  which  she  has  received  medical
         treatment [18];

     vi) the claimant's presence in the UK would  not  allay  the  sponsor's
         anxieties, or solve her insomnia. It would, though, help  her  cope
         practically, particularly when she is overtired [18];

    vii) the sponsor's  son  (AD)  has  suffered  depression  in  the  past,
         although he currently requires no treatment in this regard. AD does
         not require the claimant's presence to continue his progress or  to
         support him more generally [19];

   viii) the sponsor's other son (SD)  is  profoundly  deaf  and  relies  on
         British  sign  language  to  communicate.   He  has  suffered  from
         psychosis, anxiety and depression, his  symptoms  fluctuating  from
         time to time.  As of 22 May 2017, he had a diagnosis of  'psychotic
         disorder'.  He receives medical support, has  a  dedicated  support
         worker and a care coordinator but is, nevertheless, heavily reliant
         on the sponsor [20];

     ix) the claimant's presence in the United Kingdom is not  required  for
         SD's health to improve or for SD to return  to  education.  SD  has
         been making progress and has meaningful support from other sources.
          The sponsor would find it easier to support SD if the claimant was
         present [20];

      x) it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to require the sponsor to
         move to Jamaica with her children [21].

 6. At [24] of its decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  concludes  that  the
    claimant does not meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM.  In
    doing so the tribunal identified that it had not been provided  with  a
    complete account of the offence that had led the claimant to be given a
    sentence of ten years' imprisonment in the United  States.  It  further
    concluded  that  the  claimant  does  not  represent  a  high  risk  of
    reoffending, and that the sponsor has sufficient financial resources to
    ensure that the claimant would not need to call on public funds  whilst
    in the United Kingdom.

 7. The Tribunal, at [30] of its decision, found as follows:

             "This is a difficult case.  I have no doubt that  the  sponsor
             would benefit from the appellant's presence and that they very
             much wish to be together.  I have no doubt  that  the  sponsor
             would find it easier  to  cope  with  daily  routines  and  to
             support her two sons with the  appellant  present  to  support
             her.  On the other hand the significant  sentence  imposed  on
             the appellant in 1996 is suggestive of  serious  offending;  I
             acknowledge a public concern about the admission of those  who
             have committed serious offences  while  recognising  that  the
             appellant is not at  high  risk  of  reoffending.   I  am  not
             satisfied that either the sponsor or the  appellant  has  been
             completely candid about relevant  matters;  that  is  of  some
             concern.  Neither  [SD]  nor  [AD]  requires  the  appellant's
             presence to continue progress in health or education.  All  of
             the sponsor, [SD] and [AD] have the  support  of  medical  and
             other services in the United Kingdom.  Paragraph  391  of  the
             Rules provides  a  useful  analogy;  had  the  appellant  been
             deported from the  United  Kingdom  the  continuation  of  the
             deportation order would have been  the  proper  course  unless
             that  course  breached  the  1950  Convention  or  there  were
             exceptional  circumstances  meaning  that   continuation   was
             outweighed by compelling factors.  On balance I  am  satisfied
             that there are compelling factors in this case to outweigh the
             public interest in the  refusal.   I  have  particularly  been
             influenced by  [SD's]  ill-health  and  the  difficulties  the
             sponsor has in coping with that.

         31.  I find that the  refusal  was  disproportionate  and  breaches
             Article 8."

Discussion and Decision

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly granted permission to  appeal  in  a
    decision of 29 August, in the following terms:

         "(4) The respondent sought permission on the basis that  inadequate
             reasons have been given.  This was against the  background  of
             the finding that the sponsor  had  not  been  frank  with  the
             Tribunal and  in  reference  to  parity  with  provisions  for
             deportation.   These  grounds  and  other   grounds   advanced
             indicate an arguable error of law."

 9. At the outset of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Khan accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  contains  two  errors  of  law
    capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  that  as  a
    consequence it ought to be set aside.  Given this  concession,  I  need
    only  briefly  set  out  the  reasons  why  I  conclude  that  it   was
    appropriately made.

10. The First-tier Tribunal fails to identify the  particular  features  of
    the case which, despite the claimant not meeting  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, are  sufficiently  compelling  to  lead  to  the
    conclusion that Article 8 would be  breached  by  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.  For the most part  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal lead a  reader  of  the  decision  down  the  path  towards  a
    conclusion adverse to the claimant.  The FtT does not set out with any,
    or sufficient, clarity the path  between  the  findings  made  and  the
    ultimate outcome of the appeal.

11. The one feature of the case which is  seized  upon  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, at paragraph 30 of its decision, is  "[SD's]  ill-health  and
    the difficulties the sponsor has in coping with that."   However,  when
    viewed in the context of the findings made by the Tribunal elsewhere in
    its decision, particularly those relating to  the  assistance  SD  gets
    from the state and from her father, the prominence this aspect  of  the
    case attracts in the Tribunal's ultimate conclusion is baffling. It may
    well be that the "sponsor would find it easier to  support  SD  if  the
    appellant was present", but that is a long way from being sufficient of
    itself to rationally lead to  the  conclusion  that  refusal  of  entry
    clearance would breach of Article 8. No other  compelling  factors  are
    identified in the concluding paragraphs of the decision,  nor can  they
    be easily identified from the rest of decision itself.

12. There are further areas of  concern  within  the  FtT's  decision.  For
    example, at [21] the First-tier Tribunal concludes  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to require the sponsor to move with her adult children  to
    Jamaica.  It is readily apparent from the FtT's decision, however, that
    this  conclusion  was  reached  absent  an  analysis  of  all  material
    circumstances - including the  claimant's  offending.  In  MM  (Uganda)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450, the Court of Appeal concluded  that  consideration
    must be given to the wider circumstances of  the  case  and  not  focus
    entirely on the interests and circumstances of  the  children  when  an
    assessment is being undertaken of whether it would be unduly  harsh  to
    require family members to leave the United Kingdom  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the applicant.  It may well be that the approach
    taken by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) is not to be taken in cases
    where the decision under  challenge  is  made  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, but this is not something the FtT gave any consideration to.

13. Further concern arises from by the FtT's consideration of the  risk  of
    the claimant reoffending.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that the claimant was not at a high risk of reoffending,  there  is  no
    consideration of, or conclusion on, the risk that is in fact  posed  by
    the claimant.  This is clearly a matter relevant to the proportionality
    assessment.

14. For all these reasons, I conclude that it is appropriate to  set  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The parties agreed that the  Upper
    Tribunal should remake the decision, and I concur.  In  doing  so,  the
    Tribunal will need to consider the correct approach to appeals in which
    it is said that the suitability requirements under the  Rules  are  not
    met because the applicant  has  a  conviction  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Secretary of State posits that a similar approach  should
    be taken in such cases to  that  which  is  taken  in  appeals  against
    refusals  to  revoke  deportation  orders.   The  claimant  is  yet  to
    formulate his position on this issue.   It  is  also  likely  that  the
    Tribunal will need to consider the correct approach to be taken to  the
    issue of whether it would be unduly harsh for the  sponsor  and/or  the
    sponsor's children to move to Jamaica to engage in family life with the
    claimant there, and in particular whether the approach identified in MM
    (Uganda) applies in the circumstances of the instant appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal
will re-make the decision on appeal.


Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                      dated 27 September 2018
