
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02703/2018
                                                           and HU/17127/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2020                   |On 2 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MOULDER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                 Ms ZAKIA SULTANA and MR MOHAMMED ROBI ULLAH
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, Counsel instructed by Hamlet Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS
   1. This is the reserved judgment on the appeal of the Appellants  against
      the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Eden)  (the   "FtTJ")
      promulgated on 9 January 2019. That decision dismissed  their  appeals
      from decisions of the Secretary of State made on 19 November 2017  and
      3 January 2018 to refuse their human rights claims made in conjunction
      with decisions to  refuse  their  applications  for  applications  for
      indefinite leave to remain.

Background

   2. The Appellants arrived in the UK in  July  2007.  The  Appellants  had
      leave to remain until 31 January 2011. On January 2011 the  Appellants
      applied for further leave to remain but failed to complete  a  section
      of the application form. By letter of 21 February 2011 the  Appellants
      were informed that they had not completed  the  application  form  and
      were informed that they should resubmit their application form.  On  6
      April 2011 the Appellants made  an  application  in  person  and  were
      granted leave to remain.

   3. At [5] the FtTJ identified the issue between the parties  was  whether
      the Appellants period of lawful residence in the UK was broken in  the
      period between them receiving the letter dated 21  February  2011  and
      then applying for leave to remain at the premium  Service  appointment
      on 6 April 2011.

Relevant law


   4. The Immigration (Leave to Remain) (Prescribed  Forms  and  Procedures)
      Regulations  2007/882  (the  "Regulations")  provided   (so   far   as
      material):


         "16.-
         (1)  The following procedures are  prescribed  in  relation  to  an
         application for which a form is prescribed by regulations 3 to 14:
         (a)  the form shall be signed and dated by the applicant, save that
         where the applicant is under the age of eighteen, the form  may  be
         signed and dated by the parent or legal guardian of  the  applicant
         on behalf of the applicant;
         (b)  the application shall be accompanied  by  such  documents  and
         photographs as specified in the form; and
         (c)  each part of the form shall be completed as specified  in  the
         form.
         Insert section 3C of the Immigration Act (the "Act")
         17.-
         (1)  A failure to comply with any of the requirements of regulation
         16(1) to any extent will only invalidate an application if:
             (a)   the  applicant  does  not  provide,  when   making   the
             application,  an  explanation  for  the  failure   which   the
             Secretary of State considers to be satisfactory,
             (b)  the Secretary of State notifies  the  applicant,  or  the
             person who appears to the Secretary of State to represent  the
             applicant, of the failure within 28 days of the date on  which
             the application is made, and
             (c)  the applicant  does  not  comply  with  the  requirements
             within a reasonable time, and in any event within 28 days,  of
             being notified by the Secretary of State of the failure."

Immigration Rules

   5. The relevant rules are as follows:

           "276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
            leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  United
            Kingdom are that:
             (i) (a) he  has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence in the     United Kingdom.
                     ...
                     (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of
             immigration laws, except that, where paragraph  39E  of  these
             Rules applies, any  current  period  of  overstaying  will  be
             disregarded.  Any  previous  period  of  overstaying   between
             periods of leave will also be disregarded where -


                  a) the previous application was made  before  24  November
                     2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or


                  b) the  further  application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                     November 2016     and  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
                     applied.

         276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE (1).


             (a)  "continuous  residence"  means  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom for an unbroken period, and for  these  purposes  a  period
         shall not be considered to have been broken where an  applicant  is
         absent from the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or less  at
         any one time, provided that the applicant in question has  existing
         limited leave to enter or remain upon their departure  and  return,
         but shall be considered to have been broken if the applicant:
                (i) has been removed under Schedule  2  of  the  1971  Act,
                section 10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or  has  left
                the United Kingdom having been refused leave  to  enter  or
                remain here; or
                (ii)  has  left  the  United  Kingdom  and,  on  doing  so,
                evidenced a clear intention not to return; or
                (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which  he
                could have had no reasonable expectation  at  the  time  of
                leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or
                (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced  to
                a period of imprisonment or was directed to be detained  in
                an  institution  other  than  a   prison   (including,   in
                particular,  a  hospital  or  an  institution   for   young
                offenders), provided that the sentence in question was  not
                a suspended sentence; or
                (v) has spent a total of more than 18  months  absent  from
                the United Kingdom during the period in question.


         (b)  "lawful  residence"  means  residence  which   is   continuous
         residence pursuant    to:
                (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or
                (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971  Act
                (as  previously  in  force),  or  immigration  bail  within
                section 11 of the 1971 Act, where leave to enter or  remain
                is subsequently granted; or
                (iii) an  exemption  from  immigration  control,  including
                where an exemption ceases to apply  if  it  is  immediately
                followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain.

          (c)  'lived  continuously'   and   'living   continuously'   mean
          'continuous residence', except that paragraph  276A(a)(iv)  shall
          not apply.


         276D. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in
         the United Kingdom is to be refused if the Secretary  of  State  is
         not satisfied that each of the requirements of  paragraph  276B  is
         met.

         Home office guidance: Long residence Version 16 (not  in  force  at
         the time of the relevant decision)
         Out of time applications
         This page tells you about 'out-of-time' applications submitted  for
         10 years long residence applications.
         An applicant applying for an extension of stay or indefinite  leave
         to remain (ILR) on the basis of  long  residence  must  not  be  in
         breach of the Immigration Rules.
         Applications made before 24 November2016
         Where the application was made before 24 November2016 a  period  of
         overstaying of 28 days or less on the date of application  will  be
         disregarded.


         The 28-day period of overstaying is calculated from the  latest  of
         the:
             .end of the last period of leave to enter  or  remain  granted
             (including where an in-time application was submitted but  the
             application was considered invalid)
             .end of any extension of leave under sections 3C or  3Dof  the
             Immigration Act 1971
             .the point that a migrant is deemed to have received a written
             notice of invalidity, in relation to  an  in-time  application
             for further leave to remain where that application was  deemed
             invalid due  to  the  failure  by  the  applicant  to  provide
             biometrics."


Decision letter


   6. In the decision letter dated 3 January 2018  the  Secretary  of  State
      took the view that the appellants had failed to meet the  requirements
      of 276B of the Immigration Rules in that they had failed  to  show  10
      years continuous lawful residence. The conclusion of the Secretary  of
      State was as follows in this regard:


           "On 27 January 2011, you submitted an  in-time  application  for
           leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
           student. The application was rejected on 21 February 2011 as you
           had failed to complete a mandatory section  of  the  application
           form.
           ...
           It is noted that you took 41 days from receiving  the  rejection
           letter on 23 February 2011 to submit  another  application.  You
           did not make a further application for leave to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom until 6 April 2011, therefore there was a gap  of
           63 days from when your leave to enter expired to when  you  were
           granted further leave to remain on the 6 April 2011.
           As this  exceeds  the  28  days  that  can  be  disregarded  for
           applications prior to 24 November 2016, the secretary  of  state
           is not satisfied that you have spent a continuous lawful  period
           of 10 years in the United Kingdom.
           .... If you had chosen to make a further application (which  was
           subsequently granted) in a  timely  manner  within  28  days  of
           receipt of the rejection letter, your continuous  lawful  period
           would not have been broken....
           As there is a gap of 63 days  from  when  your  leave  to  enter
           expired to when you were granted further leave to  remain  on  6
           April 2011, a period which exceeds  the  28  days  that  can  be
           disregarded, the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that  you
           have spent a continuous lawful period of 10 years in the  United
           Kingdom. As you have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  276B
           your application is refused  under  276  D  of  the  Immigration
           Rules." [emphasis added]

First-tier Tribunal

   7. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  under  section  82  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against decisions  of  the
      respondent made in respect of the first appellant on  3  January  2018
      and in respect of the second appellant on 19 November 2017  to  refuse
      their human rights claims,  made  in  conjunction  with  decisions  to
      refuse the applications for indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  on
      the basis of 10 years residence.


   8. The First-tier Tribunal judge noted that although their appeals listed
      a number of grounds of appeal, the only ground permitted under section
      84 of the 2002 Act is that the decision was unlawful under  section  6
      of the Human Rights Act 1998.


   9. Before the First-Tier Tribunal counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State
      relied on the reasons set out in the refusal letter  and  stated  that
      there was a gap in the  10  years  of  lawful  residence  required  by
      paragraph 276B (at [13] of the judgment).


  10. For the Appellants it was submitted that the application  made  on  27
      January 2011 was not decided until the appointment on 6 April 2011. It
      was also argued that the premium service appointment was  made  on  27
      February 2011 which was within the 28-day grace period provided for.

  11. The FtTJ stated (at [17]) that the burden is on the appellants to show
      that the respondent's decisions are unlawful under section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act. He then  stated  that  in  determining  whether  the
      appellants had shown that the decisions were in breach of  article  8,
      he adopted the approach set out in R (Razgar) v SSHD 2004 UKHL 27.


  12. He took the view that the failure to grant  the  appellants  leave  to
      remain was an interference with their private life and it would be  of
      sufficient gravity to engage article 8. He also concluded that refusal
      of leave to remain was in accordance with the law and would be for the
      purposes  of  maintaining  effective  immigration  controls.   As   to
      proportionality  he  first  considered   the   position   within   the
      Immigration Rules.


  13. The FtTJ concluded at [21]  that  the  Appellants  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. He stated:


         "I agree with the respondent  that  they  have  not  had  10  years
         continuous lawful residence in the UK,  as  required  by  paragraph
         276B(i)."


  14. The FtTJ found that on 21 February 2011 the respondent  did  write  to
      the first  appellant  stating  that  there  was  a  problem  with  the
      application and stating clearly what the Appellants needed  to  do  in
      order to meet the requirements of regulation 16. He held at [28]:


          "therefore, the appellants had 28 days from 23 February 2011,  the
          date on which the first appellant acknowledged receipt of  the  21
          February 2011 letter, to meet the requirements of  regulation  16.
          This period expired on 23 March 2011. I consider that on 24  March
          2011, the appellants' applications were invalidated."

  15. At [29] he held that the Appellants did not make an application  until
      6 April 2011 and the making of an appointment  did  not  count  as  an
      application. At [31] he concluded:


         "as the 27 January 2011 application lapsed on 23 March 2011 and the
         making of a premium  service  appointment  does  not  count  as  an
         application, there is no possibility of the 28-day grace period for
         overstaying (either under the immigration rules in 2011,  paragraph
         276 B (v) of the current  immigration  rules  or  the  respondent's
         current policy) applying."

  16. As to the position outside the rules, the tribunal judge concluded
      that there were no exceptional circumstances which would render the
      refusal of leave to remain a breach of article 8.


Submissions


  17. It was submitted by Mr Malik for the Appellants that:


             1. By virtue of regulation 17 of the Regulations the
                application was only invalidated by reason of the
                Appellants failure to comply with the requirement within 28
                days of being notified of the failure to complete the form.
                Accordingly, the applications were only invalidated on 24
                March 2011.


             2. Since the application was valid when made in January, their
                leave was automatically extended under Section 3C of the
                Act until 24 March 2011.


             3. The gap in lawful residence was a period of 12 days from 24
                March until 6 April 2011 and this should be disregarded,
                consistent with the respondent's guidance on Long
                Residence.

  18. In the respondent's written  submissions  for  this  hearing,  it  was
      submitted  that  the  application  of  27  January  was  not  a  valid
      application and therefore did not give rise to section 3C leave  under
      the Immigration Act 1971. The respondent relied on the decision  in  R
      (on the application of Mirza, Iqbal and Ehsan) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 63 at [33]:


           "an  application  which  is  not  validly  made  can   have   no
           substantive effect" and could not engage section 3C of the  1971
           Act as a result."

  19. The respondent therefore submitted that the decision of the First-Tier
      Tribunal on this issue disclosed no material error of law.


  20. Mr Malik for the Appellants  rejected  the  respondent's  reliance  on
      paragraph 33 of Mirza which was dealing with the non-payment  of  fees
      accompanying an application and for which there was express  provision
      in the relevant regulations.


  21. Mr Malik submitted that the position in this  case  was  akin  to  the
      position in Mizra in relation to  the  failure  to  provide  biometric
      information,  namely  that  failure  to  comply  did  not  render  the
      application void ab initio but the application  only  became  void  if
      there was a failure to comply once the notification of the failure  to
      comply had been given.


Discussion

  22. The relevant passage relied  upon  by  the  respondent  in  Mirza  was
      dealing with specific language in different regulations  as  is  clear
      when the entire passage is set out:


           "33.  We must accordingly decide the present appeals within  the
           legislation as it  stands,  there  being  no  challenge  to  the
           legality or rationality of the relevant rules  and  regulations.
           The issues have to be  approached  by  the  application  of  the
           ordinary principles of statutory interpretation. They start from
           the natural meaning of the words in their context. On that basis
           I have no doubt that, at least in respect of  Mr  Iqbal  and  Mr
           Mirza, the Court of Appeal reached the correct conclusion. There
           is no ambiguity in the  words  of  regulation  37  of  the  2011
           Regulations. It provides in terms that if an application is  not
           accompanied by the specified fee the application "is not validly
           made". In ordinary language an application which is not  validly
           made can have no substantive effect. There  is  nothing  in  the
           regulation to exclude section 3C from its scope."

  23. As set out in the judgment the relevant  regulation  being  considered
      was in relation to fees  and  were  the  Immigration  and  Nationality
      (Fees)  Order  2011  and  the  Immigration  and   Nationality   (Fees)
      Regulations 2011  ("the  2011  Order"  and  "the  2011  Regulations").
      Regulation 37 of the 2011 Regulations provided:


           "Consequences of failing to pay the specified fee
           37.  Where an application to which these Regulations refer is to
           be accompanied by  a  specified  fee,  the  application  is  not
           validly made unless  it  has  been  accompanied  by  that  fee."
           [emphasis added]

  24. The date on which the application was invalidated  is  a  question  of
      construction of the Regulations.


  25. Mr Malik relied on the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Mirza  as
      supporting his submission.


  26. In our  view  the  decision  in  that  case  provides  little  if  any
      assistance on the construction of the Regulations. The  provisions  at
      issue in that case related firstly to a non-payment of fees where,  as
      referred to above,  there  was  specific  provision  in  the  relevant
      regulations that  if  the  application  was  not  accompanied  by  the
      relevant fee it was "not validly made".


  27. The second type of case considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Mirza
      involved a failure to provide biometric information. In that case  the
      relevant regulations (Immigration (Biometric Registration) Regulations
      2008) provided that a person subject to immigration control must apply
      for the issue of a biometric immigration document and that on  failure
      to comply the Secretary  of  State  "may"  take  any  of  the  actions
      specified in paragraph (2) of Regulation 23 which included:


           "(b) treat the person's application for leave to remain as
           invalid ...".

  28. The present case differs from those cases in that:


         - There is no specific provision either if the sections of the
           form are not completed, that the application is "not validly
           made" or that the Secretary of State can determine (at a
           subsequent date) to treat the application as invalid.


         - Unlike the position with the biometric information which had to
           be supplied subsequent to the submission of the application
           form, this tribunal is concerned with the initial submission of
           the application form itself.

  29. We do not accept the submission  by  Mr  Malik  that  this  issue  was
      determined by the FtTJ at [28]and it is  not  open  to  respondent  to
      challenge that finding. As set out above, at [28] of the judgment  the
      FTT judge stated:


           "I consider that on 24 March 2011, the appellants'  applications
           were invalidated."

  30. In our view by this statement the FtTJ found that the  date  on  which
      the Appellants had failed to remedy the failure was  24  March,  being
      the date on which the 28-day period expired, but he  did  not  make  a
      finding in that paragraph as to whether the effect of the  Regulations
      was that the application was then void ab initio.


  31. Mr Malik also relied on the decision  in  Kishver  [2011]  UKUT  00410
      (IAC). The tribunal  was  dealing  with  an  earlier  version  of  the
      regulations which for these purposes are in all material respects  the
      same where the appellant had used the wrong form. The Tribunal held at
      [5]:


           "5.  Those Regulations make it clear that it  was  open  to  the
           Secretary of State to treat an invalid application as one  which
           was valid, because invalidity would only arise if the  Secretary
           of State notified the failure..."


  32. It seems to us that the language of Regulation 17 would  suggest  that
      it  is  not  intended  to  render  the  application  void  ab  initio.
      Regulation 17 states:

           "An application will be invalidated..."

  33. Whilst the language is not  free  from  ambiguity,  in  our  view  the
      language suggests that rather than an application "being void/invalid"
      if the form is not completed in full, it is only  invalidated  if,  in
      the  future,  the  failure  is  identified,  and  not  remedied.  This
      interpretation of the words used is  consistent  with  the  provisions
      which then allow for the failure to be notified and remedied within  a
      specified period. This  is  consistent  with  the  approach  taken  in
      Kishver.


  34. As to the purpose behind the language, we were  not  referred  to  any
      materials.


  35. In our  view  Mr  Malik  is  correct  in  his  interpretation  of  the
      Regulations and therefore the period in question for which  there  was
      no valid leave ran from 23rd March 2011 until 6 April 2011.


  36. Accordingly, the conclusion of the FtTJ (and the basis of the decision
      in the letter of the respondent of 3 January 2018) that the period for
      which  there  was  no  leave  exceeded  the  28-day  grace  period  is
      incorrect.


The decision in Ahmed

  37. Mr Malik in accordance with his duty properly brought to our attention
      the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Ahmed) v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
      Civ 1070.


  38. Mr Malik submitted that the decision in Ahmed related  solely  to  the
      Immigration Rules and does not displace  the  published  guidance.  Mr
      Malik sought to pray in aid the head note in the decision of the Upper
      Tribunal in SF v SSHD [2017] UKUT 120(IAC):

           "Even in the absence of a  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"
           ground of appeal, the Tribunal ought to take  the  Secretary  of
           State's  guidance  into  account  if  it  points  clearly  to  a
           particular outcome in the instant case. Only  in  that  way  can
           consistency be obtained between those cases that do,  and  those
           cases that do not, come before the Tribunal."

  39. As Mr Malik had raised the authority of Ahmed,  we  invited  the  Home
      Office Presenting Officer to address this tribunal on the implications
      of Ahmed but he maintained his position that, if  the  Tribunal  found
      that the application only lapsed on 23 March 2011 and was not void  ab
      initio, the Appellants would be within the 28-day grace period allowed
      for in the Guidance and therefore the Appellants would succeed.


  40. The decision of the Court of Appeal in Ahmed on the interpretation  of
      276B is clear.
       At [14] the issue in that case was stated as follows:


           "The issue on this application for PTA is whether it is arguable
           that paragraph 276B(v) operates  so  as  to  cure  short  'gaps'
           between periods of LTR so as to  entitle  persons  such  as  the
           Applicant in the present case  to  claim  "10  years  continuous
           lawful residence "under paragraph 276B(i)(a)."


  41. The court held at [15]:


           "In our view, the wording of paragraph 276B is clear:
              (1)  First,  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276B(i)-(v)  are
           separate, freestanding provisions each of which has to be met in
           order to for  an  applicant  to  be  entitled  claim  "10  years
           continuous lawful residence "under paragraph 276B (see paragraph
           276C).
              (2)  Second, sub-paragraph (v) is not drafted as an exception
           to sub-paragraph (i)(a) and makes no reference to it. There  are
           no words which cross-refer or link  sub-paragraph  (v)  to  sub-
           paragraph  (i)(a),   or   vice-versa,   whether   expressly   or
           inferentially.
           ...
              (4)  The critical point is that the disregarding  of  current
           or previous short periods of overstaying for the purposes of sub-
           paragraph (v) does not convert  such  periods  into  periods  of
           lawful LTR; still less are such periods to be" disregarded" when
           it comes to considering whether an applicant has  fulfilled  the
           separate requirement of establishing "10 years continuous lawful
           residence "under sub-paragraph (i)(a).
           ...
              (8)  If and insofar as reliance is placed on the SSHD's" Long
           Residence" Guidance (Version 15.0) published on 3rd April  2017,
           this does not avail the Appellant. We note that "Example 1"  and
           "Example 2" on page 16 of the Guidance say that "gaps in  lawful
           residence" can be disregarded because "the  rules  allow  for  a
           period of overstaying of 28 days or less when that  period  ends
           before 24 November 2016". This does not  accord  with  the  true
           construction of paragraph 276B as set out above, although it may
           reflect a policy adopted by the SSHD. However, it  is  axiomatic
           that the intention of the Rules is to be discerned  "objectively
           from the language used" not from e.g.  guidance  documents  (per
           Lord Brown in Mahad (Ethiopia) v. Entry Clearance Officer [2010]
           1 WLR 48 (2009) at paragraph 10). The  SSHD  may  wish  to  look
           again at the Guidance to ensure that it does not go any  further
           than a statement of policy.

  42. In our view in light of Ahmed, the appellants cannot succeed in  their
      appeal on the basis that the FtTJ was in error in concluding that  the
      appellants did not qualify for leave under the Rules.


  43. The decision in SF related to the situation  where  an  assessment  of
      whether it would be reasonable for a British citizen  child  to  leave
      the UK had to be made and there was  published  guidance  as  to  what
      would be regarded as reasonable.
           In such circumstances it was found that the tribunal should  take
           into account the guidance in order  to  ensure  consistency.  The
           Upper Tribunal held:


           "10. It is clear that the appellants do  not  have  available  to
           them a ground of appeal on the basis that the decision was not in
           accordance with the law such as before the amendments made to the
           2002 Act by the 2014 Act they might  have  had.  Nevertheless  it
           appears to us that the terms of the  guidance  are  an  important
           source of the Secretary of State's view of what is to be regarded
           as reasonable in the circumstances, and it is  important  in  our
           judgement for the Tribunal at both levels to make decisions which
           are, as far as possible, consistent with decisions made in  other
           areas of the process of immigration control"


  44. It  was  submitted  by  Mr  Malik  that  in  circumstances  where  the
      appellants are entitled to indefinite leave to  remain,  there  is  no
      proportionate justification for their removal from the United  Kingdom
      as  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  point  to  the  importance   of
      maintaining immigration control as a factor weighing in her favour  in
      the proportionality exercise.


  45. It seems to us that contrary to  the  submissions  of  Mr  Malik,  the
      appellants are not "entitled" to indefinite leave to  remain  as  they
      fail to meet the requirements of the Rules and do not meet the test of
      "exceptional circumstances" to be granted leave outside the Rules. The
      existence of the Policy does not bring them within the Rules, nor does
      it provide a basis on which they can establish a right to a  grant  of
      leave outside the Rules. The appellants have failed to show  that  the
      decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error of law such  that
      the decision should be set aside.


Decision:

Consequently, the appeals against the decision of the FtTJ are dismissed.




Signed                              Date: 28/2/20

Mrs Justice Moulder
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


