
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02647/2018
                                                               HU/02648/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 April 2019                   |On 1st May 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                        Mrs DARSHANABEN VISHAL PATEL
                         Mr VISHAL DINESHKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman (Counsel) instructed by London Imperial
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Connor promulgated on 09/01/2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellants' appeal.

Background

3.    The second Appellant is  the  first  appellant's  husband.  The  first
appellant  was  born  on  15/05/1985.  The  second  appellant  was  born  on
02/07/1984.  Both  appellants  are  Indian  nationals.  On  02/01/2018   the
Secretary of State refused the Appellants' applications for leave to  remain
on the basis of long residence in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Connor  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22/03/2019 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Dr H H Storey gave permission to appeal stating

    "It is arguable that  the  Judge,  although  referring  to  KO  and  to
    MA(Pakistan) failed to apply guidance given in MA(Pakistan) in  respect
    of children resident for (more) than 7 years, required  when  assessing
    reasonableness or strong reasons to be  shown  for  requiring  them  to
    leave"

The Hearing

6.    For the appellants, Mr Rehman moved the grounds of appeal. He took  me
straight to page 57 of the appellant's bundle, which is a copy of the  grant
of leave to remain which the respondent  has  now  made  in  favour  of  the
appellant's son, who was  born  on  18  November  2010.  The  respondent  is
satisfied that the appellant's son meets the requirements of  paragraph  276
ADE(1) of the rules.

7.    Mr Walker immediately told me that the appeal is no  longer  resisted.
He told me that the decision contains a material error of  law  because  the
Judge did not  correctly  consider  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
child. He asked me to set the decision aside and substitute my own  decision
allowing the appeal.

Analysis

8.    The Judge's findings of fact start at [32] of the decision. The  Judge
finds that neither of the  appellants  can  succeed  under  the  immigration
rules. At [46] the Judge starts to consider the position of the  appellant's
son. At [48] the Judge finds that, at the date of  hearing  the  appellant's
son was seven years and 10 months old,  and  correctly  identifies  that  he
must assess whether or not it is reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

9.    At [55] the Judge finds that is reasonable for the appellant's son  to
leave the UK with his parents. At [57] the Judge says that he finds that

    "The decision is in accordance with the law."

That is an irrelevant finding because it does  not  relate  to  a  competent
ground of appeal.

10.   The Judge's findings are based almost entirely on the  fact  that  the
appellants and  their  son  need  not  be  separated.  The  Judge  conflates
separate  tests  of  the  child's  best  interests  with  the  question   of
reasonableness of return. That is a  material  error  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside. I am able to substitute my own decision.

My findings of fact.

11.   The appellants are husband-and-wife. They  have  one  child,  who  was
born on 18 November 2010 in the UK. The first appellant entered  the  UK  on
26 October 2009 as a student. Leave to remain has  been  extended  until  28
September 2016. The second appellant has been granted  leave  to  remain  as
the first appellant's dependent. The grants of leave  to  remain  (for  both
appellants) were curtailed by the respondent to expire on 5 June 2016.

12.   On 4 June 2016 the first appellant submitted an application for  leave
to remain as a tier 1 highly  skilled  entrepreneur.  The  second  appellant
submitted an application as the dependent of the first  appellant.  Both  of
those applications were  refused  on  18  October  2016.  Applications  were
submitted for administrative review which concluded  on  30  November  2016,
when the respondent adhered to the original decision. On  17  December  2016
both appellants submitted an application on article 8  ECHR  grounds,  which
resulted in the respondent's decision dated 2 January  2018,  against  which
the appellant's appeal.

13.   On 2 April 2019 the appellant's  son  made  his  own  application  for
leave to remain in the UK. On 4  April  2019  the  respondent  granted  that
application. The appellant's son now has limited leave to remain in  the  UK
for 30 months from 4 April 2019. The respondent  has  told  the  appellant's
son that he has now embarked on a 10-year-old route  to  settlement  in  the
UK.

The Immigration Rules

14.   The appellant's son meets the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
of the immigration rules which says

    '276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

          (iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
         the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
         imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK; or ...'

15.   The appellants cannot meet the requirements  of  appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules because neither of them is either  a  British  citizen  or
settled in the UK. Because of their age and the length  of  time  that  they
had been in the UK, neither of the appellants can meet the  requirements  of
paragraph 276 ADE(1)(i) to (v) of the rules. There  is  no  evidence  placed
before me  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration,  so  that  the
appellants fail to discharge the  burden  of  proving  that  they  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

16.   There is no reliable evidence before me to  indicate  that  either  of
the appellants meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

Article 8 ECHR

17.   In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..." In  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
11, Lord Reed (when explaining how  a  court  or  tribunal  should  consider
whether a refusal of leave to remain was compatible  with  Article  8)  made
clear that the critical issue was generally whether, giving  due  weight  to
the strength of the public interest in removal,  the  article  8  claim  was
sufficiently  strong  to  outweigh  it.   There  is  no  suggestion  of  any
threshold to be overcome before proportionality can be fully considered.

18.   I have to determine the following separate questions:

    (i)    Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8

    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with

    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

19.   Article 8 family life exists for the appellant in the UK. On  4  April
2019 their only son was granted leave to remain in the  UK  for  30  months.
The respondent decided it was not reasonable  for  the  appellants'  son  to
leave the UK.

20.   Section 117 B6 of the 2000 and to act says

         '(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

21.   It is beyond dispute that the appellants' son is a  qualifying  child.
The  public  interest  in  immigration  control   is   outweighed   by   the
respondent's concession that it is not reasonable to expect the  appellants'
child to leave the UK. It is beyond  dispute  that  the  appellants  have  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with their son.

22.   Things have moved on since the Judge's decision was promulgated  on  9
January  2019.  The  change  in  circumstances  makes  the   proportionality
assessment for me much simpler. The proportionality assessment  is  informed
entirely by statutory provision. The public interest in immigration  control
is outweighed because the respondent accepts that it is  not  reasonable  to
expect the appellants' qualifying son to leave the UK.

23.   The appellants have established family life. The  grant  of  leave  to
remain to the appellants' son combined with the terms  of  section  117B  of
the 2002 Act make it clear that the interference with the right  to  respect
for family life is disproportionate.

24.   The appellants' appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.

CONCLUSION

25.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9 January  2019
is tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

26.   I substitute my own decision.

27.   The appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed      Date 25 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


