
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/02105/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On April 8, 2019                        |On April 16, 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  mrs s s a
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Juroo, Counsel, instructed by Healys LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a Pakistani national, applied for entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom as the dependant of her son. The respondent refused her
    application on December 8, 2017 under Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on January 4, 2018 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. Her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth on
    December 4, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on January 7, 2019, her
    appeal was refused under article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on January 30, 2019 and Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth granted permission on February 15,
    2019 finding it arguable the Judge may have erred by failing to attach
    sufficient weight to the medical evidence and in his assessment of
    relocation.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Juroo adopted the grounds of appeal and the skeleton  argument  that
    he had submitted. The Judge had erred in  his  approach  to  article  8
    after finding in paragraph 11 that the appellant  enjoyed  family  life
    only to later find there  was  no  family  life.  There  was  extensive
    medical  evidence  about  the  appellant's  medical   condition   which
    demonstrated she suffered from a psychotic condition and poor  physical
    health. The Judge did not challenge the psychiatrist's diagnosis but he
    erred by failing to give the appropriate weight to her actual condition
    as set out in the psychiatrist's report  which  effectively  said  that
    part of her problems was her son was the only person who could  provide
    the care she needed.

 7. The care she needed is as set out in paragraphs 58 and 59 of Briticis v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368. Whilst the decision in Ribeli  v  ECO  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 611 should not  be  overlooked  he  submitted  that  case  was
    distinguishable from this case because of  the  facts  appertaining  to
    this case.

 8. The expert evidence in this case made it clear that only  care  from  a
    close family member would address the  appellant's  situation  and  the
    only person able to provide this  case  was  her  son.  In  considering
    paragraph E-ECDR  2.5  the  Judge  should  consider  whether  care  was
    available in this country and not whether the appellant's son should go
    and look after the appellant in Pakistan because the provision of  care
    only became relevant outside of the Rules under article 8 ECHR.

 9. Mr Juroo further submitted  the  Judge's  approach  to  article  8  was
    flawed. The Judge had looked at 117A and B outside the  proportionality
    assessment when they were integral to the  proportionality  assessment.
    He submitted the Court should apply the test set out in Rhuppiah [2018]
    UKSC 58 because the appellant spoke English and sponsor was  very  well
    off. The Judge erred  by  re-examining  if  family/private  life  under
    article 8  was  engaged  because  he  previously  accepted  it  was  in
    paragraph 11 of the decision.

10. The crucial question he should have asked was whether it was reasonable
    to expect the sponsor to relocate  to  Pakistan,  as  per  para  69  of
    Ribeli, to look after mother in circumstances where he has never  lived
    in Pakistan, as he had been born in  Saudi  Arabia,  and  he  had  been
    living here in the United Kingdom since  he  was  18  and  had  British
    children. He submitted it was not reasonable for the sponsor  to  leave
    his wife and children to go and look after  the  appellant.  Whilst  he
    said he would consider looking after her, Mr Juroo submitted  this  was
    only said to keep her hopes up.

11. Mr Avery opposed the application and submitted that  whilst  the  Judge
    accepted there was some limited family  life  this  was  a  preliminary
    gateway and meant the Judge could consider a full article 8 claim. From
    paragraph 39 onwards he made it clear the case could not succeed  under
    article 8 ECHR. At paragraph 24 the  Judge  stated  he  considered  the
    evidence carefully and had regard to the fact the  appellant  was  well
    enough to travel to the United Kingdom and the psychiatric  report  was
    based on what he was told by appellant and was not determinative of the
    appeal.

    FINDINGS

12. The appellant submitted an application for entry clearance as the adult
    dependant  of  a  person  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Both  the
    respondent and Judge identified the  correct  legislation  to  consider
    this appeal under was Section EC-DR of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The respondent refused the application  because  he  argued  the
    appellant did  not  satisfy  Section  EC-DR1.1(d)  which  required  the
    appellant to demonstrate she met all of the requirements of Section  E-
    ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative.
    Reliance was placed on Appendix FM-SE (paragraph 35) which required:

         " Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with the
         practical and financial help of the sponsor in the  UK,  to  obtain
         the required level of care in the country  where  they  are  living
         should be from:
         (a) a central or local health authority;
         (b) a local authority; or
         (c) a doctor or other health professional."

13. By the time the  appeal  came  before  the  Tribunal,  the  appellant's
    representatives had submitted additional  evidence  which  they  argued
    addressed the concern raised in the decision letter. It  was  therefore
    argued the Rule was met. The medical evidence also  was  said  to  have
    addressed the other argument advanced by  the  respondent  namely  that
    privately or government funded care was available in Pakistan.

14. The Judge noted the following:

      a) The appellant had been residing alone in Pakistan since 2008 having
         lived in Saudi Arabia with her husband (who died in  2007)  between
         1979 and 2008.

      b) The UK sponsor (her son) had left Saudi Arabia (he was born  there)
         in 2002 and come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  university,
         graduating in 2005 and became a British  citizen  in  2012.  He  is
         employed by UBS Investment Bank as an Executive Director  and  held
         the position of Head of Solutions Structuring Europe.

      c) The appellant had been able to travel to the  United  Kingdom  most
         years since 2008 and had also travelled to  America  to  visit  her
         daughter. Her last visit to the United Kingdom was in June 2017.

      d) A psychiatric report from Dr Saleem was  prepared  and  the  author
         concluded that her mental health would only  deteriorate,  and  the
         best option would be for her to be reunited with her children.

      e) The appellant and sponsor enjoyed  a  family  life  as  defined  in
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

      f) The Judge had  regard  to  a  witness  statement  provided  by  the
         appellant which outlined her physical and mental health issues  and
         indicated she also suffered with rheumatoid  and  gouty  arthritis,
         low mood, severe insomnia and tiredness.

15. Mr Juroo challenged the approach the Judge took to the report  provided
    by Dr Saleem. Reference was made to the decision  of  Britcits  and  in
    particular paragraph 59 which states-
         "First, the policy intended to be implemented by the new ADR Rules,
         as appears from the evidence, the new ADR Rules themselves and the
         Guidance, and confirmed in the oral submissions of Mr Neil Sheldon,
         counsel for the SoS, is clear enough. It is twofold: firstly, to
         reduce the burden on the taxpayer for the provision of health and
         social care services to those ADRs whose needs can reasonably and
         adequately be met in their home country; and, secondly, to ensure
         that those ADRs whose needs can only be reasonably and adequately
         met in the UK are granted fully settled status and full access to
         the NHS and social care provided by local authorities. The latter
         is intended to avoid disparity between ADRs depending on their
         wealth and to avoid precariousness of status occasioned by changes
         in the financial circumstances of ADRs once settled here."

16. The Court of Appeal emphasised that the court must consider (a) whether
    the provision of health and social care services could  reasonably  and
    adequately be met in their home country and (b) where their needs could
    only be met in the United Kingdom that the appellant should be  granted
    fully settled status and full access to the NHS  and  any  social  care
    available with the local authority.

17. Mr Juroo  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  recognise  or  place
    sufficient weight on the fact that the appellant's restricted  physical
    abilities arose from her severe mental health and argued that the Judge
    failed to recognise Dr  Saleem's  opinion  that  the  appellant's  best
    interests were best served being cared for by her son.

18. I find the Judge was aware of Dr Saleem's opinions  because  the  Judge
    recorded the same in his decision including his view that the appellant
    would not have access to adequate  treatment  for  her  serious  mental
    illness in Pakistan but the Judge balanced the content  of  the  report
    against the oral submissions advanced at the hearing namely that it was
    accepted she would be able to access psychiatric services.

19. The Judge noted the standard of services in Pakistan fell beneath those
    offered in the United Kingdom but that was  not  the  test  to  succeed
    under this Rule. The correct approach is set out by the Court of Appeal
    in Briticis namely whether the provision  of  health  and  social  care
    services could reasonably and adequately be met in their  home  country
    and (b) where their needs could only be met in the United Kingdom.

20. The Court of Appeal considered the level of care available  in  appeals
    such as this in the two cases cited in paragraph 7 above and the  Judge
    considered both cases within his decision.

21. Contrary to Mr Juroo's submission, the Judge took  on  board  that  the
    issue was the appellant's mental health and had regard to the  guidance
    that had been issued after the authorities cited in paragraph 7  above.
    The Judge concluded in paragraph 27 of his decision that  the  evidence
    did not come remotely close to coming within the Rules with  the  Judge
    noting that the appellant had been able to visit the United Kingdom  on
    an almost yearly basis and that it was open to the sponsor to visit the
    appellant in Pakistan.

22. The Judge did have regard to Mr  Juroo's  submission,  advanced  today,
    that she was vulnerable living  alone  and  her  condition  would  only
    worsen if the status quo remained but he concluded the report failed to
    engage with the fact the appellant did have other relatives, who  lived
    nearer, who should have been factored into the assessment. I refer  the
    parties to the Judge's assessment in paragraph 28 on this issue.

23. As the Court of Appeal stated in Briticis the first  test  was  whether
    the provision of health and social care services could  reasonably  and
    adequately be met in their home country  and  the  Judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 29 and 31 of the decision that this had not been addressed in
    either the report of other objective evidence.

24. Having considered the submissions advanced on ground one I  am  of  the
    view that the Judge carefully approached this appeal and  did  consider
    the relevant points that arose from the evidence. The  Judge  did  take
    into account what was contained in the reports  and  the  view  of  the
    expert but ultimately concluded the provision of health and social care
    services could reasonably and adequately be met in their home  country.
    He rejected the submission she could only  receive  health  and  social
    care in the United Kingdom.

25. The Judge considered the  case  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    article 8 ECHR and the challenge, under  ground  two,  related  to  the
    Judge's approach to proportionality.

26. In paragraph 11, the Judge accepted there was family  life  and  whilst
    the Judge in paragraph 42 appears to move away from that position it is
    important to note that the decision  does  not  end  at  that  juncture
    because at paragraph 45 the Judge reiterated that he accepted there was
    family life.

27. Mr Juroo submitted the Judge considered sections 117A and 117B  outside
    the "proportionality" assessment. He refers to the fact that the  Judge
    dealt with this prior to considering proportionality  as  evidenced  by
    his approach in paragraph 36 of the  decision.  I  accept  findings  on
    reference to the NHS are dealt with in paragraph  37  and  the  Judge's
    assessment on proportionality commenced from paragraph 39.

28. The Judge did not say the sponsor had to leave his  wife  and  children
    but merely found that he could, if he was prepared  to  do  so,  go  to
    Pakistan  or  he  could  continue  the  current  state  of  affairs  as
    previously found.

29. As this was an entry clearance application many  of  the  section  117B
    factors were not relevant  and  ultimately  the  Judge  had  to  decide
    whether  it  was  disproportionate  to  refuse  her  entry.  The  Judge
    concluded the public interest outweighed the arguments advanced and  on
    the evidence that was a conclusion open to the Judge. A different Judge
    may have reached a different conclusion but that does  not  mean  there
    was an error in law.

30. There was no error in law.

    DECISION

31. There was no material error in law and I uphold the decision.



Signed                              Date     11/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date     11/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
