
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02740/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 18 December 2017                 |On 12 January 2018                      |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               Wahib Abi Faraj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - amman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Roberts, Cromwell Wilkes
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Wahib Abi Faraj, was born on 29 August  1968  and  is  a
    male citizen of Lebanon.  On  29  January  2017,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) Amman refused the appellant entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom for settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his  wife.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kainth) which,  in
    a decision promulgated on 18 September 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 18  December  2017,  Mr  Bramble,  who
    appeared for the Entry Clearance Officer, did not seek to  support  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  The decision itself is confused and  its
    outcome, in the light of the  findings  made  by  the  judge,  arguably
    unintelligible.  At [27], the judge wrote:

         "Before I consider proportionality itself, I must  examine  whether
         there is justification for  the  decision  appealed.   I  begin  by
         considering this in the light of the public interest considerations
         set out in Section 117A  and  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  as
         amended.  The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
         the public interest and therefore refusing entry to  a  person  who
         meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules  have  provided  no
         ground to suggest that Article 8 should be invoked in their favour,
         is sufficient reason and justification for exclusion."

 3. I have struggled to understand the meaning of that paragraph.  Further,
    it is not clear why the  judge  refrained  from  allowing  this  spouse
    settlement application appeal on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  having  found
    unequivocally at [32] that "the appellant meets the requirements  under
    the Immigration Rules as a partner".

 4. In the circumstances, and in the light of the  helpful  submissions  of
    both representatives, I have set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision
    and have remade the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  18
    September 2017  is  set  aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    dated 29 January 2017 is allowed on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
