
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02571/2015
                                                               HU/03480/2015
                                                               HU/03481/2015
                                                               HU/03482/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2016                            |On 25 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                              MS, RS, SM and AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by UK Immigration Advisors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the respondents
    as the appellants (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The first and second appellants are husband  and  wife  and
    are citizens of Pakistan.  The third and fourth  appellants  are  their
    children (born in 2007 and 2009 respectively) who are also citizens  of
    Pakistan.  They appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    17 July 2015 refusing them leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 3 and 8, ECHR).  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bashir)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 21 April 2016, allowed  the  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The parties agree that none of the appellants can succeed under HC  395
    (as amended).  The appeal turned upon the  medical  conditions  of  the
    third and fourth  appellants.   These  children  suffer  from  Duchenne
    Muscular Dystrophy (DMD).  The appellants entered  the  United  Kingdom
    together on 25 September 2013 (the first appellant  was  a  student  in
    this country) and the children were diagnosed with DMD in  2014.   Both
    children are in full-time education in the United Kingdom  and  receive
    care from Leeds Teaching Hospital.

 3. The  judge  set  out  a  number  of  detailed  findings  regarding  the
    circumstances of the children in particular.  As regards Article 3 ECHR
    he found that the high threshold established by D [1997] 24 EHRR 43 and
    N [2005] UKHL 31 had not been crossed in the case of these children who
    "do not face imminent  death,  neither  do  they  face  ...inhumane  or
    degrading  conditions."   The  children  are  seriously  ill  but   are
    currently coping well with a disabling condition.  The judge's findings
    as regard Article 3 have not been challenged.

 4. The judge found that  the  children  are  receiving  a  good  level  of
    education and also medical treatment in the United Kingdom.   He  found
    that accessing a decent education in Pakistan might  prove  problematic
    especially on account of their DND condition and  that  the  "level  of
    treatment" which they are receiving at the Leeds hospitals would not be
    available in Pakistan [25].

 5. Allowing the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  the  judge  found  that,
    notwithstanding the fact that they had only been living in  the  United
    Kingdom for some 30 months, the children had established a private life
    within the meaning of  Article  8  "the  loss  of  which  would  impact
    strongly upon their physical and psychological  integrity."  [34].  The
    judge found "the third and fourth appellants have  established  private
    life with the caregivers at school and others."  He also found that the
    medical conditions of the  children  would  lead  to  a  social  stigma
    falling upon their parents on return to Pakistan which, in turn,  would
    lead to the social isolation of  the  family  there.   Ultimately,  the
    judge found that "it would not be in the best interests of the children
    to return them to Pakistan as they have established a private  life  in
    the  UK."   He  found  that  there  were  "exceptional   compassionate"
    circumstances which would lead the Tribunal to allow the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State, in the grounds of appeal, asserts that none  of
    the appellants have come close to satisfying the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Having found  that  the  children  would  not  face
    degrading treatment or imminent death in Pakistan, the judge should not
    have found that there would be an unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  should
    they be returned to that country.  The judge had failed to explain how

         the appellants' departure from the UK and  the  resulting  loss  of
         links with [health] professionals resulted in a  strong  impact  on
         their physical  and  psychological  integrity.   These  links  were
         formed with those individuals on a professional basis rather than a
         personal or private basis therefore there is no reason why  similar
         relationships   could   not   be   established   with    healthcare
         professionals in Pakistan.

 7. I  find  that  there  is  considerable  force  in  the  last  of  those
    submissions.  I am not persuaded that private  life  relationships  (as
    understood  in  the  context  of  Article  8  ECHR)  can  normally   be
    established between an individual and  those  who  provide  (out  of  a
    professional obligation) that individual  with  medical  treatment.   I
    agree also that one's relationship with one's doctor can be  replicated
    by similar professionals in a different jurisdiction.  Further,  whilst
    the children may be emotionally engaged with those providing  treatment
    to them at the present time, there is no reason to  believe  that  such
    emotions are reciprocated by the health professionals.  In  conclusion,
    I am not satisfied that, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal or for the reasons given by the judge, the  third  and  fourth
    appellants have established  in the United Kingdom private  lives  such
    as merit protection under Article 8 ECHR.   In  the  short  period  (30
    months) during which they have  been  living  in  this  country,  there
    appears to be no evidence that the  children  have  established  strong
    private life links  with  other  individuals  or  groups  within  their
    community.

 8. The judge clearly had sympathy with this family and with  the  children
    in particular.  However, an  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  can  only
    succeed if Article 8 is in the first instance engaged by the  existence
    of a family and/or private life.  I am not satisfied that the judge was
    entitled to find on the basis of the evidence before him  that  any  of
    these appellants have  established  sufficiently  strong  private  life
    links in the United Kingdom during the short period during  which  they
    have been living here.

 9. In the circumstances, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
    I have remade the decision on the  basis  of  the  evidence  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellants'  appeals  against  the
    decision of the respondent are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  21  April
2016 is set aside.   I  have  remade  the  decisions.   The  appeal  of  the
appellants against the decision of the respondent dated  17  July  2015  are
dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds  (Articles
3 and 8).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 2 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 2 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
