

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/02997/2020

                                                           HU/02834/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On the 30th June 2021                        |On the 12th July 2021          |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

              CHARLES AMOGE IKONWA & JENNIE OROMA ALIEZI-IKNOWA

                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellant:     Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hussain, instructed by Simo Law Firm, Leeds

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge  Drake,  promulgated
    on 2 February 2021.

 3. The grounds (using their paragraph numbers) allege misdirection in law,
    or inadequacy of reasoning, in summary, as follows:

      [1], long residence provisions - no legal basis  for  the  finding  at
      [15] that the first appellant had completed 10 years continuous lawful
      residence in terms of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules;

      [2 - 7], private life - no proper consideration of the issue in  terms
      of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules,  being  "very  significant
      obstacles to integration"; test  wrongly  specified;  no  evidence  to
      establish such obstacles;

      [9  -10],  article  8  -  no  specification  of  "unjustifiably  harsh
      consequences" of the respondent's decision; no application of sections
      117B(4)(a) and 117B(5) of the 2002  Act;  private  life  derived  from
      precarious immigration status should have been  given  little  weight;
      ability to speak English and financial independence incorrectly  taken
      as positive, rather than neutral.

 4. Mr Howells submitted that the FtT erred on all three above issues.

 5. The statement in the decision at [15] that the appellant  had  achieved
    10 years legitimate residence is baldly made.  The  judge  goes  on  at
    [16] to find in the appellants' favour on private life, without much of
    an explanation, and then  says  at  [17]  that  "for  all  the  reasons
    referred to in [2] and [12] above" the appeal  is  allowed  "under  the
    rules".

 6. (The FtT has no jurisdiction to allow  an  appeal  directly  under  the
    rules, but that might be only an error of form.)

 7. [2] is narrative of the appeal.  [12] states that the first  appellant,
    if he did not meet the rules, invoked article 8.  Neither [2] nor  [12]
    contains any reasons for favourable findings in  terms  of  the  rules,
    either on long residence or on private life.  It may be that  something
    has gone astray in drafting.  Absence of reasons is a legal error.

 8. On the first issue, Mr Hussain argued  that  the  case  law  should  be
    interpreted and applied to the facts of the appellant's case to justify
    the finding that the first appellant had  completed  10  years'  lawful
    residence.  That is debatable, but in view of parties'  submissions  on
    further procedure it is neither necessary nor desirable to  resolve  it
    at this stage.  It suffices to say that an analysis which might support
    that finding is absent from the FtT's decision.

 9. (It emerged in course of oral submissions before me that  in  the  FtT,
    after a case management review  hearing,  and  before  the  substantive
    hearing, the respondent prepared a separate  submission  on  the  first
    issue.  That submission may well have been sent out by the  respondent,
    but it does not  appear  to  have  been  received  by  the  appellant's
    representatives or the tribunal.  Nothing  turns  for  "error  of  law"
    purposes on this mishap, but it is an  additional  reason  for  further
    procedure to be in the FtT.)

10. On the second issue, Mr Hussain conceded, inevitably,  that  the  judge
    stated the test wrongly.  He contended that in substance the judge  did
    apply the  correct  test,  or  alternatively,  engaged  in  the  "broad
    evaluative judgement" required by the case law.

11. I accept that citation of the wrong test might not require the decision
    to be set aside, if that was a formal slip only.  However, despite  the
    best  efforts  of  Mr  Hussain,  I  find  error  to  go  further   than
    misquotation.  Although the decision says at [16] that  the  appellants
    "would have little or no private life" (in Nigeria) that is unexplained
    (and perhaps  rather  mysterious).   The  judge  does  not  tackle  the
    fundamental question whether the appellants,  with  their  history  and
    background, might be "outsiders" rather than "insiders"  on  return  to
    Nigeria.  The findings are as cryptic as on the first issue.

12. The judge at [21] purports to consider section 117A-D of the 2002  Act,
    but applies it simply by finding that  financial  independence  of  the
    state and social integration require the  appeal  to  be  granted.   In
    terms of statute and of case law, the financial aspect  can  be  little
    more than neutral.  Analysis in terms of other relevant parts  of  part
    5A of the Act is absent.

13. The FtT erred on all 3 issues identified in the SSHD's grounds.

14. Mr Howells did not ask for the UT to remake the decision.  He submitted
    that the case should be remitted for fresh decision.  If  the  decision
    were to be set aside, Mr Hussain sought  the  same  outcome.   In  that
    light, and considering the procedural  mishap  above,  which  may  have
    deprived the FtT of proper ventilation of the  long  residence  aspect,
    the outcome is as follows.

15. The decision of the FtT is set aside, other than as a  record  of  what
    was said at the hearing, and the case is remitted  for  fresh  hearing,
    not before Judge Drake.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      2 July 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
