
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/02570/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 December 2019                      | On 9 December 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                          NILESHKUMAR BABULAL DAVE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman, instructed by Lawfare solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.     The appellant was born on 1 September 1976 and is a  male  citizen
      of India. By a decision dated 31 January 2019, the Secretary of  State
      refused the appellant leave to remain on family grounds. The appellant
      lives with a British citizen, VW, and her daughter, RW, who  was  aged
      17 at the date of the First-tier Tribunal appeal but who  is,  at  the
      date of the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, 18 years  old.  The
      First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgation  on  11  April  2019,
      dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
      the Upper Tribunal.

   2.   The grant of permission purports to exclude permission for Ground  1
      but has not done so in a way  which  complies  with  Safi  and  others
      (permission  to  appeal  decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  00388  (IAC).  Both
      representatives agreed that all grounds may be argued.

   3.    The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  turned  in  the  first
      instance  upon  the  application  of  Section  117B6  of   Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):

      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the  public
      interest does not require the person's removal where-

      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and

      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom

      the judge found that there existed no genuine and subsisting  parental
      relationship between the appellant and RW. The appellant  argues  that
      it was wrong for  the  judge  to  find  that  there  was  no  parental
      relationship solely because RW was, at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing, on the point of becoming an adult.  It  is  asserted
      that the judge failed properly to consider the  evidence  showing  the
      extent of the care provided by the appellant for RW. I find  that  the
      ground is without merit. I agree with Mr Howells, who appeared for the
      Secretary of State, that the judge's finding that the  natural  father
      of RW continues to enjoy a  parental  relationship  with  her  natural
      father who also acts a 'father figure' for her led the judge to  reach
      a finding which was wholly in accordance  with  the  decision  of  the
      Upper Tribunal in Ortega [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC). Part of the headnote
      of Ortega reads as follows:

      As stated in paragraph 44 of R (on the application of RK) v  Secretary
      of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Section   117B(6):   "parental
      relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC), if  a  non-biological  parent
      ("third party") caring for a child claims to  be  a  step-parent,  the
      existence  of  such  a  relationship  will   depend   upon   all   the
      circumstances including whether or not there are others  (usually  the
      biologically parents) who have such  a  relationship  with  the  child
      also. It is unlikely that a person will be able to establish they have
      taken on the role of a parent when the biological parents continue  to
      be involved in the child's life as the child's parents .

      The grounds do no more than to disagree with the reasoned  finding  of
      the judge.

   4.   Secondly,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  exist
      insurmountable obstacles preventing  the  appellant  and  his  partner
      enjoying family life together in  India  having  correctly  determined
      that the appellant might only rely upon the provisions  of  EX1  under
      the  'partner  route'   to   settlement.   As   regards   the   proper
      interpretation of  'insurmountable  obstacles',  the  judge  correctly
      directed himself to the Supreme Court judgement in Agyarko [2017] UKSC
      11. Mr Howells is right to submit  that  the  appellant  falls  to  be
      considered under the 10 years route to settlement (rather than  the  5
      years route) because he had  made  a  human  rights  application  (the
      subject of this appeal) when he had no  valid  leave  to  remain.  The
      appellant submits that the judge's analysis is  flawed  and  that  the
      judge has failed to give proper weight  to  evidence  which  indicated
      that there would exist insurmountable obstacles preventing the  couple
      enjoying their family life in India. I find that that  submission  has
      no merit. The  judge  has  at  [47-53]  sought  to  identify  possible
      difficulties associated with relocation of family life to India raised
      by the appellant and his partner but he has given  sound  reasons  for
      finding that  those  difficulties  do  not  amount  to  insurmountable
      obstacles. The judge correctly directed himself to find that financial
      independence in the United Kingdom and an  ability  to  speak  English
      with neutral factors in the analysis under Section 117 of the 2002 Act
      (as amended). I entirely  agree  with  Mr  Howells  that  the  grounds
      regarding the judge's analysis and insurmountable obstacles amount  to
      no more than disagreement with the  Tribunal's  soundly  reasoned  and
      clear findings. I also agree with Mr  Howells  that  the  judgment  in
      Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, which has been raised for the first time  in
      the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, had not been put before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal and, in any event,  has  no  relevance  in  the  current
      appeal. The judge's  finding  that  there  existed  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life being enjoyed in India was  determinative  of
      the appeal; there remained no need whatsoever to consider whether  the
      appellant might return alone to  India  to  make  an  out  of  country
      application for entry clearance in the light of a finding that  family
      life may continue in India.

   5.   The appeal, therefore, fails first because the judge  did  not  fall
      into legal error in his application of section  117B6  and,  secondly,
      because the grounds provide no basis at all for the Upper Tribunal  to
      interfere with the judge's assessment of whether exist  insurmountable
      obstacles preventing family life continuing in India. Finally, I  note
      in passing that, even if I were to  set  aside  the  decision  and  to
      remake it or return the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
      Tribunal to remake the decision, the appellant's relationship with  RW
      would now be of no relevance; RW is 18 years old and no longer a child
      and the circumstances which any Tribunal would consider in determining
      the human rights appeal would be those appertaining as at the date  of
      the hearing before it

       Notice of Decision

        This appeal is dismissed.




      Signed                            Date 5 December 2019


      Upper Tribunal Judge Lane














