
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02955/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 9th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                         Bibi Walia Naseri Fazlullah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Bachu of Counsel, instructed by IAS (UK)
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Lodge (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 21st March 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.   She  was  granted  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a person settled in the UK (to whom I  shall
    refer as the Sponsor) on 16th March 2014.  Her leave was  valid  until
    26th November 2016.

 3. On 7th November 2016 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain.
     The application was refused on  6th  February  2017.   The  Respondent
    found the financial requirements of Appendix FM were not satisfied.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 8th March 2018.  The judge  recorded
    that it was accepted by Counsel representing the  Appellant,  that  she
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.  The judge was asked  to  find
    that  exceptional   circumstances   existed   which   would   lead   to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences, and therefore allow the  appeal  with
    reference to Article 8, outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The judge found  no  exceptional  circumstances,  and  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The Appellant's representatives contended that the judge had  erred  in
    finding  there  would  be  no  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences   and
    explained that  the  Sponsor  originates  from  Afghanistan,  and  only
    returned to Afghanistan to marry.  It would be unjustifiably harsh  for
    him to return there to live permanently.

 7. It was submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph  32  in  finding
    that any private life established by the Appellant had been established
    while her immigration  status  is  precarious.   It  was  contended  at
    paragraph 8 of the grounds, that this indicated that the judge believed
    the Appellant had lived in the UK illegally.

 8. It was contended that the judge had been mistaken in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's immigration history.  It was also contended that the  judge
    had erred at paragraph 32 in finding that the Appellant does not  speak
    English.  It was submitted that the Appellant had passed her B2 English
    test to satisfy the Immigration Rules.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9.  Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Judge  Adio,  but
    subsequently granted by Judge Chalkley who found the grounds  arguable,
    commenting that it would be for the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  if  the
    errors alleged are material or not.

10. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

11. At the oral hearing  Mrs  Bachu  relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument,
    contending that the judge had erred in finding that the Appellant could
    not speak English.  Also, reference was made to Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58
    in which the Supreme Court found that the provisions of section 117B of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   are   not   a
    "straightjacket".  There is provision for some flexibility.

12. Mr Mills accepted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant could not speak English, but  submitted  that  this  was  not
    material, and if the judge had found that  the  Appellant  could  speak
    English, this would not have altered the decision in any way.

13. I found that the judge did err at paragraph 32 in  recording  that  the
    Appellant could not speak English.  This had not  formed  part  of  the
    reasons for refusing her application.  However I did not find the error
    to be material for the following reasons.

14. In my view, even if the judge had found that the Appellant could  speak
    and understand English, that would not have altered the  decision  that
    he made.  The appeal was put  to  the  judge  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,  in  order  to  be
    granted leave to remain.  This  concession  was  made  by  Counsel  who
    represented the Appellant and recorded by the judge  at  paragraph  22.
    It is not disputed that Counsel made such a concession.  The  judge  at
    paragraph 28 noted that in conceding that the rules were not  met,  the
    Appellant was  conceding  that  she  could  not  satisfy  EX.1.(b)  and
    therefore was conceding that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Afghanistan.  There is a typographical  error
    in paragraph 28 in that the judge omits the word  "not".   However  the
    meaning is clear.

15. The judge was therefore asked to  allow  the  appeal  by  relying  upon
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The correct approach  is  set
    out in paragraph 31 of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 in  which  it
    is stated that where Article 8 is in issue within the rules there  will
    have to be consideration of whether there are insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing outside the UK.  Guidance is given that  when
    a Tribunal goes on to consider an Article 8 claim outside the rules, it
    will still need to consider whether or  not  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles, as this will be relevant to the evaluation of whether  there
    are exceptional circumstances.  TZ had not in fact been published  when
    the judge made his decision, but in my view  the  judge  does  in  fact
    follow the principles outlined in that case.  The judge was entitled to
    take into account the concession made by Counsel, but at  paragraph  28
    makes a finding that in any event he could not, on the facts, find that
    there would be insurmountable obstacles, describing the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor  as  being  young,  fit  and  healthy,   and   culturally   and
    linguistically Afghans.

16. The judge was  asked  to  consider  whether  exceptional  circumstances
    applied which would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    either the Appellant or the Sponsor if the Appellant  was  not  granted
    further leave to remain.  The factors that the judge was asked to  take
    into account are listed at paragraph 24, and the judge considers  those
    factors at paragraphs 29-31.

17.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  those  factors   either
    individually  or   cumulatively   did   not   amount   to   exceptional
    circumstances, and gave sustainable and adequate reasons  for  reaching
    that conclusion.

18. Contrary to what is claimed in the grounds at paragraph  8,  the  judge
    did not find that the Appellant had been living in the UK illegally for
    four years.  The judge at paragraph 32 makes reference to section  117B
    of the 2002 Act, finding that he  had  not  been  "furnished  with  any
    evidence with regard to the private life the Appellant has  established
    in the UK."  That was a finding open to the judge to make.   The  judge
    then records that any private  life  that  had  been  established,  was
    established while the Appellant's  immigration  status  is  precarious.
    The judge does not err in reaching that conclusion.  This is not a case
    of the judge operating an "straightjacket" policy.  The Appellant had a
    precarious immigration status because she did not have settled  status.
    She was only ever granted limited leave to remain.

19. The judge has considered all material evidence in this case.  It is not
    suggested that the judge has made any perverse or  irrational  findings
    and I find as a fact that he has not.  The  judge  did  not  find  that
    exceptional circumstances existed which would result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences, and gave sustainable reasons  for  those  findings.
    The grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  was  granted  display  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached  by  the  judge  but  do  not
    disclose any material error of law.  The only error made by  the  judge
    was to make reference to the Appellant's ability in  English  but  this
    was not a material error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
direction.


Signed                              Date 2nd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2nd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

