
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/02270/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2017                            |On 19 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                  Ms R A O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade, O A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 16 April 1951 who entered
    the UK as a visitor on 23 June 2003 and remained unlawfully after her
    leave expired.

 2. On 5 May 2015 she applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    her family and private life.  On 25 June 2015 the application was
    refused.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant
    was able to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules or that
    there were exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave
    outside the Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
    heard by Judge Rowlands.  In a decision promulgated on 22 March 2017
    the judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal, in summary, was
    that she resided with her daughter, son-in-law and four grandchildren,
    all of whom are British citizens.  Her daughter had been diagnosed with
    terminal cancer and her son-in-law worked full-time.  She claimed that
    she looked after her daughter and grandchildren.  In her statement she
    stated that: "My grandchildren would not be able to cope without my
    support and they would be devastated if I were to be removed to
    Nigeria."

 5. The judge found that the appellant had been caring for her daughter and
    her family since about 2012 although it appeared she had been living
    her life separately from them.  He accepted that the appellant's
    daughter was very unwell and suffering from a life-limiting illness.

 6. The judge considered whether the appellant was able to satisfy the
    Immigration Rules and concluded that she was not, finding that there
    were not very significant obstacles to her integration into Nigeria.

 7. The judge then assessed whether the appeal should be allowed outside
    the Immigration Rules.  He found at paragraph 16:

    "There is no doubt that family life exists between the appellant and
         her daughter, grandchildren and son-in-law."

 8. The judge then stated that he was not convinced family life was as deep-
    rooted as the appellant claimed.  He stated that he accepted that the
    appellant had been a great help to her family but not that the family
    would be unable to manage without her.  The judge concluded at
    paragraph 19 that:

    "As sad as the family's circumstances are I do not believe that the
         circumstances mean that their family life is such that removal
         would engage Article 8 at all."

 9. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge contradicted himself by
    finding at paragraph 16 that family life exists and at paragraph 19
    that it does not exist.  It is also maintained that a finding that
    family life does not exist is inconsistent with the factual matrix
    accepted by the judge which in essence was that the appellant has been
    caring for her daughter and family since about 2012.

10. A further argument in the grounds is that the judge failed to consider
    the best interests of the appellant's grandchildren.

11. The Secretary of State submitted a Rule 24 response where she accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had not carried out any obvious
    assessments of the best interests of the appellant's grandchildren as a
    separate consideration from the later analysis of proportionality and
    compelling circumstances.  The Rule 24 response went on to state: "The
    respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for permission
    to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh
    oral (continuance) hearing."

12. Before me, Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr
    Aborisade on behalf of the appellant both confirmed that the parties
    were in agreement that the judge had made a material error of law by
    failing to consider the best interests of the appellant's grandchildren
    and that consequently the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be
    set aside and remade.

13. Mr Aborisade drew to my attention that the appellant's daughter had
    recently died.

14. Mr Jarvis expressed the view that extensive fact-finding might be
    required to assess the best interests of the appellant's grandchildren
    in light of the change of circumstances and therefore that it would be
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
    Mr Aborisade was in agreement. I also agree.

Notice of Decision


15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  19 December 2017     |

