
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/02159/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2018                  |On 6 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    [a m]
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G S Peterson, Counsel instructed by CK Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on [ ] 1974.  He  is  the
         subject of a deportation order made against him on 8 November  2016
         and he appeals the respondent's decision  of  18  January  2017  to
         refuse his human rights claim.

      2. The appeal against the refusal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Walker at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 3  November  2017  and
         was dismissed by way of a determination promulgated on 27  November
         2017.

      3. The appellant takes issue with the findings and conclusions of  the
         judge and argues that.

      4. Permission was granted by Judge Birrell on 29  December  2017.  The
         matter then came before me on 26 February 2018.

      5. Submissions

      6. Ms Peterson expanded on  the  two  arguments  put  forward  in  the
         grounds. She submitted that the judge erred in  his  assessment  of
         whether it would be unduly harsh to separate the appellant and  his
         children. The judge's error was to factor in the seriousness of the
         appellant's offence whereas he should have conducted a  stand-alone
         assessment of the unduly harsh test. She relied on the judgment  of
         Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60. The second error made by the  judge  was
         his approach to the issue  of  the  appellant's  re-integration  to
         Jamaica. She argued that the judge had found that the appellant had
         family there. He had relied on earlier determinations from 2004 and
         2006 which had made such findings but he  failed  to  consider  the
         appellant's claim that he had no one left there and he did not  put
         this matter to the appellant at the hearing.  Whether  or  not  the
         appellant had relatives in Jamaica was relevant to the issue of re-
         integration and so the error  was  material.  She  urged  that  the
         decision be set aside and the matter remitted for a  fresh  hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

      7. In response, Mr Kotas  submitted  that  it  was  wrong  in  law  to
         maintain that the unduly harsh assessment had to be  a  stand-alone
         undertaking. He relied on the judgment of  MM  Uganda  and  another
         (KO) [2016] EWCA Civ 617  which  had  been  before  the  judge.  He
         submitted that whether something was  unduly  harsh  was  itself  a
         balancing exercise involving the public interest  and  that  Hesham
         Ali looked at the broader issue of whether the rules constituted  a
         complete code. The citation in the grounds related to the issue  of
         deterrence and, in any event, the appellant had not lived here most
         or all of his life and so it did not apply to him. With respect  to
         the second ground, Mr Kotas argued that if there was an  error,  it
         was not material to the outcome.  The  appellant  knew  there  were
         previous determinations and it was for him  to  present  his  case.
         However, as he could only have succeeded under  paragraph  399,  on
         the issue of compelling circumstances, the issue of whether or  not
         he had relatives in Jamaica could not be material to  the  outcome.
         The appellant was a grown man, he was fit and healthy  and  he  had
         spent only 4 of 17 years here lawfully. It was  not  possible  that
         the absence of a brother or son in Jamaica would tip the balance in
         his favour.  When  the  serious  drugs  offences  were  taken  into
         account, the public interest had to take precedence.

      8. Ms Peterson replied. She agreed the judge had other  relevant  case
         law before him but the Hesham Ali judgment needed to be considered.
         The public interest was not a fixed entity.  It  was  also  in  the
         public interest that families were not separated. The  decision  on
         the unduly harsh test should not  be  clouded  by  the  appellant's
         offending. with respect to the second ground,  the  judge  made  an
         assumption which was wrong. He  relied  on  evidence  that  was  no
         longer relevant and his finding was unsafe. As it  formed  part  of
         the proportionality assessment, it was a material point.

      9. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.

     10. Discussion and Conclusions

     11. I have considered  all  the  evidence  and  the  submissions  made.
         Emphasis was placed by the  appellant  on  Lord  Kerr's  dissenting
         judgment in Hesham Ali (as the First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  at
         paragraph 57 of his determination) but with no attempt  to  address
         the principles of the other judgment before the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge. MM and KO specifically  addressed  the  meaning  of  "unduly
         harsh" in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules and s.117C (5)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  the  approach
         to be taken by Tribunals in appeals concerning the  deportation  of
         foreign  criminals.  Of  particular  relevance  are  the  following
         findings of the court:

             "22.      I turn to the interpretation of the  phrase  "unduly
                  harsh".  Plainly it means the same in section  117C(5)  as
                  in Rule  399.   "Unduly  harsh"  is  an  ordinary  English
                  expression.  As so often, its meaning is coloured  by  its
                  context ...

             23. The  context  in  these  cases  invites  emphasis  on  two
                  factors, (1) the public interest in the removal of foreign
                  criminals and (2) the need for a proportionate  assessment
                  of  any  interference  with  Article  8  rights.   In   my
                  judgment, with respect, the approach of the Upper Tribunal
                  in MAB ignores this combination of factors.  The first  of
                  them, the  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  foreign
                  criminals, is expressly vouched by Parliament  in  section
                  117C(1).  Section 117C(2)  then  provides  (I  repeat  the
                  provision for convenience):

                      "The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign
                      criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
                      deportation of the criminal."

             24.  This  steers  the  tribunals  and  the  court  towards  a
                  proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation  in
                  any given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the  public
                  interest in his removal, the harder it  will  be  to  show
                  that the effect on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly
                  harsh.  Any other approach in my judgment  dislocates  the
                  "unduly harsh" provisions from their  context.   It  would
                  mean that the question of undue hardship would be  decided
                  wholly without regard to the force of the public  interest
                  in deportation in the particular case ... What is  due  or
                  undue depends on all the  circumstances,  not  merely  the
                  impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
                  present context relevant circumstances  certainly  include
                  the criminal's immigration and criminal history.

             ...

             26. ... The expression "unduly harsh" in section  117C(5)  and
                  Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to be had to  all  the
                  circumstances including  the  criminal's  immigration  and
                  criminal history".

     12. The appellant first arrived in the UK in May 2000 as a visitor.  He
         overstayed and subsequently made an unsuccessful asylum claim.  His
         appeal was dismissed and he  was  removed  on  17  March  2004.  In
         October 2009 he was granted entry clearance following a  successful
         appeal, after several failed  applications,  as  the  spouse  of  a
         British national; that marriage ended prior to March 2012  when  he
         commenced another relationship. His leave  expired  on  22  January
         2012 and he overstayed. In  September  2016  he  had  a  successful
         appeal against the refusal of leave and he  was  granted  leave  to
         remain until 3 April 2019.

     13. The appellant has four criminal convictions. The first  three  pre-
         date his  removal  and  he  received  non-custodial  sentences  for
         possession of  an  offensive  weapon  and  two  for  possession  of
         cannabis. On 13 October 2016 he pleaded guilty  to  ten  counts  of
         supplying Class A drugs on eight different dates between April  and
         August 2016. He was sentenced to 44 months'  imprisonment  on  each
         count  to  be  served  concurrently.  According  to   the   judge's
         sentencing remarks, he had played a "significant role" and were  it
         not for his guilty plea,  he  would  have  received  a  66  months'
         sentence.

     14. The judge considered article 8 and paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A  of
         the Immigration Rules and also s.117C of the  Act.  He  heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant, his current  partner  and  a  daughter
         from his previous relationship. The respondent  accepted  that  the
         children were all British and that it would not be unduly harsh for
         the twin daughters from the appellant's  previous  relationship  to
         live in Jamaica and no argument was taken at the hearing in respect
         of the child from the present relationship although in her decision
         letter the respondent had maintained she could live in Jamaica.  It
         was agreed by the parties that the main issue was  the  appellant's
         separation from his children. No reliance was placed on  any  claim
         for protection (at 48 and 59). It was conceded by Counsel  for  the
         appellant that the seriousness of the offending was a key issue (at
         60)

     15.  The  judge  made  clear  findings  of  fact.  He  found  that  the
         appellant's  offences  were  very  serious,  that  they  had   been
         committed recently and that he was not a home  grown  criminal  (at
         67). He found that the appellant had  parental  relationships  with
         his  children  and  that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with his current partner which had commenced after his
         leave had expired (at 69).  He noted that  the  appellant  did  not
         live with his twin daughters and that there had been a period  when
         he had been refused contact with them (at 71). He  noted  that  the
         twins had travelled with their mother to Jamaica  on  a  number  of
         visits to see her family (at 71). Neither they nor their mother had
         any health issues and she was able  to  act  effectively  as  their
         primary carer (at 71). Whilst the  appellant's  third  child  lived
         with him and her mother, the latter was the bread  winner,  had  no
         medical problems and could provide for  the  child  (at  73).  Both
         women get along and the children consider each other as sisters and
         attend the same  school  (at  74).  The  judge  accepted  that  the
         children were finding separation from the appellant whilst  he  was
         in prison to be difficult (at 75) but he found that the  impact  on
         their education had been minor (at 77). There was no social  report
         and no  intervention  by  social  services  (at  53  and  79).  The
         appellant had been  behaving  well  in  prison  (at  81)  and  that
         although there was an ongoing risk of re-offending, this was not as
         high as stated in the OASys  report  (at  82).  He  had  worked  in
         Jamaica and had supported himself when he had been removed there in
         2004 (at 85). Of the  last  17  years  only  four  had  been  spent
         lawfully here (at 65). He had some cousins here and had worked as a
         volunteer at a soup kitchen (at 86). He also worked in  prison  (at
         85). It was not accepted that he would be unable to work in Jamaica
         (at 85).

     16. The judge was clearly aware that the appellant had asserted that he
         had lost all contact with Jamaica (at 23 and 58 and 84)  but  chose
         not to accept that claim. He noted that he had "been told  nothing"
         about the relatives of family members in Jamaica other  than  those
         in the US. He found that the appellant's contention  that  all  his
         children were British was undermined by the  fact  that  he  had  a
         Jamaican son who would now be aged 21  and  who  may  still  be  in
         Jamaica (at 84). He considered that  the  appellant  had  not  been
         forthcoming about the true extent of family ties (at 84).

     17. The judge then applied the law to his findings. He  considered  the
         position of the children and section 55 first (at 90  and  91).  He
         found that  their  best  interests  would  be  met  by  having  the
         appellant remain in the UK but properly noted that that was not the
         end of the matter (at 91). That approach is in accordance with what
         the court held in MM, and in Hesham Ali (at 29). The  judge  relied
         on all his findings of fact and concluded  that  it  would  not  be
         unduly harsh to separate the children from the appellant. He  gives
         clear reasons for that conclusion at  paragraph  92.  Although  his
         findings at paragraph 93 form the focus of criticism,  they  follow
         the finding he has made about the children and  have  been,  in  my
         view, taken out of context and read in isolation to  the  remainder
         of  the  determination.  Whatever  the  format  of  the  Tribunal's
         approach, the crucial issue is whether  a  fair  balance  has  been
         struck (Hesham Ali at 32). The Tribunal is required to consider all
         factors when considering whether article 8 is engaged. The relevant
         factors identified by various judgments and summarised at paragraph
         28 of Hesham Ali are all matters that were considered. There can be
         no criticism on him for failing to follow an approach set out in  a
         dissenting judgment.  The judge gave full consideration to all  the
         evidence, reached clear findings of fact and arrived at sustainable
         conclusions. He was entitled to find that in all the  circumstances
         it would not be unduly harsh to  separate  the  appellant  and  the
         children. As required by MM  he  had  regard  to  "(1)  the  public
         interest in the removal of foreign criminals and (2) the need for a
         proportionate assessment of any interference with Article 8 rights"
         and he plainly had regard to the sliding scale when considering the
         first issue. It follows that I conclude that the judge did not  err
         in his approach to the unduly harsh test.

     18. The second  criticism  relates  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the
         appellant's links with Jamaica; specifically, with whether  he  has
         family there. It was argued for the appellant that the judge  erred
         in relying on the  earlier  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Housego which, it is said, is from several years  ago.  There
         is no merit in this submission. The skeleton argument and Counsel's
         submissions before the First-tier Tribunal both relied  heavily  on
         that determination and the judge was entitled to  take  all  of  it
         into account not just the sections that were cherry picked.  As  Mr
         Kotas  submitted,  this  was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  the
         appellant knew the contents of the determination and yet  as  Judge
         Walker found, nothing  was  said  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the
         appellant's son. Whilst the appellant claimed he  had  no  ties  to
         Jamaica, the judge did not accept that evidence (see  paragraph  16
         above). There is no error in this respect. It was open to the judge
         to find as he did.

     19. In conclusion, therefore, I find that the judge did not err in  his
         approach to the evidence or  in  the  conclusions  he  reached.  He
         undertook a thorough  assessment  of  all  the  evidence,  properly
         applied the law and reached fully sustainable findings  in  respect
         of the appellant and his children. It was open to him to find  that
         this was not a very strong or very compelling  case  and  that  the
         public interest in this case outweighed the appellant's family life
         and the rights of his family members.

     20. Decision

     21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any  errors  of  law  and  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

     22. Anonymity

     23. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 5 March 2018
