
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02789/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Tuesday 4 May 2021                       |On Friday 28 May 2021          |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                            MR MUHAMMAD ASIF KHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Abbott Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this appeal.  For ease of
   reference, however, I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 2 December 2020 ("the Decision"). By
   the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 3 February 2020, refusing his human rights
   claim.  The context of the claim was an application to remain as the
   partner of a British citizen.


2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He entered the UK on 22
   January 2011 as a student.  He applied for further leave in that category
   but that was refused on 2 January 2013. The Appellant appealed the
   refusal of leave and his appeal was allowed.  However, following
   reconsideration by the Respondent, the application was again refused.
   That refusal was based on an allegation that the Appellant had used a
   proxy test taker when sitting an English language test.  This case
   therefore involves an English Testing Service ("ETS") allegation. The
   Appellant again appealed but his appeal was unsuccessful.  As I
   understand it, the appeal was determined on that occasion by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Barber.  That determination does not appear in the
   bundles.

3. The Appellant then made a human rights application which was again
   refused by the Respondent and led to an appeal before First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Hobson.  By a decision promulgated on 14 May 2019, she dismissed
   the appeal.  I was not taken to that decision, but I will need to refer
   to it later in this decision.  For present purposes, I note only that
   Judge Hobson found the ETS allegation to be made out.  A further human
   rights application was made on 16 July 2019 which led to the decision
   which is here under appeal.

4. On this occasion, Judge Andrew found in the Appellant's favour in
   relation to the ETS allegation.  She did so in reliance on a report by
   the All-Party Parliamentary Group ("APPG") dated 18 July 2019 in relation
   to the Respondent's conduct in ETS cases ("the APPG Report"). I will need
   to return to the extent of her reliance on the APPG Report and the
   underlying evidence below.

5. Judge Andrew also found at [14] of the Decision that, even if she was
   wrong about her conclusions in relation to the ETS allegation, she found
   in the Appellant's favour applying paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM to the
   Immigration Rules ("Paragraph EX.1.") on the basis that there were
   insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's family life with his partner
   continuing in Pakistan.  That conclusion was based on a report of Ms
   Marryam Mehmood dated 3 April 2020 ("the Expert Report").  The
   conclusions of the Expert Report were, in broad summary, that the
   Appellant and his partner would be at risk of honour killing by his
   family if they were to return together to Pakistan as they are not
   married.  Furthermore, the Appellant is Muslim and his partner is Sikh.

6. The Respondent appeals the Decision on what can be summarised as two
   grounds as follows:


       Ground one: The Judge erred in her reliance on the APPG Report when
       that was considered in the light of guidance given and evidence
       considered in earlier decisions of this Tribunal in relation to ETS
       cases.  The Judge had also failed to have regard to the earlier
       appeal decisions relating to the ETS allegation in respect of this
       Appellant. I refer to this hereafter as "the ETS issue".


       Ground two:     The basis on which the Judge found Paragraph EX.1. to
       be made out amounted to a protection claim and should have been dealt
       with as such.  The Judge had, in effect, put herself in the position
       of primary fact finder and had deprived the Respondent of the
       opportunity properly to examine the claimed risk on return.

   I refer to those two grounds in what follows as "Ground One" and "Ground
   Two" respectively.


7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 31
   December 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:


       "... It is arguable the Judge erred in law in her treatment of the
       APPG report by relying on its conclusions without investigating the
       evidence referred to in the report and supposed to support its
       conclusions and to explain why they supported her departure from
       previous decisions of the Upper Tribunal which although not binding
       are persuasive.


       The Judge rightly directed herself that the Article 8 claim needed to
       be considered in the light of the extent to which the Appellant met
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules as a preliminary to the
       assessment of the proportionality of the decision under appeal to any
       of the legitimate public objectives identified in Article 8(2).  She
       looked only at the provisions of Section EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM.
       There is no record in the decision that the parties agreed or the
       Judge found the Appellant met all the other relevant requirements of
       the Immigration Rules and notwithstanding the self-direction at
       paragraph 2 of the decision the Judge did not move on to conduct a
       balancing exercise to reach a conclusion on the proportionality of
       the Respondent's decision.


       The grounds disclose arguable errors of law in the Judge's decision.
       Permission to appeal is granted and all grounds may be argued."


8. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 reply on 12 January 2021.  I also had for
   the purposes of this hearing, the Appellant's bundle before the First-
   tier Tribunal to which I refer hereafter as [AB/xx], the core bundle
   including the Respondent's bundle and a skeleton argument from Mr Sharma
   prepared for the purposes of the hearing before me.

9. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains an
   error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.   The hearing was
   conducted remotely in light of the continuing restrictions arising from
   the Covid-19 pandemic.  Neither party objected to that course. There were
   no major technical difficulties affecting the conduct of the hearing.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10. At the outset of the hearing, I drew the attention of the parties to
   two decisions of this Tribunal.  The first relates to Ground One - DK and
   RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence) [2021] UKUT 00061 (IAC) ("DK").
   The second is of relevance to Ground Two - JA (human rights claim:
   serious harm) Nigeria [2021] UKUT 0097 (IAC) ("JA").  In broad terms, DK
   is of potential assistance to the Respondent.  JA is of potential
   assistance to the Appellant.  For this reason and also because Ms Everett
   had not had sight of Mr Sharma's skeleton argument prior to the hearing
   and therefore did not know how he put the Appellant's case, it was agreed
   that Mr Sharma would make his submissions first.  I permitted Mr Sharma a
   right of reply following Ms Everett's submissions in fairness to the
   Appellant.  I deal hereafter with the parties' cases on each of the
   grounds in turn.

Ground One


11. The Judge dealt with the APPG Report at [11] to [13] of the Decision as
   follows:


       "11.   I have given careful consideration to the APPG Report.  The
          analysis and conclusions of that report was that the evidence
          relied on by the Respondent in individual cases was weak and that
          the internal procedures adopted by ETS to determine whether
          cheating had, in fact, taken place were not robust.  I have noted,
          in particular, paragraph 2.3 of that report which is headed
          'Misuse of Expert Advice'.
      12. The report is damning of both the investigations undertaken by ETS
          and the Respondent's reliance on the results of those
          investigations to underpin the Respondent's decisions to revoke
          visas.  The evidence given to APPG is that the Respondent
          effectively ignored the information which pointed to the
          unreliability of ETS and that she has continued to do so.
      13. The Report post-dates the decisions in SM and Quadir [sic] and MA
          (Nigeria).  It also post-dates the well-known report of Professor
          French.  The evidence given by Professor French to the APPG was
          that his estimate of the false positives is less than 1% but this
          was qualified because it depended on the result from ETS to the
          Respondent.  The APPG Report concluded that there was a
          significant doubt as to the usefulness of that statistic relied
          upon by the Respondent.  The experts before the APPG all agreed
          that there had been a worrying lack of scrutiny of the evidence
          supplied by ETS as referred to at above [sic] (at paragraph 2.3 of
          the report).  In the light of that evidence, which has not
          previously been considered, I am satisfied that the Respondent has
          not discharged the evidential burden to prove that the TOEIC
          certificate was procured by dishonesty.  It would follow from this
          that the Appellant would be able to meet the suitability
          provisions of the Rules."


12.  At the time of the Decision, the case of DK was in the Court of Appeal
    pending judgment ([10] of the Decision).  That appeal has since been
    remitted and has been considered at least in relation to the
    preliminary issue concerning reliance on the APPG Report by a
    Presidential panel leading to the giving of the following guidance:


       "(1) Although the Upper Tribunal is not bound by formal rules of
       evidence, it cannot act in such a way as to violate Parliamentary
       privilege, whether that be to interfere with free speech in
       Parliament or by reference to the separation of powers doctrine. The
       Tribunal cannot interfere with or criticise proceedings of the
       legislature.
       (2) Courts and tribunals determine cases by reference to the evidence
       before them and not by reference to the views of others, expressed in
       a non-judicial setting, on evidence which is not  the  same  as  that
       before the court or tribunal.  Indeed, even if the evidence were  the
       same, the court or tribunal must reach its own  views,  applying  the
       relevant burden and standard of proof."


13.  In short, therefore, the guidance permits a First-tier Tribunal Judge
   to have regard to the evidence before the APPG in order to reach his own
   conclusions but not to rely on the views of the APPG itself.

14. Mr Sharma submitted that Judge Andrew had not fallen into this trap.
   The APPG Report is at [AB/166-200].   Judge Andrew said that she had
   particular regard to section 2.3 of the APPG Report (beginning at
   [AB/186]).  I do not set that out in full.  It begins with an account of
   the background to the ETS litigation although making no reference to the
   consideration of the evidence by this Tribunal or the higher courts.  It
   refers to evidence which the APPG appears to have received from Professor
   French.  I accept that this evidence does indicate as Judge Andrew notes
   that the 1% false positives figure "was valid 'if the results that ETS
   had given the Home Office were correct'".  It goes on to refer to what
   was said by one of the lawyers acting for appellants in ETS cases, Mr
   Lewis.  I do not suggest that it was not open to the APPG to take
   evidence from such persons.  As Mr Sharma submitted, and I accept, the
   APPG is not a court or tribunal.  A court or tribunal would not generally
   receive "evidence" from a lawyer but would hear from such a person only
   by way of submissions which would be given weight as such.  The purpose
   of the APPG Report as set out in the foreword is to hold an inquiry into
   what is there described as the "TOEIC scandal".  However, the way in
   which evidence is taken by the APPG which includes evidence which would
   not generally be admitted or given weight by the Tribunal, as set out in
   section 2.3 underlines the difficulty in placing reliance on it.


15. I accept of course that the Judge was entitled to have regard to what
   is recorded in that section as apparently said by the three technical
   experts that the reliability of the ETS evidence rendered the voice
   recognition software results "almost irrelevant" and cast doubt on the 1%
   false positives figure.  However, that part of the APPG also has to be
   read with what Professor French apparently told the APPG that the 1%
   false positives figure should not be used as "the sole basis for accusing
   a particular person of fraud".  It is not there suggested that there were
   no cases where deception was exercised but rather that as a generality
   the false positive rate could not be relied upon as the sole reason for
   accusing of deception all those whose voice recognition tapes appeared to
   match a proxy test taker. It appears accepted in the introduction to the
   APPG Report that there were some cases at least where cheating had taken
   place.

16. I have in the foregoing sentences referred to what was apparently said
   to the APPG.  That leads me on to the second reason why reliance on the
   section of the APPG Report is, in and of itself, unsafe, at least as a
   sole reason for rejecting the Respondent's evidence.  There is no record
   of what the APPG was told.  There is no record of the questions asked or
   the answers given.  I do not suggest that the APPG did not receive the
   evidence as recorded but there is no context given to any of this
   evidence. By contrast, previous Tribunals have examined the evidence in
   the form of written reports and oral evidence from the experts.  The
   content of that evidence is fully recorded to support the Tribunal's
   reasoning and conclusions.


17. That brings me on to the lack of any reference in the APPG Report to
   the decisions of this Tribunal or the higher courts in relation to the
   ETS cases which have been scrutinised in both appeals and judicial
   reviews.  I recognise that Judge Andrew has made reference to the
   decision in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 299 (IAC) ("SM").  In that
   case, a Presidential panel of this Tribunal concluded that the
   Respondent's generic evidence "sufficed to discharge the evidential
   burden of proving" that the TOEIC certificates "had been procured by
   dishonesty".  The Tribunal in that case recognised the "multiple
   frailties from which this generic evidence was considered to suffer".
   In reaching that conclusion, the Tribunal heard evidence from the makers
   of the generic witness statements (which APPG did not since it did not
   apparently take any evidence from anyone on behalf of the Home Office)
   and, importantly, the Tribunal heard and considered evidence from Dr
   Harrison who was one of the three experts from whom the APPG heard
   evidence.  SM pre-dated Professor French's evidence and therefore there
   was no reliance by the Tribunal on the 1% false positive evidence.


18. Judge Andrew also referred to MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450
   (IAC) ("MA").  In that case another Presidential panel reconsidered the
   generic evidence in light of expert evidence which it heard from three
   experts, including Professor Sommer who was one of the three experts who
   gave evidence to the APPG.   Although not part of the guidance for which
   MA is reported, I note what is said about the expert's criticism of the
   Respondent's evidence at [47] of the decision that "there are enduring
   unanswered questions and uncertainties relating in particular to systems,
   processes and procedures concerning the TOEIC testing, the subsequent
   allocation of scores and the later conduct and activities of ETS".
   Those are in large part the criticisms made by the experts to the APPG.
   In MA, the Tribunal had a great deal more evidence from the Respondent
   than simply the generic evidence relied upon in SM.  However, as the
   Tribunal said in MA, this merely serves to underline the point that
   "[t]he question of whether a person engaged in fraud in procuring a TOEIC
   English language proficiency qualification will invariably be
   intrinsically fact sensitive".


19. Mr Sharma also relied in his skeleton argument on the case of R (oao
   Saha and others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Secretary
   of State's duty of candour) [2017] UKUT 17 (IAC).  He suggested that, if
   the Tribunal did not accept that the Judge was entitled to find that the
   Respondent's case on the ETS issue was undermined by the APPG Report then
   it was immaterial because the same conclusion could be reached via the
   decision in Saha.  There are three fundamental difficulties with that
   submission.

20. First, of course, that was not the basis for Judge Andrew's conclusion.
    She relied squarely on what was said in the APPG Report about the
   evidence of the experts in that forum.  She did not rely on what the same
   experts had said in evidence previously given.  Granted, one of the
   experts in Saha was one of the experts who gave evidence to the APPG.  I
   also accept that, in Saha, the Tribunal probed that evidence in more
   depth than in SM.  It also gave a much more thorough analysis of the
   deficiencies in the ETS evidence than did the APPG.  That is, as I say,
   to be expected.  The APPG is a very different body to a court or tribunal
   and has a very different function.

21. Second, however and crucially, notwithstanding the criticisms made of
   the Respondent's evidence based on the expert views in Saha, the case was
   not reported for any conclusions about the evidential value of the
   Respondent's ETS evidence.  It was not reported to give guidance that
   what was said in SM about that evidence should not be followed.

22. Third, there is good reason for that because Saha was a judicial review
   application and not an appeal.  As such, the Tribunal was addressing a
   different issue namely whether the Respondent's decisions under review
   were irrational based on the generic evidence when judged not only with
   the benefit of the expert evidence but also against the evidence of the
   applicants in those cases.

23. I do not suggest that Judge Andrew was not entitled to find that the
   Respondent's generic evidence was undermined by the evidence given to the
   APPG.  However, in order to reach the conclusion that it undermined the
   evidence to such an extent that the Respondent could not discharge even
   the evidential burden, she had to consider whether the evidence which was
   given to the APPG displaced the Tribunal's findings in SM that the
   generic evidence did meet the burden, notwithstanding the weaknesses in
   that evidence.  She was not entitled to do so merely relying on the
   APPG's opinions.  The APPG is not a court of law and does not purport to
   be.  It heard no evidence from anyone in the Home Office so far as I can
   see.  It took evidence which, even with the Tribunal's more flexible
   rules of evidence would not be accepted as such (from appellants'
   lawyers).  There is no record of the evidence which the APPG received in
   order to set that evidence in context.

24. In short, the error disclosed by the Judge's reliance on the APPG
   Report can be categorised as a failure to provide reasons which is the
   basis on which the Respondent's first ground proceeds.

25. That brings me on to the second central reason why I conclude that
   Judge Andrew has erred in relation to the ETS issue.  As Judge Andrew
   notes at [9] of the Decision, the ETS issue had been considered in the
   Appellant's case in two previous Tribunal appeals.  The decision of First-
   tier Tribunal Hobson is at [AB/239] and following.  The decision in the
   earlier appeal of First-tier Tribunal Judge Barber is not in either of
   the bundles.  It is recorded at [9] of Judge Hobson's decision that Judge
   Barber, on 4 August 2016, "had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against
   the refusal of leave in relation to the TOEIC issue".  Thus, as Judge
   Hobson rightly recognised, in accordance with the Devaseelan guidelines,
   she was obliged to take that as her starting point.  The Appellant's case
   before Judge Hobson was that there were two important differences since
   Judge Barber's determination.  The first consisted of inconsistencies in
   the Respondent's evidence about the test venue and second that in spite
   of the Appellant's efforts to obtain his voice recording, he had been
   unable to do so.  I do not need to say more about those reasons as they
   are not relevant to the case now put.  Judge Hobson however went on to
   consider the Appellant's case on the ETS issue afresh.  I accept that she
   did so on the basis that the Respondent's evidence satisfied the
   evidential burden.  As I have already pointed out, that is consistent
   with the guidance given in SM which has, even now, not been displaced by
   later evidence.  Judge Hobson then went on to consider the Appellant's
   evidence but rejected that due to inconsistencies.  In other words, Judge
   Hobson did not believe the Appellant's evidence.


26. I add as an aside that I am not assisted by the inclusion in the
   Appellant's bundle of an appeal decision in an unrelated case ([AB/227-
   238]). In fairness to Mr Sharma, he did not take me to it or seek to rely
   on it.  However, since it was part of the Appellant's bundle before Judge
   Andrew, I should explain why I do not find it of assistance.   First, I
   note that the Appellant has not sought permission to rely on what is an
   unreported case of another Upper Tribunal Judge in a case which is
   unrelated to the present appeal.  Second, the views of that Judge about
   the evidential value of the APPG Report are, understandably, not informed
   by the case of DK as the decision pre-dates the Tribunal's decision.
   Third, the decision is only at error of law stage and therefore depends
   on the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There is no further
   decision on re-making. Finally, and more importantly, the Judge in that
   case concludes at [17] of the decision that "[t]he APPG report is capable
   of undermining the strength of the Respondent's case against the
   Appellant or at least assists the Appellant to raise an innocent
   explanation".  She does not there say that it renders the guidance given
   in SM about the evidential weight of the generic evidence of no value.


27. That then brings me on to the way in which Judge Andrew determined the
   ETS issue.  As I have already pointed out, in spite of its criticisms,
   the APPG did not suggest that there had been no cheating in TOEIC tests.
   The thrust of its report was that many students who were innocent had
   been falsely accused.  Nor do I understand the experts, however critical
   of the methodology of the Respondent's evidence, to have said that the
   evidence was entirely valueless.   As Mr Sharma put it in his skeleton
   argument "[t]he weight to be given to evidence is a matter for the
   Tribunal".  He goes on to say that the Judge has "clearly" taken the
   previous appeal decisions as the starting point.  I observe of course
   that Judge Andrew could not have taken Judge Barber's decision into
   account as it was not part of the evidence before her.  However, there is
   no indication that Judge Andrew took into account what had previously
   been said about the Appellant's evidence in relation to the ETS issue.
   The thrust of [9] to [13] of the Decision is that the APPG Report meant
   that the Respondent had "not discharged the evidential burden to prove
   that the TOEIC certificate was procured by dishonesty".  That does not
   disclose the "intrinsically fact sensitive" approach advocated in MA on
   which case Judge Andrew relied and in which, as I have already pointed
   out, on the basis of not dissimilar criticisms to those made by the APPG,
   the Tribunal did not depart from its previous guidance in SM that the
   Respondent's evidence discharged the evidential burden.


28. For those two reasons, which are essentially a failure to provide
   reasons for departure from previous guidance, a failure to explain why
   the Respondent's evidence did not meet the evidential burden based on
   that guidance and a failure to take into account previous decisions in
   the Appellant's case, the Respondent's first ground is made out.  I will
   turn to the effect of that error following consideration of the second
   ground.

Ground Two


29. Ms Everett very fairly accepted that the Respondent's second ground may
   not be as she put it "tenable" following the Tribunal's decision in JA.
   The guidance given in JA is as follows:

       "(1) Where a human rights claim is made, in circumstances  where  the
       Secretary of State considers the nature of what is being  alleged  is
       such that the claim could also constitute a protection claim,  it  is
       appropriate for her to draw this  to  the  attention  of  the  person
       concerned, pointing out they may wish to  make  a  protection  claim.
       Indeed, so much would appear to be required,  in  the  light  of  the
       Secretary of State's international obligations regarding refugees and
       those in need of humanitarian protection.

       (2) There is no obligation on such a  person  to  make  a  protection
       claim. The person concerned may decide to raise an  alleged  risk  of
       serious harm, potentially falling  within  Article  3  of  the  ECHR,
       solely for the purpose of making an application for leave  to  remain
       in the United Kingdom that is centred on the private life aspects  of
       Article 8, whether by reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) or outside
       the immigration rules. If so, the 'serious harm' element of the claim
       falls to be considered in that context.

       (3) This is not to say, however, that the failure of a person to make
       a protection claim, when the possibility of  doing  so  is  drawn  to
       their attention by the Secretary of State, will never be relevant  to
       the assessment by her and, on appeal, by the First-tier  Tribunal  of
       the 'serious harm' element of a purely human rights appeal. Depending
       on the circumstances, the  assessment  may  well  be  informed  by  a
       person's refusal to subject themselves to  the  procedures  that  are
       inherent in the consideration of a claim to refugee  or  humanitarian
       protection status.  Such  a  person  may  have  to  accept  that  the
       Secretary of State and the Tribunal are  entitled  to  approach  this
       element of the claim with some  scepticism,  particularly  if  it  is
       advanced only late in the day. That is so, whether or not the element
       constitutes a 'new matter' for the purposes of section 85(5)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

       (4) On appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim,  a  person
       who has not made a protection claim will not be able to rely  on  the
       grounds set out in section 84(1) of the 2002 Act,  but  only  on  the
       ground specified in section 84(2)."


30. As I have already noted, the Appellant's case in this regard is that he
   and his partner would be at risk on return to Pakistan both because they
   are not married and because they are of different religions. The
   Appellant's partner is also of Indian origin. The Appellant and his
   partner contend that they would be at risk of honour killing by the
   Appellant's family.  The Appellant has not claimed asylum on this basis.
   He claims instead that it is relevant to the "insurmountable obstacles"
   to family life being enjoyed by the couple on return to Pakistan for the
   purposes of Paragraph EX.1. As Ms Everett again very fairly accepted, it
   is perhaps understandable that the case is put in that way here as it may
   be the Appellant's partner who faces the more significant risk as a woman
   rather than the Appellant himself. As a British citizen, the Appellant's
   partner would have no basis on which to claim asylum.  I also note that
   it is accepted by the Respondent that this part of the case does not
   constitute "a new matter".  It was put to the Respondent who considered
   it in the decision under appeal albeit not under Paragraph EX.1. because
   of her conclusion on suitability (based on the ETS allegation).


31. I do not need to consider what is said by Judge Andrew about this
   aspect of the case which turns on her view of the Expert Report.  The
   Judge reaches the conclusion at [27] of the Decision that the Appellant
   and his partner would face "very significant difficulties in continuing
   their family life in Pakistan".

32. The Respondent's second ground is based squarely on an error of the
   Appellant to raise his case as a protection claim.  In light of the
   guidance in JA, that ground falls away.  I have also explained why the
   way in which the case is put might have been the only way in which the
   risk could have been raised due to the nature and potential target of the
   risk.  For those reasons, the Respondent's ground two is not made out.

Effect of the Error of Law under Ground One


33. Mr Sharma sought to persuade me that, having found there to be no error
   under Ground Two, the error under Ground One made no difference. I do not
   accept his submission for the following reasons.


34. First, as the Respondent points out at [5] of the grounds, the Judge
   has purported to allow the appeal solely on the basis that "there would
   be insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and his partner carrying on
   family life together in Pakistan".  Those are said at [29] to be the
   reasons why the appeal is allowed.  As the Respondent points out, the
   Appellant's appeal cannot succeed solely on the basis that he meets
   Paragraph EX.1.  The only basis on which the appeal can be allowed is
   that the Respondent's decision breaches the Appellant's human rights.

35. Although that might appear to be a purely technical error, it is not so
   in this case.  That brings me on to the second reason why the error
   identified by Ground One makes a difference.  Having reached her findings
   at [13] of the Decision concerning the ETS issue (where I have found the
   Judge to fall into error), she continues at [14] to say that "[e]ven if
   [she is] wrong about this" she turns to Paragraph EX.1.  That ignores
   though that if the Appellant fails on suitability grounds under the
   Immigration Rules ("the Rules") as he would if the ETS issue is
   determined against him, Paragraph EX.1. cannot apply.


36. It might then be said, however, that the conclusion would be the same
   outside the Rules on a full proportionality assessment.  Put another way,
   if, under the Rules, an applicant is entitled to succeed if there are
   insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued outside the UK
   (if the other criteria are met) on the basis that there would otherwise
   be a breach of Article 8 ECHR, then the same position should pertain on a
   proportionality assessment outside the Rules.  However, as Ms Everett
   correctly pointed out, other considerations would then have to be brought
   into account such as whether it would be proportionate for the Appellant
   to return to his home country to seek entry clearance to return to the UK
   to re-join his partner by making an application within the Rules.  In
   this case, also, the Appellant's partner is of Indian heritage and may
   have a right to reside there (although I recognise that she asserts in
   her witness statement that she does not).  There may need to be
   consideration to whether that is the case and whether the couple could
   reasonably be expected to return to India if it were found that they
   could not be expected to return to Pakistan.  The public interest in
   removal would also be different if the Appellant fails under the Rules on
   suitability grounds based on a deception.


37. The Judge has reached her conclusion based solely on a finding (in
   effect) that Paragraph EX.1. is met which cannot be the case if the
   Appellant fails on suitability grounds.  She has not conducted a
   balancing assessment under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules as she should
   have done if she had recognised that the Appellant could not succeed
   under the Rules if she were wrong about the suitability ground (as I have
   found) based on the APPG Report.  For those reasons, I am satisfied that
   the same conclusion might not necessarily be reached on a full evaluation
   of proportionality in this case, depending of course on a proper
   assessment of the ETS issue.

38. I therefore set aside the Decision.  Mr Sharma asked me to preserve the
   findings made in relation to the Expert Report at [14] to [26] of the
   Decision.  I decline to do so.  I accept that the issue in relation to
   the position which the Appellant and his partner would face in Pakistan
   is capable of being separated from the ETS issue.  However, I have
   decided that it would not be appropriate to bind another Judge to the
   findings of a previous Judge for the following reasons.

39. The impact of a second Judge's conclusion on the ETS issue will need to
   be taken into account in a full Article 8 evaluation.  A Judge's
   assessment of that issue is also likely to need to take into account
   evidence from the Appellant and another Judge may wish to hear evidence
   from the Appellant and his partner on the issue of the circumstances they
   would face in Pakistan (or indeed India if the Appellant's partner has a
   right to return to that country) when considering the obstacles on
   return.  Another Judge may well want to consider any such evidence when
   assessing the Expert Report and it would not be appropriate to restrict
   the assessment of the Expert Report in the context of all the evidence.


CONCLUSION

40. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of law
   disclosed by ground one.  That error is capable of affecting the outcome
   of the appeal.  For that reason, the Decision is set aside, and the
   appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.




DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 2 December
2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law.  I therefore set
aside the Decision and remit the appeal for re-hearing before a Judge other
than Judge Andrew.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  18 May 2021

