
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02258/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24 May 2021                      |On 16 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                Umair Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, counsel instructed by Queen's Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Burnett, promulgated on 20  October  2020.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by on First-tier Tribunal Judge Gumsley on 25 November 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and no request  nor  reason  was
    given for directing anonymity now.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18 February 2011 with entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 migrant, valid until 30 April 2013. On  8  August
    2018 he applied for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  on  the
    basis of family life with a partner. That application was refused on  7
    March 2019 with no in-country right of appeal. The appellant's judicial
    review challenge to that decision failed.

 4. On 4 November 2019, the appellant made a  further  human  rights  claim
    based on  his  relationship  with  the  same  partner  as  before.  The
    Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was married to  or
    had been living with his claimed partner and nor was it  accepted  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting. The respondent  considered
    that the appellant did not meet any of the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)  and   nor   were   there   any   exceptional   circumstances
    notwithstanding the appellant's claim that his  partner  was  pregnant,
    his parents had disowned him and that he would have nowhere  to  go  in
    Pakistan.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal which  took  place  on  3
    August 2020, the appellant and his partner attended in person and  gave
    evidence. The Tribunal  accepted  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner was genuine and subsisting and that they  had
    been living together in a relationship akin  to  marriage  from  August
    2019.It was not argued before  the  judge  that  the  appellant  had  a
    parental relationship with his partner's children and the judge did not
    accept that there was any  risk  or  difficulty  with  the  appellant's
    family in Pakistan. It was found that  the  appellant's  partner  could
    accompany him to Pakistan given that  she  no  longer  lived  with  her
    children from a previous relationship, who were being cared for by  her
    ex-partner and an older daughter. It was concluded that there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Pakistan, that it
    would not be disproportionate for the appellant to return  to  make  an
    entry clearance application from Pakistan and that the public  interest
    outweighed the appellant's interests.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were  that  the  judge
    made perverse findings, failed to give reasons on material matters  and
    failed to resolve conflicts on material matters. Those matters included
    that the appellant's partner had suffered a miscarriage, that it  would
    be devastating for the  partner's  minor  child  if  she  relocated  to
    Pakistan and that this child would be residing with the  appellant  and
    his mother.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, albeit there  was
    some criticism of the "incomprehensible" grounds.

 8. The respondent did not provide a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. At the outset, Ms  Everett  expressed  her  view  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was not very comprehensive  and  that  she  could  be
    persuaded that the judge erred but that those errors were not material.



10. Mr Malik argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  adequately
    address all of the issues  which  were  before  it.  Those  unaddressed
    issues being whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family life
    taking place in Pakistan, whether there were very significant obstacles
    to the appellant's re-integration in Pakistan and  whether  there  were
    any exceptional circumstances, taking into account the  best  interests
    of the minor  child  of  the  appellant's  partner.  I  heard  detailed
    submissions from Mr Malik which expanded on those themes, all of  which
    I have taken into consideration.

11. In  response,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not  dealt
    thoroughly with  the  issues  raised  today  but  that  the  judge  was
    constrained by a lack of evidence as  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  While evidence of the sponsor's pay was provided  there  was
    no argument that the financial requirements of the Rules were  met.  As
    the appellant had not demonstrated that the Rules were met it was  open
    to him to return to Pakistan and make an application with the  positive
    findings as to his relationship. There was no evidence before the judge
    as to the impact of the sponsor accompanying the appellant to Pakistan.

Decision on error of law

12. The judge accepted that the appellant and his partner (who is  divorced
    and of Filipino origin) were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    and that they had been  living  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage since August 2019  [39].  The  appellant's  partner  has  four
    British children, the youngest aged 15 at the time of the hearing. That
    minor child was living with his older  siblings  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing because the sponsor was living with the appellant in Manchester
    and worked in a senior care role.

13. The evidence before the  judge  was  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    visited the children weekly apart from when unable to do  so  owing  to
    lockdowns  emanating  from  Coronavirus   regulations.    The   sponsor
    continues to provide for her children's financial and emotional  needs.
    The plan, referred to in the various witness statements,  was  for  the
    minor child to live with the appellant  and  his  partner  once  a  new
    school had been  arranged  for  him,  but  the  various  lockdowns  had
    affected those plans.

14. There is  little  reference  to  the  aforementioned  evidence  in  the
    decision and reasons. Nor is there any reference to section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the  best  interests  of
    the minor child or of the considerations in section 117B(6).

15. In these circumstances, the judge's  conclusions  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Pakistan and that
    the decision to refuse the appellant leave to remain  on  human  rights
    grounds was proportionate, were materially flawed.

16. I considered whether to retain  this  appeal  at  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    albeit the parties were in agreement that  it  ought  to  be  remitted.
    While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal which takes into consideration the  best  interests
    of his partner's minor child and it would be unfair to deprive  him  of
    such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Burnett.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date 01 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

