
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02367/2018
                                                               HU/02360/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th February 2019                         |On 21st February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               Manjinder kaur
                              sukhjinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Rana of Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I F Taylor promulgated  on  5  September  2018,  in
    which the Appellants' appeals against  the  decision  to  refuse  their
    human rights claims dated 27 December 2017 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of India and are twins born on  7  January
    1994.  They originally made applications for indefinite leave to  enter
    the United Kingdom on 7 July 2011, to join their  father,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Those  applications  were
    refused by the Respondent on  13  September  2011,  but  successful  on
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 6  February  2012.   There  was  no
    further appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer or the Respondent against
    that decision, however entry clearance was not issued to either of  the
    Appellants and instead their applications  were  refused  again  on  11
    October 2012, albeit the decisions were not received until 25  February
    2013.  For reasons which are unexplained, it appears that  one  of  the
    Appellants, Sukhjinder Singh sought Judicial Review  of  that  decision
    and the other, Manjinder Kaur appealed the decision.

 3. In an order dated 21 July 2014, Michael Fordham QC sitting as a  Deputy
    High Court Judge, on the application for Judicial Review,  quashed  the
    Respondent's decision  dated  11  October  2012.     Ms  Kaur's  appeal
    against the same decision  was  allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro in a decision promulgated on 22 August 2014  with  the
    direction that the Entry Clearance Officer grant  the  Appellant  entry
    clearance.

 4. The Appellants were granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom on  a
    multi-visit visa basis between 21 November 2014  and  14  August  2017.
    The nature of the entry clearance granted was not challenged by  either
    appellant prior to a letter from their solicitors dated  19  July  2017
    claiming a case working error as to the nature  of  the  visas  granted
    which was not  appreciated  at  the  time.   A  request  was  made  for
    settlement with indefinite leave to remain as initially sought  by  the
    Appellants.

 5. Presumably having had no response to the request on 19 July  2017,  the
    Appellants applied for further leave to remain on human rights  grounds
    on, according to the Respondent's  decision,  16  August  2017  (albeit
    there is a dispute about the date  upon  which  the  applications  were
    made) and refused on the basis that the Appellants applied  at  a  time
    when they were overstayers and could not meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules either under Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  for  a
    grant of leave to remain.  The Respondent did not consider  that  there
    were any exceptional circumstances outside of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Judge I F Taylor dismissed the appeals in a decision promulgated  on  5
    September 2018 on human rights grounds.   In  summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that there was insufficient evidence of a previous grant
    of indefinite leave to remain  to  the  Appellants  (in  particular  no
    copies of any application forms, refusal letters or  records  from  the
    Respondent were available) and the Appellants could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  It was not accepted  that  the  Appellants  had
    established family life in the United Kingdom, although it was accepted
    that they had established private life here,  their  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would not amount to disproportionate  interference  with
    their right to respect for private life under Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.



The appeal

 7. The Appellants appeal on two grounds.  Firstly, on the basis  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to appreciate that the  Appellants'  initial
    entry clearance applications were for settlement under paragraph 297 of
    the Immigration Rules and there  was  sufficient  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to show that they had been successful on appeal and
    in the application for Judicial Review on that basis,  such  that  they
    should have both been granted indefinite leave to  remain  without  the
    need for any  further  application  to  extend  the  leave.   In  these
    circumstances, there would be no public  interest  in  the  Appellants'
    removal,  which  is  highly  relevant,   although   accepted   not   be
    determinative, of the proportionality balancing exercise and  therefore
    the outcome of the appeal on human rights grounds.

 8. Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellants' applications for further leave to remain were  made  on  16
    August 2017, therefore two days out  of  time  and  refused  under  the
    Immigration Rules  for  that  reason  (amongst  others).   Pursuant  to
    paragraph 34(2) of the Immigration Rules, the date  of  application  is
    the date of  posting,  not  the  date  of  receipt  and  therefore  the
    applications were made when the Appellants still had  extant  leave  to
    remain.

 9. At the oral hearing, Mr Rana highlighted the  evidence  supporting  the
    Appellants' applications for settlement  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the findings in their favour  on  this  point  in
    both the statutory appeal and  Judicial  Review  application  in  2014;
    which he submitted created a legitimate expectation for the  Appellants
    to be granted indefinite leave to remain.  As to the second  ground  of
    appeal, it was submitted that there was an error in the findings as  to
    the timeliness of the application, albeit accepted that this  was  only
    one of several grounds for the refusal of the applications and not  the
    strongest ground in this onward appeal.

10. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble submitted that in  relation  to
    the issue of whether the correct leave had been granted, the  issue  is
    whether the error was a material.   The  second  ground  of  appeal  in
    relation to timeliness, even if an error, was clearly immaterial to the
    outcome of the appeal.

11. On the first ground of appeal, Mr Bramble's focus  in  his  submissions
    was that the Appellants could not in  fact  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules because  although  their  father
    was in the United Kingdom with the required status here,  their  mother
    had been here unlawfully since 2005 and that was clearly the reason why
    they had left India in the first place.  It was submitted that even  if
    a mistake had been made by the Entry Clearance Officer, this would  not
    be determinative because it would be necessary to look at the situation
    of the mother as part of the facts in the round and  determine  whether
    paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  actually  applied  to  the
    Appellants.  It is not known what details were before the court in  the
    application for Judicial Review and in particular whether the situation
    of the mother was known.  Similarly, it was accepted that there  is  no
    evidence of the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  reasons  for  any  of  the
    decisions made in relation to these Appellants.

Findings and reasons

 1. To determine the first ground of appeal, it is  necessary  to  look  in
    more detail at the findings of the First-tier Tribunal on the issue  of
    whether the  Appellants  should  have  previously  been  granted  entry
    clearance for settlement under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules.
    The findings on this point are as follows:

         "17. On the evidence before me there is  insufficient  evidence  to
         suggest that ILR was granted to  the  appellants  previously.   The
         evidence largely consists of assertions and there  is  no  evidence
         such as application forms and refusal letters or  records  held  by
         the respondent on the computer for example to assist in determining
         this issue.

         18.  Prior to November 2014 decisions made by the  respondent  were
         allowed on appeal  and  despite  the  ECO  not  challenging  either
         decision the ECO took it upon him or herself to refuse to issue the
         entry visa without expressing any grounds why this should be  done.
         The ability to do this can only happen in  very  limited  class  of
         cases where there are cogent and compelling reasons which are given
         for refusal after the determination of an  Immigration  Judge.   To
         hold otherwise would have major repercussions as the  rule  of  law
         would be damaged if the Secretary of State were free to  ignore  an
         un-appealed  decision  by  an  Immigration  Judge.   In  the  final
         paragraph of the decision dated  20  August  2014  the  Immigration
         Judge directs that the Entry Clearance Officer grant the appellants
         entry clearance.  It seems that following that  direction  and  the
         findings of the High Court,  the  respondent's  decision  dated  11
         October 2012 was  quashed.   There  then  is  the  issue,  was  the
         respondent in error once entry clearance had been  issued  from  14
         November 2014 to 14 August 2017 and whether that should  have  been
         indefinite leave to remain rather  limited  leave  to  remain.   As
         stated above the evidence is not very clear about this  matter  but
         bearing in mind that the burden of proof is on the appellant. I  am
         not satisfied that they have established that an error has in  fact
         occurred  which  I  should  deal  with  under  the  proportionality
         exercise."

 2. At the outset, paragraph 17 of the decision displays a misunderstanding
    of the Appellants case - it  is  not  that  they  had  previously  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain, it is that they  had  succeeded  on
    appeal and in an application  for  Judicial  Review  against  decisions
    refusing this and should have been granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    as a result.  The case is based on there being an error  in  the  entry
    clearance they were granted in 2014.

 3. Although the First-tier Tribunal recognised that it would  only  be  in
    very limited cases that a further refusal could be given after  an  un-
    appealed successful appeal by an appellant, the Judge did not make  any
    reference to the findings of Judge O'Garro in 2014 that there  were  no
    such reasons in the present  case,  there  being  no  new  evidence  or
    material considered when the Entry Clearance Officer made to the  fresh
    decisions in 2012 and therefore the Respondent's  decisions  to  refuse
    entry clearance after succeeding in their previous appeals was found to
    not be in accordance with the  law.   It  is  clear  from  that  appeal
    decision that the original applications were under paragraph 297 of the
    Immigration Rules, which are applications for settlement and  not  just
    for entry clearance.

 4. Further, although the First-tier Tribunal  refer  to  the  Respondent's
    decision in 2012 being quashed by the High Court in the application for
    Judicial Review, there is no reference to or consideration of the basis
    upon which that Order was made, which is expressly recorded on the face
    of the order as follows:

         "UPON the Defendant having indicated that she will now  secure  the
         grant to the Claimant of entry clearance as the child of  a  parent
         present and settled in the UK, pursuant to S297 of the  Immigration
         Rules"

 5. I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  reaching  the
    findings in paragraphs 17  and  18  of  the  decision  that  there  was
    insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  Appellants   should   have
    previously been granted indefinite leave to remain, which  was  against
    the, albeit limited evidence, before the Tribunal.  There was a failure
    to take into account the detailed reasons given by  Judge  O'Garro  for
    allowing the appeal in 2014 and more importantly,  a  failure  to  take
    into account the Respondent's express  indication  that  the  grant  of
    entry clearance pursuant to paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    would be secured for Sukhjinder Singh, with liberty for an  application
    for an order to join Manjinder Kaur whose case is materially identical.
     The combination of this evidence and the fact that  paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules is an application for  settlement  and  not  just
    leave to remain is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  Appellants  had  a
    reasonable expectation that they would be granted  entry  clearance  on
    this basis with indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The  findings  to  the
    contrary having failed to take  into  account  this  evidence  and  the
    nature of the application made is an error of law.

 6. As recognised by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  paragraph  18  of  the
    decision,  if  the  Appellants  should  have  previously  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, that is a matter which is relevant  to  the
    proportionality exercise in a human rights appeal.  In  this  situation
    there is a clear impact on the public interest in removal  relevant  to
    the balancing exercise and the failure to take  it  into  account  when
    undertaking the same which is material to the outcome of the appeal.

 7. I do not accept the submissions on behalf of the  Respondent  that  the
    error identified above is immaterial on the  basis  that  in  fact  the
    Appellants could not have satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  297
    of the Immigration Rules  for  two  primary  reasons.   First,  in  the
    absence of any evidence from either party about the reasons for refusal
    of entry clearance or the reasons for the grant which was made in 2014,
    the submissions were speculation.  Secondly, and  in  any  event,  this
    submission seeks to reopen clear findings made in the decisions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Respondent's express  position  before  the
    High Court in 2014, neither of which were appealed by the Respondent.

 8. For the all of these reasons, I find a material error  of  law  on  the
    first ground such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be
    set aside.  It is not necessary to consider the second ground of appeal
    which was in any event immaterial to  the  outcome.   I  indicated  the
    finding of an error of law in  summary  to  the  parties  at  the  oral
    hearing, further to which submissions  were  made  by  the  parties  to
    enable me to remake the decision under appeal.

 9. On behalf of the Appellants, Mr Rana sought to rely on the findings  in
    2014 to show that the Appellants should have  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  at  that
    time.  In these circumstances there would  be  no  public  interest  in
    their removal from the United Kingdom.  Considering the  other  factors
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    there are no other adverse factors in relation to these Appellants,  in
    particular there is no issue as to  the  English  language  ability  or
    ability to maintain themselves.  Although there was no direct challenge
    to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant  had  not
    established family life in the United Kingdom, it was submitted that in
    fact there was subsisting family life with their  parents  and  in  any
    event this must be taken into account as part of  their  private  life.
    Taking all of these factors  together  with  the  unusual  history  and
    exceptional features of this case, it was submitted that the removal of
    the Appellants would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
    right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

10. Mr Bramble reiterated his earlier submissions that paragraph 297 of the
    Immigration Rules did not in fact bite on the Appellants' case  and  in
    any event in the balancing exercise, it would  have  to  be  considered
    whether the passage of time since 2014 when the Appellants entered  the
    United Kingdom is such that they  have  developed  private  life  which
    outweighs  the  public  interest  factors  in  section  117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in particular when little
    weight is attached to such private life  given  the  precariousness  of
    their status.  The Appellants are now adults who could return  together
    to India, potentially with their mother as well who  has  no  leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  would  not  amount  to   a
    disproportionate interference with her rights under Article 8.

11. In determining the appeal on human rights grounds, I  follow  the  five
    stage approach in Razgar v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27.  There was no challenge to the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that Article 8 was  engaged,  at  least  in  relation  to
    private life,  for  these  Appellants  and  that  their  removal  would
    constitute an interference with the same and I  adopt  those  findings.
    Such interference would be in accordance with the law and necessary  in
    a Democratic society in the interests of effective immigration controls
    and the economic well-being of the country.

12. The final question is whether the interference is proportionate to  the
    legitimate  public  aims  sought  to  be  achieved,  which  requires  a
    balancing of the public  interest  and  the  Appellants'  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom.  In undertaking this exercise, I  am
    required to take into account  the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

13. In these appeals, I find that at its highest, only minimal  weight  can
    be attached to the public interest in removing the Appellants in  light
    of their immigration history and the evidence as set out above  in  the
    context of the error of law decision.  That evidence is  sufficient  to
    establish that the Appellants should have been granted entry  clearance
    for settlement, that is indefinite leave to remain under paragraph  297
    of the Immigration Rules, at the latest following the  appeal  decision
    and application for Judicial Review in 2014, if not  earlier.   At  the
    latest in 2014, this was the position that the Respondent  had  himself
    expressly accepted in relation to one of the Appellants and there is no
    distinction at all between the two cases.  If the Appellants' had  been
    granted entry clearance in accordance with the decisions of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and High Court in 2014, as the Respondent indicated  that
    he would secure, they  would  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
    indefinite leave to remain and no further application would be required
    to the Respondent to extend leave.  There can be no significant  public
    interest in removing individuals in such circumstances.  There  are  no
    other adverse factors to the  Appellants  which  would  strengthen  the
    public interest in this case under  section  117B,  in  particular  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control falls away for the reasons
    already given, the Appellants speak English and are not a burden on the
    state and even if only little weight is to be attached to private  life
    on the basis of the entry  clearance  which  were  they  were  in  fact
    granted, the private life established taken together with  the  unusual
    circumstances of these cases would be sufficient to outweigh the public
    interest in any event.  I find that the Appellants'  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
    right to respect for private life  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights for these reasons.

14. Although I have no power to  direct  that  the  Respondent  grants  any
    particular type of leave  to  remain  to  the  Appellants  following  a
    successful human rights appeal,  I  would  hope  that  in  all  of  the
    circumstances of this case, that the Respondent remedies  the  previous
    errors and abides by the undertaking given to the High  Court  in  2014
    for the correct leave to remain to be given to  both  Appellants  under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.
Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remake  the  appeal
is as follows:

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity directions are made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         18th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
