
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02642/2019
                                                               HU/03576/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                mrs Ayswarya Vishwanathan (first Respondent)
                  mr Maha Devan Jayapal (second Respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Bhebhe, instructed by Njomane Immigration law
practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first respondent (whom I shall refer to as "the claimant") is a
    citizen of India.  The second respondent, who is the claimant's
    husband, is also a citizen of India.  The claimant and the second
    respondent have a son born in the UK in October 2016.

 2. On 17 February 2017 the claimant, who has been in the UK since 2011,
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of her private and family
    life.  On 22 January 2019 that application was refused.

 3. One of the reasons the Secretary of State gave for refusing the
    application was that in a previous application made in July 2013 the
    claimant had relied on a fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate.  The
    Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter states that using voice
    recognition software it was confirmed the TOEIC certificate submitted
    by the claimant with the July 2013 application was invalid.

 4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where the appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence ("the judge").  In a decision
    promulgated on 5 September 2019 the judge allowed the appeal.  The
    Secretary of State is now appealing against that decision.

 5. The judge gave a self-direction as to the burden of proof at paragraph
    7 of the decision where he stated:

         "It is a three stage approach.  First the respondent must adduce
         sufficient evidence to raise the issue of fraud.  The applicant has
         then a burden of raising an innocent explanation which satisfies
         the minimum level of plausibility.  If that burden is discharged
         the respondent must establish on a balance of probabilities that
         this innocent explanation is to be rejected".

 6. The judge found that the Secretary of State had not satisfied the first
    of these three stages and therefore there was no need for the claimant
    to raise an innocent explanation.  This is stated both at paragraphs 14
    and 15 of the decision.  At paragraph 14 the judge stated

         "the evidential burden does not shift to the appellant to rebut
         anything".

    At paragraph 15 he stated

         "the evidential, the second stage, burden does not shifted to the
         first appellant to rebut anything".

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge failed to follow SSHD v
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

 8. At the hearing, Ms Everett argued that even if judge was correct in
    respect of the fraud issue, the judge had not, in any event, provided a
    reasoned basis for allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.  She
    acknowledged that this was not raised specifically in the grounds of
    appeal.  I declined to hear this argument as it had not been raised
    previously.

 9. Mr Bhebhe argued that the document relied on by the Secretary of State
    to support the allegation of fraud (an extract from a spreadsheet
    headed ETS selt source data which refers to the claimant's test as
    being invalid) is not of itself enough to meet the initial burden. He
    also argued that the decision, read as a whole, shows that the judge
    considered the appellant's "innocent explanation" and accepted it.

10. In order to discharge the initial evidential burden in this case the
    Secretary of State submitted witness statements from three individuals
    that are not specific to the claimant (referred to by the judge at
    paragraph 11 as "generic witness statements"), along with an extract
    from a database referred to as the ETS selt source data, referring to
    the claimant as having an "invalid" test. The judge made no reference
    to the ETS selt source data document even though it was in the
    Secretary of State's bundle (at page 84).  The impression formed from
    reading the decision, in particular paragraph 11, is that the judge
    entirely omitted this document from consideration.

11. In Shehzad it is made clear that the witness statements referred to by
    the judge as the generic witness statements taken together with the ETS
    selt source data extract referring to the individual in question is
    ordinarily sufficient to shift the evidential burden.  At paragraph 26
    of Shehzad it is stated that:

         "the in limine rejection of the Secretary of State's evidence as
         even sufficient to shift the evidential burden was an error of
         law."

12. The judge erred in law because had he followed Shehzad, as he was bound
    to do, he would have found that the Secretary of State had discharged
    the initial burden such that the burden shifted to the claimant to
    provide a plausible innocent explanation.

13. The judge has made several findings in the decision which show that he
    believed the claimant told the truth and which provide support for such
    a conclusion.  However reading the decision as a whole it is plain that
    the judge, when reaching his final conclusion, gave significant weight
    to his conclusion, which is not consistent with Shehzad, that the
    Secretary of State had not even established the initial evidential
    burden. I am therefore of the view that the error was material.

14. Given that there will be a need for a judge to reach fresh conclusions
    on the evidence I consider this is a case that is appropriate for
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh before a
    different judge.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
    before a different judge.
|                                      |                            |
|                                      |                            |
|Signed                                |                            |
|                                      |                            |
|                                      |                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 20 January 2020      |

