
                                    [pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. HU/02443/2015
                                                               HU/14195/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 1 February 2017             |On: 3 February 2017             |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JE
                                     SAM
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a re-making of an Article 8 appeal following the error  of  law
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley dated 9 December  2016
    which set aside the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    dated 11 July 2016.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to JE and SAM as the  appellants,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal. I also refer to  JE  as  "the
    appellant" as she is the adult in this matter and the person conducting
    the litigation on behalf of SAM, her daughter.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellants. This direction  applies
    to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so  in
    order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to SAM, a minor.

 4. The appellant was not represented before me. She confirmed that she was
    prepared to present her case herself and  that  her  English  was  good
    enough to do so. She was clear that she did not want  further  time  to
    obtain legal representation. I heard from the appellant,  went  through
    her documents with her and heard from Mr Tufan, reserving  my  decision
    at the end of the hearing.

 5. The undisputed background to this  matter  is  that  the  appellant,  a
    Nigerian national born in 1970 has been in the UK without  leave  since
    at least 2005. Her daughter, SAM, was born to a Nigerian national on 10
    April 2008. She has never had any form of leave. It was  agreed  before
    me that SAM is a Nigerian national.  On  3  July  2015  the  appellants
    applied for leave to  remain  under  Article  8  ECHR.  The  respondent
    refused that application on 10 July 2015.

 6. The respondent did not find that the  appellants  qualified  for  leave
    under the provisions of Appendix FM or paragraph 276DE. The  respondent
    accepted that SAM had been in the UK continuously for at least 7  years
    immediately preceding the date of application. She  therefore  assessed
    whether, in line with paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules whether it was reasonable  for  SAM
    to leave the UK.

 7. At paragraphs 18 and 19 of the decision, the  respondent  set  out  her
    view that notwithstanding 7 years' continuous residence  it  was  still
    reasonable for SAM to return to Nigeria with her mother.  Although  she
    had been born in the UK, SAM had not spent her formative years  in  the
    UK and was of an age to adapt to life in  Nigeria.  There  was  nothing
    indicating that SAM would not thrive in Nigeria and do well  at  school
    there.  It  was  also  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  have
    significant difficulties reintegrating in Nigeria having spent at least
    31 years there prior to coming to the UK.

 8.  The  respondent  also  found  that  there  would  be   no   compelling
    circumstances that should lead to leave being granted under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  In  essence,  this  was  for  the  same
    reasons as set out above. The respondent  relied  on  country  evidence
    showing that free education from the age of 6 to 15  was  available  in
    Nigeria. It was not accepted that a differential  in  the  health  care
    systems of the UK and Nigeria amounted to compelling circumstances.  It
    was not accepted that the appellant's subjective fears of  mistreatment
    of SAM because of customary rights was  a  relevant  criterion  in  the
    Article 8 assessment and she was advised of the provisions for making a
    protection claim.

 9. The appellant maintained that it was not reasonable for her daughter to
    return to Nigeria. She had only experienced life in the  UK  and  would
    find Nigeria very hard. The economic situation there would make it very
    hard for her to find  work  to  support  them  and  they  would  become
    destitute. The only schools that offered a  reasonable  education  were
    private and she would not be able to pay for this. There were no family
    members to look to for support,  the  only  relative  still  living  in
    Nigeria being her elderly mother who lived in straitened  circumstances
    in a single room.

10. The first assessment that I must conduct is whether it is  "reasonable"
    for SAM to go to Nigeria after living in the UK since she was born here
    in order to establish whether paragraphs EX.1 and paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    are met and the appeal allowed under the Immigration Rules.

11. When conducting that assessment, I referred to the  guidance  from  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.  The
    case   addresses   the   correct   approach   to   an   assessment   of
    "reasonableness" under paragraph 276ADE(iv) and section 117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Court  of  Appeal  in
    MA, with some reluctance, at [45] adopted  the  ratio  of  MM  (Uganda)
    [2016] EWA Civ 450 to the effect that in the reasonableness  assessment
    either under or  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  "wider  public
    interest considerations must be taken into account". Those include  the
    immigration history of  the  parent  and  wider  factors  such  as  the
    situation for  the  child  on  return,  ability  to  integrate,  access
    education and so on.
12. This was so, albeit, at [46], the Court identified  that  residence  of
    seven years or more remained a significant factor, setting out that:
         "... the fact that a child has been here for seven  years  must  be
         given significant weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
         exercise. Indeed, the Secretary  of  State  published  guidance  in
         August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
         entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10
         Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated that  once  the  seven
         years' residence requirement is satisfied, there need to be "strong
         reasons" for refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were
         not in force when the cases now subject to appeal were  determined,
         but in my view they merely confirm what is implicit in  adopting  a
         policy of this nature. After such a period of time the  child  will
         have put down roots and developed social, cultural and  educational
         links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly  disruptive  if
         the child is required to leave the UK. That may be less so when the
         children are very young because the focus of their lives will be on
         their families, but the disruption becomes more serious as they get
         older. Moreover, in  these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."



13. At [47] of MA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal also identified that even
    if a child's best interests were in staying in the UK:

         "... it may still not be  unreasonable  to  require  the  child  to
         leave. That will depend on a careful analysis  of  the  nature  and
         extent of the links in the UK  and  in  the  country  where  it  is
         proposed he should return."

    and at [54]:

         "There is nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst
         it is in the child's best interests are for him or her to stay,  it
         is not unreasonable to expect him or her to go. That is so even  if
         the reasonableness test should be applied so as to  exclude  public
         interest considerations bearing upon the parents."

14. I must therefore conduct "a careful analysis of the nature  and  extent
    of the links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed" to send
    SAM. Her residence of 7 years clearly shows strong links to the UK  and
    creates a strong indication that her best interests lie in remaining in
    the UK with her mother. The materials before me did not show additional
    factors beyond her residence and education in primary and junior school
    that added to the degree of her links to the UK. She has never  visited
    Nigeria so her links are only through her mother. There was  no  reason
    to doubt the appellant's evidence that only her elderly mother remained
    in Nigeria and that she  was  not  in  a  position  to  accommodate  or
    otherwise assist the appellant or SAM on return.

15. The appellant also explained, however, that prior to coming to  the  UK
    she had a job with Shell as a cashier, working in  Port  Harcourt.  She
    was able to find good employment in Nigeria before coming  to  the  UK,
    therefore. She has also worked extensively in the UK since coming  here
    and continued to do so as a single parent after her daughter was  born,
    albeit she is currently not permitted to work. Her history  is  not  of
    someone unable to find work or  act  resourcefully.  Nothing  suggested
    that the respondent's country evidence as to the availability  of  free
    education up until the age of 15  was  incorrect.  The  free  education
    available may well be of a different standard to that available in  the
    UK but that difference did not appear to me to be capable of  amounting
    to a factor showing that it would not be reasonable for SAM  to  return
    to Nigeria. There is also the long-term overstaying of the appellant to
    factor into the reasonableness assessment.

16. The respondent's also sought to rely on her records  showing  an  entry
    clearance application made using a passport in the appellant's name  in
    Nigeria on 31 May 2005. The respondent indicated at paragraph 27 of the
    refusal letter that this showed that the appellant had been in  the  UK
    for only 10 years as of the date of the decision rather than 13  years.
    That did not appear  to  me  to  make  a  material  difference  in  the
    reasonableness assessment. The refusal letter did not suggest that  the
    entry clearance application to the appellant otherwise showed  material
    deception, only that she could be better shown to have retained  social
    and cultural ties with Nigeria. The appellant  has  always  been  clear
    that she does not know how the entry clearance application was made and
    considered that she had been a victim of fraud that  occurred,  in  her
    view, relatively frequently in the Nigerian community.

17. After considering all of these factors,  my  conclusion  was  that  the
    evidence here showed that SAM's best interests lay in remaining in  the
    UK with her mother because of her much stronger links  to  the  UK  and
    very limited links to Nigeria where  even  with  her  English  language
    skills and UK education life would be less advantageous  for  her  even
    after the initial difficult readjustment because of  the  more  limited
    opportunities for her.

18. It was not my judgement that it was unreasonable for  SAM  to  live  in
    Nigeria, however. As above, her mother's background suggests  that  she
    can be expected to find work to support them and that SAM will be  able
    to go to school at least up to the age of 15. Those circumstances  also
    fall to be weighed alongside the appellant's serious overstaying. I did
    not find that the requirements of pargraph EX.1 or 276ADE(iv) were  met
    and refused the Article 8 appeal under the Immigration Rules.

19. I must also assess  whether  the  decision  is  disproportionate  under
    Article 8, outside of the provisions of the Immigration Rules. This  is
    a freestanding assessment albeit consideration must  be  taken  of  the
    respondent's legitimate policy position on Article 8  as  expressed  in
    the Immigration Rules. The provisions of  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 must also be applied.

20. The public interest in effective immigration control inevitably  weighs
    against the appellants as they are unable to meet the policy provisions
    of the Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant  and  SAM's  proficiency  in
    English is a neutral  factor.  The  appellant  cannot  be  said  to  be
    financially independent,  a  factor  weighing  against  her,  following
    s.117B(3).

21. This free-standing assessment of the private life of SAM must take into
    account her residence here of nearly 9 years which I accept adds weight
    to the appellants' side of the balance compared to the assessment under
    the Immigration Rules. Also, the assessment here must include the  long
    residence of the appellant as well  as  SAM.  That,  however,  attracts
    little weight following  s.117B(4)  as  the  appellant  has  been  here
    illegally for almost all of the time that she has been in the UK.

22. Also, as clarified by the President of UTIAC at [44] of Treebhawon  and
    Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT
    00013 (IAC), a threshold of "compelling circumstances" must be  met  if
    an Article 8 claim is to succeed outside the Immigration Rules.

23. It was my view that the only  really  significant  difference  in  this
    second assessment was the  longer,  9  year  residence  of  SAM  and  I
    considered this carefully before reaching  a  conclusion.  This  factor
    fortified the conclusion that SAM's best interests lay in remaining  in
    the UK and increased the difference in her links  here  with  those  in
    Nigeria. Even  taking  this  into  account,  however,  it  was  not  my
    conclusion that the circumstances of the appellant and SAM on return to
    Nigeria could be said to be sufficiently compelling so as  to  outweigh
    the public interest in effective immigration control. The  availability
    of education, the economic activity of the appellant  in  the  past  in
    Nigeria and in the UK and the appellant's poor immigration history,  in
    the final evaluation, were sufficient for the respondent's decision  to
    be a proportionate one.

DECISION

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

25. The appeal is re-made as refused on all grounds.


Signed: [pic]                                Date:  2 February 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
