

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/02390/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated:    |
|On 25 October 2019                    |On 20 November 2019                 |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  HANA [A]


                          (Anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                            (FCO Number: 1085458)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr P Shea (Counsel)
 For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)









                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 24 June 2019, following a hearing of 18 June 2019, and which it
         sent to the parties on 26  June  2019.  The  tribunal  decided  to
         dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the   entry   clearance
         officer's decision of 7 January 2019 refusing to grant  her  entry
         clearance to come to the United Kingdom (UK), for the purposes  of
         or with a view to settlement.

      2. The background circumstances are a little unusual and so  I  shall
         take some time to set  them  out.  The  claimant  was  born  on  1
         February 1990 and is a female and a Yemeni national. She  has  two
         children. Those children were born on 13 May 2008 and 28  February
         2011 respectively. It is not disputed that, unlike  the  claimant,
         they are both British citizens. As I understand it they have  that
         citizenship as a result of the citizenship of their father. He  is
         married to the claimant but that marriage has broken down.

      3. The claimant made her  application  for  entry  clearance  in  the
         United Arab Emirates where I am told she, and  the  two  children,
         continue to reside having obtained an  initial  grant  of  limited
         leave which, according to Mr Shea, has subsequently been  extended
         for a further temporary period.

      4. The tribunal recorded a number of  agreed  facts  in  its  written
         decision of 24 June 2019. Those included an  acceptance  that  the
         claimant and her husband had separated in 2016 as a result of  his
         having physically and  mentally  abused  her;  that  he  had  made
         attempts to kidnap the children despite the claimant having  legal
         custody  as a result of Court Orders which she had obtained in the
         Yemen; that the claimant and the children had fled Yemen to  Egypt
         and had then gone from Egypt to the United Arab Emirates; that the
         claimant and her children do not wish to return to  the  Yemen  on
         account of prevailing conditions in that country and the  fear  of
         the claimant's husband; that the claimant has a family friend  who
         would be able to accommodate her and the two children in  the  UK;
         and that one of the children has a medical condition  relating  to
         her kidneys as well as psychological difficulties.

5.     The  entry  clearance  officer  who  refused  the   application   had
considered it primarily under the Immigration Rules which  permit  an  adult
parent to join a child who is already in the UK. That,  of  course,  is  not
quite the position here. Having decided that the relevant requirements  were
not  met  he  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  exceptional   or
compassionate  circumstances  such  as  to  justify  the  giving  of   entry
clearance in any event. As to that, the entry clearance officer said this:

            "Exceptional circumstances
           It has also been considered whether your application raises  any
           exceptional circumstances which, consistent with  the  right  to
           respect for private and family life contained in  Article  8  of
           the European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant  a  grant
           of  entry  clearance  to  the   United   Kingdom   outside   the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules. You have not  raised  any
           such exceptional circumstances, so it has been decided that your
           application does not fall for a grant of entry clearance outside
           the rules. With regard to family life, I am satisfied  that  the
           family life that  exists  between  you  and  your  children  can
           continue unaffected by this decision.


           Compassionate factors
           You do not fall for a  grant  of  entry  clearance  outside  the
           Immigration Rules on the basis of compassionate factors".

6. When the tribunal heard the appeal on 18 June  2019,  Mr  Shea,  who  had
also represented the claimant at that stage as well as before  me,  had  not
sought to argue  that  the  claimant  was  able  to  meet  the  requirements
contained within Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  relating  to  parents
joining children in the UK. Rather, he had argued  that  the  appeal  should
succeed under a possibly quite obscure provision which was clearly  designed
to ensure, along with certain other provisions, that the  Immigration  Rules
are Article 8 ECHR compliant. That provision is  GEN  3.2  which  relevantly
provides as follows:


           GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where  an  application
           for entry clearance or leave to enter or remain made under  this
           Appendix, or an  application  for  leave  to  remain  which  has
           otherwise  been  considered  under  this  Appendix,   does   not
           otherwise meet the requirements of this Appendix or  Part  9  of
           the  Rules,  the  decision-maker  must  consider   whether   the
           circumstances in sub-paragraph (2) apply.
           (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above  applies,  the  decision-maker
           must consider, on the basis of the information provided  by  the
           applicant, whether there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which
           would render refusal of entry clearance, or leave  to  enter  or
           remain, a breach of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
           Human Rights, because such refusal would result in unjustifiably
           harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner, a  relevant
           child or another family member whose  Article  8  rights  it  is
           evident from that information would be affected by a decision to
           refuse the application.
           (3) Where the exceptional  circumstances  referred  to  in  sub-
           paragraph (2) above apply, the applicant will be  granted  entry
           clearance or leave to enter  or  remain  under,  as  appropriate
           paragraph D-ECP.1.2., D-LTRP.1.2., D-ECC.1.1.,  D-LTRC.1.1.,  D-
           ECPT.1.2., D-LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-ECDR.1.2.


7.    Sub-paragraph (4) does not have application in this case.

8.    In explaining in concise terms why it was dismissing  the  appeal  the
tribunal said this:

           "7. I must first consider whether the Appellant has family  life
           in the United Kingdom. The answer is that she does not. As such,
           refusal of entry clearance does not interfere  with  her  family
           life in the United Kingdom. Further, her family life is with her
           children and she lives  with  her  children.  Refusal  of  entry
           clearance does not therefore interfere with that family life. As
           such, this appeal cannot  succeed,  whether  it  be  within  the
           Immigration Rules, within any exceptions to the Rules or outside
           of the Rules, as there is no interference with  family  life  by
           refusing entry clearance".

9.    An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
followed. Permission was granted and  the  granting  Judge  relevantly  said
this:

           "2. There is some arguable merit in the ground that it was  open
           to the judge to consider, and decide, whether  the  decision  to
           refuse  entry  clearance  to  the  appellant  and  her  children
           resulted in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant's
           British children. The submission was made at [5], but the  judge
           did not reach a conclusion on whether the circumstances  of  the
           appellants were sufficient  to  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
           consequences as part of  the  proportionality  assessment  under
           Article 8. Permission to appeal is granted".

10.   Permission having been granted the  case  was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be  decided  whether
the tribunal had erred in law and if it had, what  should  flow  from  that.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative for their valued assistance.

11.   Mr Shea, for the claimant, argued that GEN 3.2 does not require  there
to be existing family life in the UK (my underlining) as  the  tribunal  had
appeared to think. So, it had erred in misconstruing that provision. On  the
assumption that he was right about  that  and  given  the  accepted  factual
background Mr Shea urged me to set aside the tribunal's decision and  to  go
on to remake the decision in the claimant's favour. Mrs Pettersen,  for  the
respondent, acknowledged that the tribunal had accepted a  number  of  facts
which might, on one view, be thought to assist the claimant. But she  argued
that, as I understand it, GEN 3.2. did not permit a tribunal, as opposed  to
an entry clearance officer, to exercise what she  submitted  amounted  to  a
discretionary power to grant entry clearance. She drew my attention  to  the
tribunal's observation that although  it  had  itself  accepted  the  agreed
facts, the entry clearance officer had not done so.

12.   I have decided the tribunal erred in  law  through  misconstruing  GEN
3.2. I have set out the relevant wording above. That provision,  for  it  to
apply,  requires  it  to  be  demonstrated  that   there   are   exceptional
circumstances which would render refusal of entry  clearance,  or  leave  to
enter or remain, a breach of Article 8 because such refusal would result  in
unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  either  for  a  claimant  or  for   that
claimant's partner, a relevant child or another family member whose  Article
8 rights would be impacted by refusal.  I  agree  with  Mr  Shea,  that  the
provision does not actually require there to be pre-existing family life  in
the UK.  Nor does it require that any interference with Article 8 rights  be
interference with already existing family life in the UK. On  that  basis  I
have concluded that I should set aside its decision.

13.   As indicated, Mr Shea asked me if I were with him on the error of  law
issue, to go on to remake the  decision  on  the  material  before  me.  Mrs
Pettersen (subject of course to my  deciding  to  set  aside  the  tribunals
decision) did not seek to dissuade me from doing so.  This  is  not  a  case
where additional evidence is required given the tribunal's acceptance  of  a
number of important background factual circumstances. Further, there  is  no
real possibility of receiving oral evidence from the claimant at any  future
hearing given  her  geographical  location.  So,  I  have  concluded  it  is
appropriate for me to remake the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  material
currently before me.

14.   The case has been argued, on behalf of the claimant, solely under  GEN
3.2. That then is what I have focussed upon in remaking the decision.

15.   It seems to me that the first thing I have to ask  myself  is  whether
the claimant's application for entry clearance otherwise  (that  is  to  say
without a consideration of GEN 3.2) meets the requirements  of  Appendix  FM
or Part 9 of the Immigration Rules. But it is common  ground  that  it  does
not. So, it is necessary for me to go on to consider GEN.3.2 (2).

16.   As to that, I think I should first consider  whether  the  refusal  of
entry clearance has resulted in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  either
the claimant herself or for her two British citizen children  whose  Article
8 rights are impacted by the refusal decision. It is true that the  claimant
and the two children are currently enjoying (if  that  is  the  right  word)
family life together in the United Arab Emirates. But the two  children  are
British and are entitled to take advantage of that citizenship by coming  to
and living in the UK.  In  my  judgment  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance,
notwithstanding the current unity of the three family members,  does  result
in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  because  it  means  they  must  either
remain, for as long as they might be permitted to do so, in a country  where
they have no permanent right to reside and  on  the  basis  of  the  limited
information before me no expectation that they will attain such a right,  or
they will have to return to Yemen where, in light of the acceptance  by  the
tribunal of the claimed factual background, there must be some  risk  (since
it has  happened  before)  that  the  father  will  attempt  to  kidnap  the
children. That, if it happened of course, would result in  a  separation  of
the  children  and  their  mother.  Living  in  circumstances  where   their
immigration status is uncertain and they might have to move at any time  (if
entry clearance is not granted) to Yemen where there is the risk  of  kidnap
and consequent separation does, in my view, affect the Article 8 rights  not
only of the claimant but,  perhaps  more  importantly,  the  rights  of  the
British citizen children.

17.   In light of the above I would conclude that the circumstances in  this
case are indeed exceptional and would, in the  particular  circumstances  of
this case, render refusal of entry clearance  a  breach  of  the  Article  8
rights of, at least, the  British  citizen  children,  who  will,  if  entry
clearance is not granted to the claimant, be denied the right to  reside  in
their country of citizenship with their own mother.

18.   So, having decided to set aside the tribunal's decision, I  have  also
decided, in the most unusual circumstances  of  this  case,  to  remake  the
decision on the basis that the requirements set out at GEN 3.2 are met.

Decision

19.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error of law. That decision is set aside.

In remaking the decision, the Upper Tribunal allows  the  claimant's  appeal
from the entry clearance officer's decision of 7 January  2019  refusing  to
grant her entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated: 18 November 2019






To the respondent
Fee award

Although I have allowed the appeal I have decided not to make a  fee  award.
None was sought and I do not think, in the  unusual  circumstances  of  this
case, the entry clearance officer can be  criticised  for  arriving  at  the
decision he did on the material before him.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated: 18 November 2019
