
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02627/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2017                           |                              |
|Prepared 27 November 2017                     |On 13 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                             Jana bahadur limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Kent Immigration and Visa
Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Caskie who in a determination promulgated on 19
    July 2017  dismissed  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, New Delhi to refuse  to  grant  entry  clearance  to
    enable him to join his father, a Gurkha veteran, in Britain.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 14 June 1986.  His  father
    applied, successfully, for leave to enter as a Gurkha veteran in  2014.
    The following year the appellant applied to join him and was refused by
    the ECO who not accept that he was single or reliant upon  the  sponsor
    either financially or emotionally.  Weight was placed on the fact  that
    the appellant had travelled to the United Emirates in 2008 to work  and
    that he was 29 years of age.  It was also considered that the appellant
    was married as that had been stated on his father's  application  form.
    It was suggested that it would have been reasonable for  the  appellant
    to have sought employment and had he been unable to  obtain  employment
    there would surely have been written rejections which he could produce.
     It was pointed out that the appellant had originally claimed  that  he
    have not left Nepal during  the  previous  10  years  when   there  was
    evidence that he had gone to the UAE to work in 2008.

3.   The grounds of appeal asserted that the appellant  was  not  married  -
    his father had  expected  him  to  marry  when  he  had  made  his  own
    application but the appellant had not done so. It was argued  that   it
    was irrational to place weight on the fact that the appellant travelled
    to the UAE "for any number of reasons and even if he did  go  there  to
    work temporarily in 2008 it did not mean that he was not now  dependent
    on his father".  It was argued that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    wrong to refuse the application as the  appellant  had  "not  evidenced
    that he was  unemployed".  It  was  asserted  that  the  appellant  was
    maintained by his father and that the discretionary provisions relating
    to the entry of the children of  former  Gurkhas  were  such  that  the
    appellant should be entitled to entry.  It was also submitted that  his
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR were breached by the decision.

4.   The judge, having set out the reasons for the refusal, listed  at  some
    length the evidence given to him by the appellant's father and  by  his
    sister.  He concluded that the fact that the appellant had gone to  the
    UAE to work in 2008 and had  worked  there  for  approximately  sixteen
    months indicated that the appellant had  formed  a  separate  life  for
    himself.  Despite the fact that the appellant's father's  evidence  was
    that he had only put on his application form that his son  was  married
    because he expected him to marry, the judge found  that  the  appellant
    had married: he did not accept the appellant's father's evidence.

5.   The judge took into account the fact  that  the  appellant  was  living
    with his brothers on a small holding in Nepal, working there for "self-
    consumption" and that he worked for other  neighbours  as  a  labourer,
    earning some money.  The judge accepted that the sponsor sent money  to
    Nepal but stated that he considered that that money was  not  essential
    to the appellant.  In paragraph 31 he wrote:-

         "Whilst I consider the financial support provided is of  assistance
         to the appellant I consider that the life the appellant lives would
         essentially be the same with or without the sponsor's support."

6.   He stated that he considered the appellant had  become  an  independent
    adult supporting himself collectively with his brothers.

7.   When considering the issue of whether or not the appellant  was  living
    an independent life he accepted that the appellant had  worked  in  the
    UAE for a period in excess of one year and that the appellant had  been
    a young man when he had done so.  He stated that:-

         "I do not consider that the relationship between the appellant  and
         the sponsor is such that family life continues between  them.   The
         appellant as a young man had travelled abroad to work for a  period
         in excess of one year.  There is also in my view the evidence  that
         he married.  I consider that even the  evidence  of  the  appellant
         leaving home to travel to another country to work for a  period  in
         excess of one year such as to  fundamentally  undermine  the  claim
         that the appellant has a relationship of the nature necessary to be
         granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom."

8.   In reaching his conclusion the judge stated  that  he  had  taken  into
    account relevant case law. He referred to the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160. He noted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    said:

         "Where Article 8 is held to be engaged if the fact that but for the
         historic wrong the appellant would have been settled in the  United
         Kingdom long ago is established, this will ordinarily determine the
         outcome of the proportionality assessment, and determine it in  the
         appellant's favour.

         It  is  noted  that  a  bad  immigration  history  and/or  criminal
         behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors
         bearing on the appellant's side.  Being an  adult  child  of  a  UK
         settled Gurkha ex-serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump  card'  in
         the sense  that  not  every  application  by  such  a  person  will
         inevitably succeed.  However, if the respondent is only relying  on
         the public interest described by the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph
         41 then the weight to be  given  to  the  historic  injustice  will
         normally require a decision in the appellant's favour."

9.   He referred it to the statement of Lord Justice Sedley in  Kugathas  in
    which Lord Justice Sedley had said:

         "... if dependency is read down as meaning support in the  personal
         sense, if one adds, echoing the Strasbourg jurisprudence "real"  or
         "committed"  or   "effective"  to  the  word  "support"   then   it
         represents in my view the irreducible minimum of what  family  life
         implies."

10.  The judge concluded, in paragraphs 29 and 31:

          "29.    I do not consider there  is  a  relationship  between  the
         appellant and the sponsor such that family life  continues  between
         them. The appellant as a young man had travelled abroad to work for
         a period in excess of one year.  There  is  also  in  my  view  the
         evidence that he married.  I consider that even the evidence of the
         appellant leaving home to travel to another country to work  for  a
         period in excess of one year is such as to fundamentally  undermine
         the claim that the appellant  has  a  relationship  of  the  nature
         necessary to be granted leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
         standing the law stated above. I consider the appellant has  become
         an independent man, and upon his return to Nepal from  United  Arab
         Emirates is much more likely than  not  that  he  would  have  been
         altered, affected, and become independent as a result  of  becoming
         self-supporting for a period in excess  of  one  year  outside  his
         homeland.

         ...

         31.  I also note the family circumstances and Nepal as described to
         me. I am   satisfied that the appellant and his  brothers  live  as
         subsistence farmers in Nepal, supported financially by their father
         from the UK.  I consider  the  financial  support  provided  is  of
         assistance  to  the  appellant.   I  consider  that  the  life  the
         appellant lives would essentially be the same with or  without  the
         sponsors  support.   I  consider  the  appellant  has   become   an
         independent  adult  supporting  himself   collectively   with   his
         brothers."

11.  The judge  therefore  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  grounds  of  appeal
    asserted that the judge had erred when considering  the  issue  of  the
    existence of family life.  They  stated  that  he  had  not  adopted  a
    structured approach to assessing whether the appellant and  his  father
    enjoyed  a  family  life  and   whether   the   respondent's   decision
    disproportionately interfered with their rights to  enjoy  that  family
    life as set out in the judgment of Lord Bingham in the Court of  Appeal
    in Razgar and  had  not,  in  fact,   made  a  finding  on  whether  he
    considered the appellant and his father  shared  family  life  and  had
    erred when he had concluded that the relationship between the appellant
    and the sponsor was such that he did  not  consider  that  family  life
    continued between them.  It was stated that in so doing the  judge  had
    misdirected himself in law as, having found that  the  appellant  lived
    with his brothers on the family farm and was financially  supported  by
    his father, the judge had erred in his consideration of  the  financial
    support provided and the assistance that he gave to the appellant.

12.  Reference was made to the judgment of Sedley LJ in  Patel  &  Others  v
    ECO (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17  where  he  had  said  that  "what  may
    constitute an extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  dependency".
    Moreover the European Court of Justice in the case of Khan v UK  [2010]
    50 EHRR 47 had said that "dependence" meant "real support",  "effective
    support" or "committed support" and that it was argued  therefore  that
    the judge should have found that family life existed in the presence of
    "real", "effective" or "committed" support.  The grounds asserted  that
    the judge had failed in his duty  to  identify  why  the  existence  of
    elements of dependence and committed support  did  not  show  that  the
    appellant and his father shared family  life.   Moreover,  they  argued
    that the judge should not have found that the fact that  the  appellant
    had worked in the  UAE  had  disrupted  the  family  life  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.

13.  It is  also  argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  historic
    injustice when considering  the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
    decision.  It was stated that he should have identified the  fact  that
    the historic injustice was causative of the delay  in  the  application
    for entry  and therefore the balance of proportionality  was  reversed.
    It was also argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  relevant
    principles which postdated the decision in Ghising.  They  referred  to
    the dictum of Lord Dyson MR in R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013]  1WLR  2546  at
    paragraph 41 where he had said:

         "The crucial point is that there was an historic injustice in  both
         cases, the consequence of which was that  members  of  both  groups
         were prevented from settling in the UK.  That is why  the  historic
         injustice is such an important factor to be taken into  account  in
         the balancing exercise and why the applicant dependant child  of  a
         Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such a strong claim to have his
         Article 8(1) right vindicated, notwithstanding the potency  of  the
         countervailing  public  interest  in  the  maintaining  of  a  firm
         immigration policy."

14.   In  his  submissions  Mr  Lee  stated  that  the  judge   had   erred,
    particularly  in  his  findings  regarding  the  support  sent  by  the
    appellant's father to  him  where  he  had  said  that  "while  he  has
    considered the financial support provided  was  of  assistance  to  the
    appellant he considered the life the appellant lives would  essentially
    be the same with or without the sponsor's  support".   He  stated  that
    that did not square with the  issue  of  finding  whether  or  not  the
    funding that was received by the appellant was "not real".   The  judge
    having found that the appellant was a subsistence farmer and  had  made
    an error of law when, having accepted that the appellant was  receiving
    money, he had found that the appellant was not supported by his father.
     He also emphasised the importance of the judge taking into account the
    historic injustice in the fact that the appellant had not been able  to
    join his father in Britain.

15.   In  reply,  Mr  Bramble  having  noted  that  Mr  Lee  relied  on  the
    observations of Lindblom LJ in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ  320  where  it  was
    indicated that Gurkha cases went beyond the provisions as  set  out  in
    the Court of Appeal judgment in Kugathas.  He referred to paragraph  36
    of the judgment in Rai which emphasised that the judgment of Sedley  LJ
    in Kugathas meant that support had to be real, committed or  effective.
    He also referred to paragraph 39 of that judgment  where  it  was  made
    clear that the real issue under Article 8 was whether as  a  matter  of
    fact the appellant demonstrated that he had  a  family  life  with  his
    parents which had existed at the time of their departure to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom and endured beyond it  notwithstanding  they  having
    left when they did.  He stated that it was relevant that each case  was
    fact sensitive and the judge had been able to bring the various factors
    together.  He had heard evidence and had assessed that evidence and had
    been entitled to reach the conclusion that the appellant was living  an
    independent life and that therefore family life provisions in Article 8
    were not engaged.  He argued the judge had considered all the  relevant
    evidence.

16.  In reply Mr Lee referred to the fact that the appellant was  living  on
    the family farm and asserted that that was where the appellant's father
    had lived before coming to Britain.

Discussion

17.  I consider there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the judge.  It was incumbent upon him to take into account all relevant
    factors when determining the appeal.  He  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account not only the appellant's age at the  date  of  application  but
    also, and more importantly, the fact that  the  appellant  had  had  an
    independent life while working in the UAE and that he was married - the
    judge's findings on those points  were fully open  to  him.   Moreover,
    the judge did consider the support sent by the  appellant's  father  to
    the appellant and his brothers in Nepal.  He  reached  the  conclusion,
    having considered all the evidence before him, that although that money
    was useful it did not mean that the  appellant  was  dependent  on  his
    father.  The money being sent was not,  he  concluded,  "real"  in  the
    sense that it did not indicate  dependency.  I  consider  that  he  was
    therefore entitled that there was no interference in  the  family  life
    between the appellant and his father and that that finding  was  clear:
    it is incorrect to suggest that he did  not  make  a  finding  on  that
    issue.

18.  I would add that even if the judge was wrong to find that there was  no
    family life between the appellant and his father  he  would  have  been
    right to conclude that the decision was  not  disproportionate,  taking
    into account the fact  that  he  was  justified  in  finding  that  the
    appellant was married and had worked abroad and that he was farming  in
    Nepal for his own needs and those of his family and  was  also  earning
    money from working on the other farms. Moreover, he would  be  entitled
    to place weight on the age of the appellant when  the  application  was
    made and, of course, the  appellant  did  not  apply  when  his  father
    applied, as his father's dependent.

19.  I do not consider that the judge incorrectly considered  relevant  case
    law or that he misapplied the relevant principles when considering  the
    issue of historic injustice which he clearly  did  take  into  account.
    For these reasons I find there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in  the  First-tier  and  I  find  that  his
    decision should stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 12 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
