
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/02175/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th October 2018                    | On 7th November 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                               Mr siwan ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Joseph of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 7th February 1985 is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Joseph of Counsel.  The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Howells a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for protection in the  UK  and  that
    application had been refused by  the  Respondent's  decisions  of  23rd
    January 2017 and 20th March 2018.   The  Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Povey sitting at Newport on 9th May 2018.  The judge  had  allowed  the
    appeal under the Qualification Directive.

 3. Permission to appeal  had  been  applied  for  by  the  Respondent  and
    permission had been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on  14th
    June 2018.  It was said that it was arguable the judge had erred in law
    in his assessment of the feasibility of  return  to  the  IKR  for  the
    Appellant.  Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal first of  all
    to consider whether an error of law had been made or not and the matter
    comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was said that firstly the judge had erred in  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision in terms of his findings on Kirkuk in  that  it  was  still  a
    contested area.  It was said that the Home Office CPIN  September  2017
    on internal relocation showed that that was not the case.  I  was  also
    referred to the case of Amin [2018] which acknowledged  that  a  change
    had taken place in Kirkuk.

 5. Secondly it was said that even if Kirkuk was contested, then there  had
    been an error in law in the consideration of internal relocation to the
    IKR.  It was submitted the Appellant had not taken reasonable steps  to
    get a CSID by contacting family in Europe.  It was also said  that  the
    Appellant was unwilling to contact the embassy in  the  UK  to  further
    that matter.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. Mr Joseph submitted that essentially the Grounds of Appeal were no more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  It was submitted that a
    factual finding  had  been  made  by  the  judge  which  had  not  been
    challenged, that firstly the Appellant had no  CSID  nor  did  he  have
    family in Iraq those family members being in Europe.

 7. In terms of paragraph 27 of the decision it was submitted that in terms
    of getting any form of CSID from a visit to an embassy in  the  absence
    of a passport, the only other way to get such a document was to provide
    the civil registry place and page number which the  Appellant  did  not
    have and therefore it was simply pointless going  to  the  embassy  and
    there was no error made by the judge in that matter.   It  was  further
    said that the case of AAH made the point that  in  the  past  at  least
    Kirkuk had been contested and there was a question mark as  to  whether
    there was a civil registry office available.  The judge  at  paragraphs
    21 to 24 had given good reason as to why he believed Kirkuk was still a
    contested area and why it was not necessary to depart from the  country
    guidance case of AA [2017].  In answer to a matter that I raised it was
    agreed by both representatives that  in  terms  of  the  judge's  final
    decision it was implicit when looking at the  decision  that  he  found
    that a return to Baghdad, i.e. any form of internal relocation would be
    a breach of Article 3.

 8. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions and I now give my decision with reasons.



Decision and Reasons

 9. It was agreed evidence that the Appellant was from Kirkuk and therefore
    any return to Iraq would initially be with Kirkuk in  contemplation  as
    his home area.  The judge had considered the evidence  before  him  and
    properly had made note of the evidence that  was  considered  relevant.
    He had considered the position with regard to Kirkuk and had noted that
    in the country guidance case of AA it had been  concluded  that  Kirkuk
    was a contested area that  fell  within  the  terms  of  Article  15(c)
    humanitarian protection.  The judge thereafter had examined the country
    material provided by both the Respondent  and  the  Appellant  and  had
    concluded at paragraph 24 that there were not strong grounds  supported
    by cogent evidence to permit him to depart from the  conclusion  in  AA
    (Iraq).  He acknowledged the situation in Iraq was uniquely  fluid  and
    there was evidence of a changing front line but did not find that there
    was a fundamental and durable change that would  have  allowed  him  to
    depart from the country guidance case.  The judge was entitled to  make
    that finding based on the evidence before him.  The case of Amin [2018]
    was a judicial review case that was looking at a specific matter albeit
    in relation to Kirkuk.  It is not a case that sets a precedent  and  it
    was entirely open to this  judge  to  have  concluded  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence for him to depart from the guidance given  in  AA
    [2015] that had thereafter been considered in AA [2017] by the Court of
    Appeal.

10. It was said that the Appellant had not taken reasonable steps in  order
    to get either an initial or replacement CSID.  It  was  submitted  that
    the Appellant could and should have contacted  his  family  in  Europe.
    This suggestion within the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal is in my view
    entirely speculative.  If there had been evidence of a relative  living
    in Iraq, particularly a male relative on the patriarchal  side  of  the
    family, then that  may  well  have  been  evidence  for  the  judge  to
    carefully consider in terms  of  whether  there  was  potential  family
    assistance to obtain a CSID for the Appellant.  However, there  was  no
    such evidence.  The agreed, or only evidence was that  the  Appellant's
    family had all left Iraq and were scattered in various countries within
    Europe.  It is difficult to see how on any assessment it could be  said
    that any of those family members living in Europe whatever status  they
    may or may not have, could assist the Appellant  in  obtaining  a  CSID
    from Iraq and the suggestion is entirely  speculative.   There  was  no
    error made by the judge  in  not  adopting  that  speculative  approach
    stated by the Respondent.  In like manner there was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant knew or had ever known the page number or reference for a
    CSID or even whether the civil registry  in  Kirkuk  still  existed  or
    could be accessed.  To that extent as the judge noted at  paragraph  27
    whilst a CSID could be obtained from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK, there
    was simply no information that  the  Appellant  could  provide  to  the
    embassy on the evidence given to the judge that would have allowed  the
    Appellant to obtain a CSID from the embassy.  Furthermore, as the judge
    noted the Appellant had in fact left Iraq fifteen years ago so it could
    not even be said that events and information would be remotely  recent.
    The judge was therefore entirely correct to reach the views that he did
    in terms of the inability of the Appellant to access a CSID.

11. The judge was entitled to conclude that returning the Appellant to  his
    home area of Kirkuk would be a breach of Article  15(c)  and  therefore
    continue to follow the guidance given in AA.  In like manner  in  terms
    of an examination of  internal  relocation  (effectively  Baghdad)  the
    judge at paragraph 25 had noted the  difficulties  that  the  Appellant
    would face and at paragraph 26 the judge reasonably concluded that  the
    Appellant would have run out of funds provided by the Respondent before
    he had secured a CSID and would therefore be likely to face a real risk
    of destitution.  That was in accordance with country guidance case  law
    and as agreed by the parties before me.  It is  entirely  clear  and  a
    proper inference  the  judge  had  therefore  concluded  this  internal
    relocation to Baghdad would be a breach of Article 3.  At paragraph  21
    the judge had noted the Appellant was not from the KRI.  It is the case
    the judge  had  not  specifically  looked  at  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation to the IKR but given the  case  law  of  AA  [2017]  and  in
    particular AAH [2018] the findings on fact and credibility made by  the
    judge together with  his  views  on  internal  relocation  to  Baghdad,
    necessarily means that there would not have been any different decision
    made had the judge found it necessary to consider  internal  relocation
    to the IKR and therefore even if a failure to make  reference  as  such
    was an error of law, it did not amount to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

12. I find that no material error of law was made by the judge in this case
    and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
