
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02824/2020 V


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams       |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 3rd August 2021                   |On 15th September 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                RAVIKUMAR [P]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Badar of Counsel, instructed by Connaught Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1987. He arrived in  the
       UK in September 2009 with  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  student
       migrant. He  extended  his  leave  until  10th  July  2015  in  this
       capacity, but on 25th June 2013 his leave was curtailed to expire on
       25th August 2013 as his sponsor's licence was revoked. The appellant
       then overstayed. On 3rd October  2013  he  made  an  application  to
       remain outside of the Immigration Rules which was refused without  a
       right of appeal on  22nd  November  2013.  On  15th  July  2016  the
       appellant  applied  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  but  the
       application was refused and certified as being clearly unfounded  on
       20th July 2016. On 11th April 2019 the appellant applied  to  remain
       again on human rights grounds. On this occasion he was refused  with
       a right of appeal in a decision dated 4th February 2020.  His appeal
       against the decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Dempster in a determination promulgated on the 5th February 2021.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Scott-Baker on 26th February 2021 on the basis that it was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  consider
       the fact that the appellant was gay and whether  this  affected  the
       assessment by reference paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration
       Rules and/or on wider Article 8 ECHR grounds.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The hearing was heard by Microsoft  Teams
       in light of the need to  reduce  transmission  of  Covid-19  in  the
       context of the pandemic. Neither party objected to this format and I
       found that it was a means by which the appeal could  be  fairly  and
       justly determined. There were no significant issues of  connectivity
       or audibility.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
       law by firstly failing to look at  the  period  of  the  appellant's
       residence and the contribution he has made to the UK by volunteering
       with the NHS and his lack of  links  to  India  in  determining  the
       appeal  in  relation  to  the   Immigration   Rules   at   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi)  and on wider Article 8 ECHR grounds. Secondly, it  is
       argued that the 930 hours of unpaid work for the NHS in  a  time  of
       national emergency ought to  have  been  given  greater  weight,  as
       should the issues he has with his sexuality (for which he  has  been
       disowned by his family) and his mental health. It is argued that his
       major depressive disorder and generalised anxiety disorder meant  he
       could not leave the UK. It is argued that the appellant has  at  all
       time attempted to show compliance with the immigration laws  of  the
       UK, and that again should be given weight.  Thirdly,  it  is  argued
       that due to a failure to give weight to relevant evidence  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal is legally flawed.

    5. Mr Badar relied upon the grounds but said that he was  not  pursuing
       arguments around the treatment of the evidence  of  the  appellant's
       mental health. He argued that the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal
       failed to explicitly mention the appellant was gay  was  a  material
       error as  together  with  other  factors  this  could  have  made  a
       difference to the outcome; and further Mr Badar argued that  it  was
       irrational not to say that 930  hours  of  volunteering  during  the
       Covid-19 pandemic was not an exceptional matter which weighed in the
       appellant's factor and outweighed the public interest in maintaining
       immigration control.

    6. In a Rule 24 notice dated 3rd March 2021 the respondent argues  that
       the grounds simply attempt to reargue  the  appeal.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal was aware of the appellant's period of residence in the UK,
       his mental health problems, his sexuality and ties to the UK. It  is
       argued that the  medical  evidence  was  dealt  with  properly:  the
       psychologist's report was out of date; there  was  no  evidence  the
       appellant was receiving treatment for depression of  any  type;  and
       there was no evidence treatment was  not  available  in  India.  The
       evidence that the appellant had been disowned by  his  family  as  a
       result of his sexuality was considered, and weight was given to  the
       consideration he  would  not  have  family  support  in  India.  The
       appellant's sexuality was not argued to have any greater  impact  in
       the appellant's witness statement. The lack of a support network was
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal but it was considered he could
       find employment in India given his level of education  and  that  he
       could have remote  assistance  from  his  friends  in  the  UK.  The
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be upheld. I did not need
       to call on Mr Tufan to make any further submissions.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. This is a private life  human  rights  appeal  which  was  correctly
       determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  reference  to  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and more widely under Article
       8 ECHR.

    8. It is clear from the summary of evidence  at  paragraph  21  of  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant raised mental
       health issues; the fact that he had been disowned by his family  due
       to being gay; and the volunteering he had done supporting people who
       were self-isolating due to the Covid 19 pandemic. It is accepted  by
       the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant has close friends in  the
       UK at paragraph 23 of the decision. The conclusion of the consultant
       psychologist, Mr Smythe, dated 1st May 2019, that the appellant  has
       severe generalised anxiety disorder and  major  depressive  disorder
       with psychotic features is recorded at paragraph 25 of the decision.



    9. At paragraphs 28 to 32 of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       the application of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) to the  determination  of
       the appeal is considered. The  appellant's  mental  health  and  the
       evidence of Dr  Smythe  is  considered,  and  the  consideration  of
       whether he would have  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration
       starts from the proposition that he would not have family support or
       a  friendship  network  in  India.  It  is  concluded  however  that
       notwithstanding his mental health issues he would be  able  to  find
       friends in his country of origin where he spent his first  22  years
       of life; that he speaks two national languages; that  he  is  highly
       educated and that there was no evidence that in time  he  would  not
       find work, or that he could not  be  assisted  by  his  friends  who
       support him in the  UK  in  the  interim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       properly directs itself as to the  correct  test,  by  reference  to
       Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932, that very significant  obstacles
       is an elevated test and what must  be  shown  is  not  just  a  mere
       inconvenience or upheaval. I find that nothing material was  omitted
       from this consideration as the only relevance of the appellant being
       gay which is put forward in the evidence is  that  this  would  mean
       that he had no family support in India. There was no  evidence  that
       this would lead to any other difficulties with integration on return
       to India, and it would not  have  been  proper  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to speculate that this would be the case absent any country
       of origin or other evidence supporting such a proposition.

   10. In considering the appeal  more  widely  under  Article  8  ECHR  at
       paragraphs 33 to 55 of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       consideration is given to his established  social  network  and  his
       paid and voluntary work. It goes  without  saying  that  the  weight
       given to any evidence is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       unless  their  decision  is  irrational.   There  are  proper  legal
       directions that there is a strong  public  interest  in  maintaining
       immigration control, and to the fact little weight can  be  attached
       to private life ties formed in the UK  as  the  appellant  has  been
       unlawfully and precariously present, applying s.117B(4) and  (5)  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The fact that  the
       appellant retains no private or family ties  in  India,  the  latter
       being lost due to his sexuality, is placed in  the  balance.  It  is
       accepted in his favour that the appellant has  contributed  much  in
       the last year to society due to his voluntary work but ultimately  a
       conclusion that his removal is a proportionate interference with his
       right to respect for private life is reached for entirely lawful and
       rational reasons.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  human
      rights appeal.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  3rd August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley





