
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02908/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd January 2019                  |On 29th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  SAIDI [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He arrived in the United
    Kingdom in April 2007 and made a claim for asylum. That claim was
    refused for the reasons set out in a decision dated 11th May 2007, and
    an appeal against that decision was dismissed in July 2007. The
    appellant then made a number of applications for an EEA residence card,
    all of which were refused. Most recently, on 3rd February 2017, a
    decision was made by the respondent to refuse the appellant leave to
    remain in the UK. The appellant had sought leave to remain in the UK
    based on his family life with his partner ("GB") and his two daughters
    who I shall refer to as ("WA") and ("PA").  The appellant's appeal
    against the decision of 3rd February 2017, was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Callow and dismissed for the reasons set out in
    a decision promulgated on 5th July 2018. It is that decision of the FtT
    Judge that is the subject of the appeal before me.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
    on 16th November 2018.  In granting permission, the Judge observed
    that:


         "The appellant lives with his EEA national wife and two British
         citizen children. The Judge finds that the appellant's children are
         British citizens. It is arguable that the Judge has failed to
         properly determine whether or not the appellant's wife is settled
         in the UK (she has a grant of EEA permanent residence). It is
         arguable that at [23] the Judge fails to apply the guidance given
         in MA(Pakistan) (approved in KO (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018]
         UKSC). It is arguable that the Judge did not consider s.117B(6) of
         the 2002 Act."


 3. I do not need to make any express reference to the findings and
    conclusions of the FtT Judge.  Mr Kotas, rightly in my judgment,
    accepted from the outset that there is a material error of law in the
    decision of the FtT Judge, and the decision must be set aside.  He
    accepts that the Judge erred at paragraph [14] of the decision, in
    reaching the conclusion that the appellant gains no assistance from
    paragraph EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM because his partner, a national of
    Nigeria who holds "EEA permanent residence in the UK, is not 'a British
    citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
    humanitarian protection.'.".  Although the Judge refers to the
    definition of 'settled in the UK' in s33(2A) of the Immigration Act
    197, the Judge did not consider the interpretation provision set out at
    paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules.  The rules provide that 'settled
    in the UK' means that the person concerned is settled in the United
    Kingdom and, at the time that an application under the Rules is made,
    is physically present here.  The definition set out in paragraph 6 of
    the rules provides that for the purposes of an application under
    Appendix FM, an EEA national with a permanent right to reside in the UK
    under European law must hold either a valid residence permit issued
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000 which
    has been endorsed under the Immigration Rules to show permission to
    remain in the UK indefinitely, or a valid document certifying permanent
    residence issued under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006,  in order to be regarded as present and settled in
    the UK.  The evidence was therefore capable of establishing that the
    appellant's partner is present and settled in the UK.


 4. Mr Kotas also accepts that although the Judge refers to the relevant
    authorities at paragraph [19] of the decision, the Judge's analysis of
    the issues and consideration of the relevant evidence, has been
    undermined by the subsequent decision of the Supreme Court in KO
    (Nigeria) & Others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  In a decision handed down
    on 24th October 2018, Lord Carnwath, with whom Lord Kerr, Lord Wilson,
    Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed, referred to paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the Immigration Rules, and s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Having
    referred to the requirement that appears at paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of
    the rules, he stated, at [7]:


         "It will be seen immediately that the substance of this provision,
         in particular the seven year criterion and the "reasonableness"
         tests, appears identical to that  of section 117B(6), taken with
         the definition of "qualifying child"


At paragraphs [17] to [19], Lord Carnwath stated:


         "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in the context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it was
         intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the subsection to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6) is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification being that the
         person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above) seems
         to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the context of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245 :


             "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
             one has to address the question, 'Why would the child be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this
             there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the question in any
             other way strips away the context in which the assessment of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in
         EV (Philippines) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis that the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no
             right to remain, but the other parent does, that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. If
             neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the
             child to follow the parent with no right to remain to the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in the real world in which the children find
         themselves.


 5. Therefore, contrary to the consideration of the evidence by the Judge,
    the conduct of a parent is not directly relevant to the public interest
    consideration set out in s117B(6), although the record of the parent
    may become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a
    right to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if it would not
    be reasonable for a child to leave the UK that s117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    may give a parent a right to remain.


 6. As to disposal, the assessment of a human rights claim such as this is
    always a highly fact sensitive task.  I have decided that it is
    appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh,
    having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
    Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of
    any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will
    be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due
    course.


Notice of Decision


 7. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Callow promulgated on
    5th July 2018 is set aside, and I remit the matter for a de novo
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed                                  Date     30th January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


 8. I make no fee award as I have remitted the matter to the FtT for
    hearing afresh.





Signed                                  Date          30th January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

