
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02600/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Microsoft     |Decision promulgated                 |
|Teams)                               |                                     |
|On 20 August 2021                    |On 14 September 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  RUMA RAI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilford instructed by Everest Law Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on 5 March 2021 First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Swinnerton ('the Judge) dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
        the refusal by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) on 9 November  2019
        of her application for entry clearance as an adult dependent  child
        of her mother and sponsor, the widow of a former Gurkha soldier.
     2. The Judge having considered the documentary and oral evidence  sets
        out the findings of fact from [23] of the decision under challenge.
     3. At [26] the Judge sets out the documentary evidence  provided,  but
        only makes reference to Standard Chartered Bank statements for  the
        sponsor's account from 1 March 2019 to 30 September 2019.
     4. At [29 - 30] the Judge writes:

        "29.      Based on the evidence  of  Ms  Rai  at  the  hearing,  it
             appears that the Appellant has not been included  in  her  bank
             account. There is, in any  event,  no  documentation  from  the
             Standard Chartered Bank in the form of a bank statement, letter
             or otherwise to that effect. In light  also  of  the  far  from
             clear evidence of Mr Rai on this point, I find it  more  likely
             than not that the Appellant has not been added to the  Standard
             Chartered Bank account of her mother in Nepal.


        30.  Ms Rai also gave evidence to the effect that her daughter  had
             use of the ATM card to her Standard Chartered Bank  account  in
             Nepal and was able to use the ATM card to withdraw monies  from
             her mother's bank account. I was not  provided  with  a  recent
             bank statement demonstrated that the bank account of Ms Rai had
             been accessed recently and that monies withdrawn.  I  was  not,
             therefore,  provided   with   any   documentary   evidence   to
             demonstrate  that  the   Appellant   receives   any   financial
             assistance from her mother. In summary, on this point,  I  find
             it more likely than not that the  Appellant  does  not  receive
             financial assistance from her mother."

     5. The Judge concludes on the evidence that she was not satisfied that
        family life between the appellant  and  her  mother,  her  sponsor,
        existed and that Article 8(1) ECHR was not engaged.
     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on five  grounds,  but  I
        only need refer to Ground 3 in which it is pleaded:

        "Ground 3: Failure to take account evidence of financial support


        8.   Judge Swinnerton gave permission to  the  Appellant  to  serve
             post hearing evidence  in  the  form  of  bank  statements  'by
             midnight' and confirmed that  these  should  be  sent  via  his
             clerk's email address: [ ]. The  hearing  was  started  shortly
             after 2 PM and finished  just  before  4  PM.  The  Appellant's
             solicitor served the bank statements on  the  Tribunal  via  an
             email sent to that address at 7:32 PM  on  2  March  2021  (see
             attached). The determination was promulgated on 5  March  2021.
             The attached bank statements demonstrate that the Appellant and
             her mother (the Sponsor) held a Joint Account with the Standard
             Chartered Bank. These statements recorded  the  following  cash
             withdrawals from that account in the Appellant's name:


                 (1) 9.2.20    400,000 NPR


                 (2) 15.6.20   120,000 NPR


                 (3) 16.8.20   45,000 NPR


                 (4) 15.10.20  45,000 NPR


                 (5) 23.11.20  40,000 NPR


        9.   In spite of the above, these  statements  were  evidently  not
             considered by FTTJ Swinnerton and he concludes, 'I find it more
             likely than not that the Appellant has not been  added  to  the
             Standard  Chartered  Bank  Account'  (see  [29],  p5   of   the
             determination) and 'I find it more likely  than  not  that  the
             Appellant  does  not  receive  financial  assistance  from  her
             mother' (at [30], p5 of the determination).


        10.  FTTJ Swinnerton appears unaware of the  service  of  the  bank
             statements. However, that lack of awareness provides no  answer
             to this ground of appeal. Certainly, FTTJ Swinnerton  ought  to
             have been aware of the bank statements: the material was served
             via the  medium,  and  within  the  deadline,  he  had  himself
             directed.


        11.       Certainly, the evidence was material to  the  only  issue
             before the Tribunal: whether family life  existed  between  the
             Appellant and her mother, such as to engage Article  8(1).  The
             Strasbourg Court look to 'elements of dependence'  (A.W.Khan  v
             SSHD Khan v United (2010) 50 E.H.R.R 47 at  [32].  'Dependence'
             means  'real  support',  'effective  support'   or   'committed
             support' (per Sedley LJ at [17]). That family life can exist in
             the presence of 'real', 'effective' or 'committed' support  was
             confirmed most recently in Uddin v, Secretary of State the Home
             Department [2020] 1 WLR 1562, at [40].


        12.  The bank statements were clearly  demonstrative  of  the  fact
             that the Sponsor/mother provided  the  Appellant/daughter  with
             financial support. FTTJ Swinnerton's failure to  consider  this
             evidence, therefore amounted to a material error of law."


Error of law

     7. It is not disputed the  Judge  gave  the  appellant  an  additional
        opportunity to produce documents that were not  made  available  at
        the hearing for the purposes of enabling her to prove her case.
     8. It cannot be disputed that those documents, the additional  Charter
        Bank Statements, were sent by email on 2 March 2021 at 7:32  PM  to
        the address stipulated by the Judge.
     9. What there is not  within  the  First-tier  Tribunal  file  is  any
        indication that the following day, or any  time  thereafter,  those
        bank statements were sent to Judge Swinnerton, who is  a  fee  paid
        Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.
    10. It appears that as a result of this  error  when  Judge  Swinnerton
        came to write her determination  and  send  the  same  through  the
        promulgation she did  not  have  the  benefit  of  considering  the
        additional bank statements.
    11. Mr Bates accepted that this amounted to a procedural error.
    12. I find through no fault of the Judge who would  have  been  unaware
        that the documents she requested and gave  additional  time  to  be
        filed had been sent to the email  address  of  her  clerk,  that  a
        procedural irregularity is made  out  sufficient  to  amount  to  a
        material error of law.
    13. The appeal shall be remitted  to  Hatton  Cross  to  be  considered
        afresh by a judge other than Judge Swinnerton. There  shall  be  no
        preserved findings.

Decision

    14. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Hatton Cross to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
        Swinnerton.

   Anonymity.

    15. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 23 August 2021












