

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/02340/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham            | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 July 2017                          | On 24 July 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              baudharaj gurung
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A O'Callaghan, instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 2 December  1987.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Nixon dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his application for entry clearance.


   2. The appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as  the
      adult dependant relative of his  father,  an  ex-Gurkha  soldier.  The
      respondent considered his application under  the  Home  Office  policy
      outlined in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section 2A 13.2 as amended  on  5
      January 2015. The respondent noted that  the  appellant's  father  was
      issued with entry clearance on 14 April 2000 and settled in the UK  on
      27 May 2010, under the 2009 discretionary arrangements. His mother had
      settled in the UK on 4 June 2011, after being granted indefinite leave
      to enter. The respondent noted that the appellant was under  18  years
      of age at the time of his father's discharge and took account  of  the
      fact that an application for settlement would have  been  made  before
      2009 had the  option  to  do  so  been  available  to  his  father  on
      discharge. The respondent noted that the  appellant  had  one  sibling
      settled in the UK. Given that the appellant's parents had been present
      and settled in the UK for over four years and four months at the  time
      of the appellant's application, the  respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant had been living apart from his sponsor  for  more  than  two
      years at the date of application and therefore refused the application
      under Annex K, paragraph 9(8) Annex K, IDI  Chapter  15,  section  2A,
      13.2. The respondent noted that the appellant was one of four children
      and that, whilst one was in the UK, the others were in Nepal and could
      support  him  emotionally.  The  appellant's  living  conditions  were
      adequate, he was in good health  and  his  father  could  continue  to
      financially support him from the UK. The respondent was therefore  not
      satisfied that the appellant was wholly financially and/or emotionally
      dependent on his UK sponsor as required under Annex K, paragraph 9(5),
      IDI Chapter 15 section 2A 13.2. The  respondent  also  considered  and
      refused the application under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix  FM  and
      Article 8 of the ECHR. The application was refused on 1 July 2015.

   3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon on 13 October 2016. The appeal  was
      pursued on  Article  8  grounds  only,  as  it  was  conceded  by  the
      appellant's representative that he could not meet the requirements  of
      the immigration rules and did not fall within the terms of the policy.
      The judge heard from the sponsor, the appellant's father and noted the
      evidence that the appellant was unemployed and unmarried and lived  in
      the family home with his sister who was also single and unemployed. It
      was stated that the appellant suffered from depression and was in poor
      health. He kept in touch with his parents every day by  telephone  and
      Viber and he was financially supported by  the  sponsor.  The  sponsor
      explained that the only reason why he had applied for his son to  come
      here, and not his daughter, was that he only had sufficient funds  for
      one application and wanted his son to come as he had  four  daughters.
      The sponsor last visited the appellant and his  sister  in  2013.  The
      appellant stated in  his  evidence  that  he  was  worried  about  the
      sponsor's ill-health.

   4. The judge found  that  the  appellant's  representative  had  properly
      conceded that the appellant could not meet the requirements of Annex K
      or Appendix FM and she therefore went on to consider Article 8 outside
      the immigration rules. She accepted, from the  judgment  in  Gurung  &
      Ors, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8, that the appellant may well  succeed  on
      the proportionality assessment as a result of the  historic  injustice
      point, but that the relevant matter to determine was whether Article 8
      was engaged at  all  and  whether  family  life  existed  between  the
      appellant and his family. The judge concluded that the  appellant  had
      failed to show that there was sufficient emotional dependence  on  his
      parents to justify the conclusion that they enjoyed  family  life  and
      she found that Article 8 was therefore not  engaged.  She  accordingly
      dismissed the appeal.

   5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the grounds that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  weight  to  the
      historic injustice point in assessing family life; that the judge  had
      failed to give weight to the factors that the appellant could  satisfy
      in paragraph 9 of  Annex  K  when  assessing  whether  Article  8  was
      engaged; that the judge had failed to consider the  intention  of  the
      policy in Annex K; that the judge had  failed  to  consider  that  the
      family unit had resided  together  until  the  sponsor  and  his  wife
      exercised their right to enter the UK; that the judge  had  failed  to
      identify a time when the family life was severed for the  purposes  of
      the Article 8(1) consideration; and that  the  judge  failed  to  give
      weight to the appellant's inability to succeed under the policy  as  a
      result of the recent changes.


   6. Permission was then granted on 16 March 2017.

Appeal Hearing

   7. Ms O'Callaghan expanded upon the grounds, submitting  that  the  judge
      had given insufficient weight  to  various  factors  relevant  to  the
      policy in Annex K, to the fact that the appellant had  not  formed  an
      independent family unit in Nepal and to the fact that the  family  had
      lived together until the sponsor and his wife came to the UK.  Article
      8 was engaged prior to the sponsor and his wife leaving Nepal  and  it
      continued after they had come to the UK. The judge had failed  to  say
      when family life was severed. The sponsor had provided reasons why  he
      had not visited the appellant more often in the UK and the  judge  had
      failed  to  consider  the  financial  issues.  There   had   been   no
      consideration of the appellant's ill-health. Insufficient  weight  had
      been given to the historic injustice.

   8. Mr Mills submitted that the judge properly focussed on the question of
      family life and gave more than adequate consideration to  that  issue,
      fully aware of the context in which the case was to be considered  and
      the relevant policy.


Consideration and findings

   9. It seems to me that the grounds of challenge are in fact more relevant
      to an assessment  of  proportionality  rather  than  the  question  of
      whether family life existed between the  appellant  and  his  parents.
      Clearly the judge  was  fully  aware  of  the  context  in  which  the
      appellant's case was to be decided, having had regard to the terms  of
      the policy in Annex K and had regard to the case of Gurung  &  Ors,  R
      (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  The judge properly focussed  on  the  question  of
      family life and her approach to that question was entirely  consistent
      with that set out in Gurung, where the Court of Appeal said at [45]: "
      Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys family  life  is
      one of fact and depends on a careful consideration of all the relevant
      facts of the particular case" and at [46]  endorsed  the  guidance  in
      Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160.  She
      asked herself the relevant  question,  namely  whether  there  existed
      emotional and other ties over and above the normal ties between  adult
      family members, reflecting the conclusion reached in Gurung  at  [50],
      that in that case "the requisite degree of  emotional  dependence  was
      absent".

  10. At [11(4)]  to  [11(7)]  the  judge  gave  detailed  reasons  why  she
      considered that the relationship between the appellant and his parents
      did not constitute family life for the purposes of Article  8(1).  She
      had full regard to the circumstances in which the appellant's  parents
      came to the UK, to the appellant's financial dependence on his father,
      to his regular contact with his parents by telephone and Viber and  to
      his single status, but she provided cogent reasons as to why that  was
      not sufficient in itself to  demonstrate  that  family  life  existed.
      Contrary to the submissions made by Ms  O'Callaghan,  the  judge  gave
      full consideration to the reasons why the sponsor had not applied  for
      his daughter to come to the UK and why he had  applied  only  for  the
      appellant to come, she gave full consideration to the reason  why  the
      sponsor had made only one visit to Nepal and she had  full  regard  to
      the appellant's claim as to ill-health, noting  with  respect  to  the
      latter that no  supporting  evidence  had  been  provided.  The  judge
      addressed all of these matters and provided reasons for according them
      the weight that she did.


  11. For the reasons fully and  cogently  given  the  judge  was  perfectly
      entitled to conclude that, although the usual emotional bonds  between
      parents and their children  were  present,  the  requisite  degree  of
      emotional dependence was absent,  so  that  Article  8  was  not  even
      engaged. That was a conclusion which was fully and  properly  open  to
      her on the evidence before her. The grounds are simply a  disagreement
      with that conclusion and have no merit.

  12. Accordingly I find no errors of law in the judge's decision. I  uphold
      the decision.

DECISION

  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  19 July 2017
