
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02589/2016
     HU/02590/2016
     HU/02591/2016
     HU/02592/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th October 2017                       |On 31st October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) KALPESH [R]
                              (2) DIPTIBEN [R]
                                  (3) [S R]
                                 (4) [S K R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Mahmoud (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Aziz, following a hearing at Birmingham Sheldon  Court  on  6th
    January 2017.  In the determination, the judge allowed the  appeals  of
    the  Appellants,  whereupon   the   Respondent   Secretary   of   State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.  For the avoidance
    of doubt, the reference to the Appellants here is to a reference of the
    Appellants in the same manner as it was in the Tribunal below  and  the
    Respondent is correspondingly a reference to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants  are  a  family  of  Indian  nationals.   The  principal
    Appellant, the father, was born on [ ]  1972.   His  wife,  the  second
    Appellant, was born on [ ] 1974.  Their daughter, the third  Appellant,
    was born on [ ] 2008.  Their son, the fourth Appellant, was born on [ ]
    2009.  On 5th August 2015, they made an application for leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of family and private life.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that having entered the UK in 2003 on  an  EEA
    family permit visa, they were able to successfully extend  their  leave
    until 8th November 2011, but after which they unsuccessfully sought  to
    vary their leave  on  two  occasions,  with  them  eventually  becoming
    unlawful overstayers in the UK.  The final application was  refused  on
    26th May 2011.  It is a feature of  this  appeal  that  the  third  and
    fourth Appellants were born in the UK.  They have  never  been  granted
    any form of leave by the Respondent.

The Judge's Decision

 4. In what  is  a  comprehensive,  and  extensively  compiled,  and  clear
    determination, the judge observed, how this was a case where "there has
    been a deliberate attempt by the first and second Appellants to  remain
    in this country and carve out a family and private  life,  irrespective
    of whether or not they had leave".  The judge concluded that he did not
    find that the Appellants "ever had any intention of returning to  India
    voluntarily" (see paragraph 51(v)).

 5. Nevertheless, this was a case, where the two children,  the  third  and
    fourth Appellants, were both born  in  the  UK  and  had  been  in  the
    education system from the ages of  4  to  5  years  onwards,  and  both
    children were making good academic progress, and they had a  circle  of
    friends and, engaged in extracurricular activities,  with  being  fully
    integrated in UK society and culture (paragraph 55).   The  judge  also
    noted that the connections of these children to their country of origin
    was minimal, "extending barely beyond the facts that they  are  persons
    of internationality and they attended their  local  temple"  (paragraph
    56).  The judge concluded that  the  children's  best  interests  under
    private life lay in remaining in the UK (paragraph 57).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. In what are detailed Grounds of Appeal, it is  stated  that  the  judge
    failed to have proper regard to the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, which required a decision maker to make
    a holistic assessment, in the assessment of the reasonableness  of  the
    interference with private and family life rights, and this included the
    public interest consideration.  The  judge's  conclusion  in  terms  of
    Section 117B(6) was flawed in that it would be reasonable for the third
    Appellant to go to India.  In particular, the assessment by  the  judge
    focused on what the third Appellant would lose, rather than considering
    that the family would be returning to India together.

 8. On 2nd August 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 6th October 2017, Miss  Abone  relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  She submitted that the judge  had  not  carried
    out a proper balancing  exercise,  factoring  in  the  public  interest
    considerations, in deciding whether the third Appellant and the  fourth
    Appellant could reasonably relocate to  India,  given  that  they  were
    going to do so as a single family unit with their  mother  and  father.
    There   were   inadequate   findings   made   with   respect   of   the
    unreasonableness, as found by the judge, of the eldest child being able
    to relocate to India.

10. For  his  part,  Mr  Mahmoud  submitted  that  this  was  an  extensive
    determination and that at paragraph 75  to  76,  the  judge  had  given
    express consideration  to  the  "public  interest  question"  with  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control being properly noted.   In
    fact, even though the Grounds of Appeal were predicated  on  the  judge
    having overlooked the strictures in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705,
    the reality was that the judge's  recital  of  the  relevant  case  law
    extended beyond that to the  latest  cases  on  this  subject,  and  in
    particular the case of Kaur [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC), which had seen the
    Tribunal conclude that the judgments in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, do  not
    mean that the public interest will always prevail over  the  rights  of
    the child in the maintenance of effective immigration control.

11. In reply, Miss Abone  relied  upon  the  case  of  MA  (Pakistan),  and
    submitted that at paragraph 47 of that decision,  it  was  pointed  out
    that even on a narrow reasonableness test, it was not  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave with the Appellant to return  back  to  their
    country of origin.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law such that  it  falls  to  be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    First, this is a case where the judge is  perfectly  cognisant  of  the
    fact that there has been "a deliberate attempt by the first and  second
    Appellants to remain in this country" (paragraph 51(v)).   Second,  the
    judge has balanced this against  the  best  interest  of  the  children
    (paragraphs 55 to 57).  The judge has then referred extensively to  the
    applicable case law (from paragraph 67 onwards).  He has noted that  he
    has to weigh in the balance, on the one hand, that the removal  of  the
    Appellants "would  be  hugely  disruptive  for  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants".

13. On the other hand, the judge observed, over a period of time, the third
    and fourth Appellants could "with the help  and  support  of  a  stable
    family unit adapt to life in India" (paragraph 69).

14. On this basis, the judge went on to consider

         "the factors to which I give determinative weight are the length of
         the third Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom (nearly  nine
         years as at the date of the appeal hearing; a very deep emotion  in
         all aspects of life in this country; a full  integration  into  the
         British education system and the minimal connections that  she  has
         with her country of origin" (paragraph 71).

15. In coming to these conclusions, the judge  was  not  unmindful  of  the
    public  interest  considerations  in  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control (see paragraph 75 to 76).

16. Nevertheless, it remained the case that  the  third  Appellant  was  "a
    qualifying child" as was the fourth Appellant, and this  being  so  the
    only question now left for the judge to determine was "whether it would
    be reasonable to  expect  the  third  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom" (paragraph 79).

17. The reasons that the judge gave, it was not reasonable to  expect  them
    to leave the United Kingdom.  That was a finding  that  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to come to.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th October 2017

