
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02071/2019
                                                               hu/02088/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                 Rakshya [M]
                                 Aniraj [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by CND Parker
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Rakshya [M] and Aniraj [S], are citizens of Nepal  born
    on 26 March 1990 and 21 December 1981 respectively.  They  are  married
    and have a son together who is nearly 3 years old.  They appeal against
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  promulgated  on  16
    August 2019 dismissing their appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 16 January 2019 to refuse their applications  for  leave
    to remain based on their human rights.

Factual background

 2. The Secretary of State have refused the appellants' human rights claims
    on suitability grounds, relating to  alleged  cheating  in  an  English
    language test by the first appellant, and because  the  appellants  did
    not meet the private life provisions of the Immigration  Rules  in  any
    event.

 3. There is no challenge by the Secretary of  State  to  Judge  Devittie's
    exoneration of the first appellant on suitability grounds.   The  judge
    found that the allegations that had been made by the Secretary of State
    that the first appellant had used a proxy test taker not to  have  been
    made out, in light of the explanation provided by the first  appellant.
    Turning to the  substantive  Immigration  Rules,  the  only  applicable
    provisions capable of being engaged in the case of the appellants  were
    those relating to their private life under paragraph 276ADE.

 4. There is, essentially, a discrete ground of appeal raised on behalf  of
    the appellants, namely that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the appellants' child.  Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard on that basis.

Discussion

 5. It  is  common  ground  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  what  the
    appellants' son's best interests were.  Mr Khan, who  appears  for  the
    appellants,  realistically  accepts  that,  although  there   is   some
    superficial force in the sole ground of appeal,  the  failure  to  have
    conducted that assessment was not material.  Although Mr Khan  stressed
    that he did not formally concede the issue, in my judgment he adopted a
    realistic approach.

 6. The assessment of the best interests of a child must be taken conducted
    by reference to the real world context in  which  the  child's  parents
    find themselves.  In the present matter that  context  is  as  follows.
    Both parents are citizens of Nepal.  Neither had  leave  to  remain  in
    this country; that is the context within which the assessment of  their
    child's best interests was to have taken  place.   In  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53,  Lord
    Carnwath endorsed what was said in EV (Philippines) v The Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 concerning this issue
    at [58].  Lord Carnwath said that the approach of the Court  of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) to assessing the best  interests  of  children  was
    sound.  At [58] the Court of Appeal said:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts as  they  are
         in the real world if one parent has no rights to  remain,  but  the
         other does, that is the background against which the assessment  is
         conducted.  If neither parent has the rights to remain,  then  that
         is the background against which the assessment is conducted.   Thus
         the ultimate question will be: is it right to expect the  child  to
         follow the parent with no  rights  to  remain  to  the  country  of
         origin?"

    Applying those considerations to this matter and bearing  in  mind  the
    absence of submissions from Mr Khan to the contrary, in my judgment  it
    is reasonable for the appellants to return to Nepal with their son.  He
    has been raised in this country, but he is of such an age as to be able
    readily to adapt to any environment he may be in in  the  future.   His
    best interests are plainly to remain with both his parents in whichever
    country they may be residing in for the time  being.   As  citizens  of
    Nepal, they will enjoy the full panoply of rights to which citizens  of
    Nepal are entitled.  They are familiar with the language,  the  culture
    and the customs.  They will be well-placed to bring their son up within
    the wider cultural context of his own nationality and ethnicity.

 7. Against that background, it follows that, although the judge failed  to
    assess what the best interests of the appellants' son were, had he done
    so that analysis would have admitted of only one  conclusion:  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellants' son to  return  to  Nepal
    with them, and his  best  interests  were  therefore  to  be  with  his
    parents, wherever they were.

 8. It follows that  although  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law, that was not an  error  of  law
    such that the decision must be set aside.  The error was not material.

 9. This appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Devittie stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 21 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
