
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
HU/02566/2016

                                            HU/13511/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 March 2018                   |         On 9 May 2018               |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                              mr faruk chotani
                              mr faizal chotani
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For reasons which will become clearer in a few moments, I am going  to
    provide one decision in respect of these two Appellants' appeals.   The
    appeals were originally heard separately by different judges.  Although
    the second in time is the appeal of Mr Faruk Chotani  (the  father)  it
    makes more logical sense to deal with his matter first.   That  matter,
    which related to an application for entry clearance, had been heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  29
    September 2017 and by way of a decision promulgated on 24 October  2017
    the judge had allowed the Appellant's appeal.  The other appeal that of
    Mr Faizal Chotani (the son) was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Metzer QC at Taylor House on 4 May  2017  and  by  way  of  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 May 2017 he had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.
    Both  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the  claimant  appeal   with
    permission.

2.    In relation  to  the  father's  appeal,  in  which  it  is  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer who has sought permission to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission was by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson dated 15  January
    2018 when she said as follows:

         "There is arguable merit in the grounds because the Judge does  not
         state why he accepts the appellant has fully co-operated  with  the
         entry clearance officer regarding his previous immigration  history
         when he is  alleged  to  have  used  deception  on  three  separate
         occasions.  The Judge does not refer  to  any  other  occasions  on
         which deception was used and while he has found that the  appellant
         did not exercise deception.  It is unclear if this would have  made
         a material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  it  is
         therefore material.  There is  also  some  arguable  merit  in  the
         grounds at para 2 on the basis of 28 and para 3 of the  appellant's
         wife's witness statement nor does he provide reasons as to  why  he
         finds  that  the  Appellant's  wife  would   have   difficulty   in
         integrating into life in Pakistan.  It is therefore  arguable  that
         the Judge's findings are not adequately reasoned and permission  to
         appeal is granted."

3.    I shall now introduce the son's appeal. Namely the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Metzer QC whereby he had dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal and said that the wrong application was made, in that  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules was relied upon but this Appellant at  the
    time was over 18 and that therefore the judge concluded that the appeal
    had to be dismissed.  The judge did say  he  was  going  to  make  some
    observations at paragraph 4 of his five paragraphed decision.  He  said
    that the other matters needed to be considered and indeed that  if  the
    father did have his appeal pending before the First-tier Tribunal  then
    his decision namely that of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer's,  should
    be brought to the Tribunal's attention in due  course.   The  grant  of
    permission in that case was by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes when it
    was said:

         "It is arguable as set out in the grounds that the Judge's decision
         discloses a material error of law.  The  ground  of  appeal  relied
         upon was that the decision was a breach of section 6 of the HRA but
         the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules  alone  without
         consideration of the Article 8 claim.  Moreover,  the  contemporary
         evidence suggests that although this will be a matter for the Upper
         Tribunal that the appellant made an application for an  adjournment
         so that his appeal could be heard alongside that of his  father  on
         12 June 2017.  If that is so then the appears  to  have  been  some
         confusion in the mind of the judge as to what he was being asked to
         do with the result the appellant was denied a fair hearing  of  his
         appeal."

4.    To give an overview of what these cases  are  about,  the  Sponsor  is
    here in the UK, she works, and she wants her husband and her adult  son
    to come and live with her here in the UK. Some years ago,  her  husband
    had overstayed and ultimately ended up being out  of  the  jurisdiction
    and for some years. Since then, it is clear he has sought to return  to
    the United Kingdom, as has his son.

5.    The Entry Clearance Officer  had  refused  the  husband's  application
    citing in particular paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules and  it
    was said in this case that paragraph  320(11)  was  applicable  in  the
    husband's case because of the following factors:

         "You entered the United Kingdom  on  a  six  month  visit  visa  in
         January 2003, you stayed in the UK until 18/08/2006 when  you  were
         served  with  removal  papers.   You  failed   to   disclose   this
         information when you previously applied for a visa in May 2010  and
         have  used  deception  in  two  of  your  applications  for   entry
         clearance.  Furthermore, you have also  admitted  when  interviewed
         during the course of your last application that  you  were  working
         illegally in the UK.  Given that you  were  an  overstayer,  worked
         illegally and have used  deception  in  an  application  for  entry
         clearance I am satisfied that you have previously  contrived  in  a
         significant way to frustrate... the intentions of the Rules  and  I
         therefore  refuse  your  application  under  paragraph  320(11)  as
         amended."

    There were other bases for refusal including if I  use  the  shorthand,
    the issue was whether or not the Sponsor was earning sufficient  funds.
    That aspect was later to be conceded at the hearing before the judge by
    the Presenting Officer.

6.    In submissions before me today, Mr Melvin relied upon the  grounds  of
    appeal against First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese's  decision  which
    state as follows:

         "(1)     The FTT at 23 has found that the applicant has  fully  co-
             operated with the Entry Clearance Officer it is unclear as  to
             how the FTT  has  reached  that  finding  as  the  Appellants'
             refusal clearly show the Appellant has sought to  deceive  the
             Entry Clearance Officers on three separate occasions.


         (2)      In addition, the FTT has found that the  Appellant  sought
             to re-enter the country legally it is unclear as to  how  that
             finding  was  reached  when  the  Appellant  has  consistently
             attempted to adopt deception in order to gain entry.


         (3)      The FTT has found that the ECO has failed to  give  weight
             to the fact that the Appellant is seeking to join his wife who
             has resided here for the duration  of  her  adult  life.   The
             Sponsor has been here since 2009 and was born in 1971.  It  is
             unclear therefore how the FTT has reached that finding.


         (4)      The FTT has accepted the evidence of the  Sponsor  as  she
             has struggled  to  reintegrate  into  life  in  India  without
             providing any reasoning."

7.    Mr Melvin said that insofar as the work is concerned that  the  father
    had previously worked in breach of  visitor  conditions  and  that  was
    premeditated intention to work and that this issue had  not  even  been
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There was also the  issue
    of frivolous and vexatious applications, some four  or  five  different
    applications had been made by the father  and  this  should  have  been
    considered by the judge.  The judge had  not  given  adequate  reasons.
    The judge's findings were irrational findings it was said.   There  was
    insufficient reason insofar as paragraph 320(11) was concerned and that
    there was a cherry-picking exercise by the  judge.   In  any  event  in
    respect of Article 8 the judge was factually wrong in saying  that  the
    Sponsor had resided in this country for all of her adult  life.   There
    was a slight error in respect of whether she had been here  since  2009
    or 2004 but in any event when she came into the UK she must  have  been
    in her 30s.

8.    Mr Bazini on behalf of the father said that this really was a case  in
    which there was a complete distortion of what had happened at the First-
    tier Tribunal and of reality.  He said the starting point was the Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision, that  had  explained  why  it  was  being
    argued paragraph 320(11) was applicable.  It was said that all of  what
    was relied upon by the ECO was  not  true.   The  interview  was  never
    produced and in any event there was simply  insufficient  evidence  for
    320(11) to be engaged.  The earnings issue relating to the Sponsor  was
    conceded at the appeal.

9.    I was taken then at some length to a previous decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  27
    February  2014  which  was  promulgated  on   11   March   2014.    Now
    interestingly that was a joint decision on that occasion.  Mr  Bazini's
    point was that the previous judge had found that there was no deception
    on the part of the father and it was with that in mind that one had  to
    look at Judge Abebrese's decision.  It  was  said  that  there  was  no
    dispute that the father had overstayed a very long time and indeed that
    he had worked but in addition there had to be aggravating circumstances
    and I was referred to the case of  PS  (paragraph  320(11)  discretion:
    care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  The argument was one  simply
    did not have the aggravating features in this case and therefore it was
    inevitable that the judge was going to allow the appeal under paragraph
    320(11).  In any event the judge did not need to consider Article 8 but
    having done so he looked at the five steps from Razgar and at  stage  3
    he says that the decision was not in accordance with the law so one did
    not even need to get to proportionality and there was no challenge from
    the ECO on this basis and it was submitted  that  this  was  a  perfect
    decision by the judge. Devaseelan had applied.  It was  submitted  this
    was a case in which there was a failure by the ECO  to  look  at  Judge
    Chamberlain's decision and it was a case almost verging on abuse it was
    submitted.

10.   In reply Mr Melvin said that  insofar  as  the  interview  record  was
    concerned that was placed before the judge and it was strange that  the
    judge said it did not relate to the  Appellant.   The  judge  had  been
    cherry-picking at paragraph  23  and  he  should  have  looked  at  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of the previous work and  the  working  in
    breach of his stay.

11.   In view of the complexity of the  background  to  these  two  cases  I
    invited Mr Bazini to respond and Mr Bazini said  that  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions which will now be referred to were not  placed
    before the judge and their relevance was therefore disputed but in  any
    event insofar as the interview was concerned one was still waiting  for
    the actual relevant interview and the  interview  that  Mr  Melvin  was
    referring to had no such thing as deception  having  been  referred  to
    within it.

12.   I now turn to my decision. Insofar as the decision in PS is  concerned
    I of course entirely accept that there  has  to  be  an  incentive  for
    people who are overstayers to leave the United  Kingdom.  Thereby  when
    they are then making proper and  appropriate  applications  from  their
    country of nationality to  seek  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  their
    voluntary removal should be noted.  If the message was that  when  such
    Appellants leave the United  Kingdom,  it  is  next  to  impossible  to
    return, then that will cause the system  to  break  down.   I  have  no
    hesitation accepting that as a principle, the incentive must  be  there
    and that there has to be good faith on the part of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer when assessing such  applications.  Indeed,  I  also  note  the
    extensive findings which Judge Chamberlain made in his decision in 2014
    and it is right to say that there are significant  favourable  findings
    for the claimants.

13.   I am troubled however when I  look  to  the  way  in  which  paragraph
    320(11) is drafted and what it requires to  be  considered.   Paragraph
    320(11) reads as follows:

         "Where  the  applicant  has  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to
         frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:


         (i)      overstaying; or


         (ii)     breaching condition attached to his leave; or


         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or


         (iv)     using deception in an  application  for  entry  clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not)


          and there are other aggravating circumstances such as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions  using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple   identities
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

14.   It is this broad reference to matters which has caused me to  hesitate
    as to the way in which I have to look at the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    grounds of appeal.  In my judgment it is quite clear that  not  all  of
    the bases upon which  the  operation  of  320(11)  can  come  about  is
    explicitly set out within the paragraph itself and that is  clear  from
    the introductory words "such as".  The  ejusdem  generis  is  relevant.
    What else could have been taken  into  account  in  this  instance?  Mr
    Bazini takes great exception to reliance now by the ECO, so late in the
    day, on the Immigration Directorate Instructions (the ones provided  to
    me by Mr Melvin were published on 14 November 2013) because  Mr  Bazini
    says the case was never put on the basis now being put. He also submits
    that in any event, the IDIs are not part of the Immigration  Rules.  In
    my judgment, in any event the introductory phrase "such as" enables the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  quite  properly  say  that  various  and
    extensive factors can be taken into account.  I then ask myself did the
    judge adequately consider the basis  upon  which  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision  was  put  forward?  I  remain  concerned,  for  the
    purposes of assessing whether there is a material error of law, that he
    did not. I was initially attracted to  the  detailed  arguments  of  Mr
    Bazini, but having looked at the history of the case  again  and  after
    exploring matters during the hearing and after taking into account what
    has been recorded by Judge Chamberlain and  indeed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, in my judgment much more needed to be  said  about  the
    father's background, his time here in the United Kingdom and  what  has
    occurred since.  Therefore, for those reasons I do find that there is a
    material error of law and that the matter will have to be  re-heard  in
    relation to the father's appeal.

15.   That then brings me on to  the  other  appeal.  That  is  against  the
    decision of FTT Judge Metzer QC.  That is the appeal  of  the  son.  In
    summary Mr Bazini said that he relied upon a witness statement by  Miss
    Shaw of Counsel and an attendance note that was prepared by her on  the
    same day for her instructing solicitors.  The grounds are  encapsulated
    as follows.  Firstly, it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  use  Case
    Management powers and /or the submissions which were put  to  have  the
    son's appeal heard with the father's or indeed after it.  Secondly,  in
    any event the judge materially erred because he  only  dealt  with  the
    appeal based on the Immigration Rules whereas it was  abundantly  clear
    from various places such as the grounds to the Tribunal that Article  8
    had to be considered as well.  In my judgment it is  quite  clear  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer did materially  err  in  law  in  both
    respects.  This case should indeed have been  adjourned  as  sought  by
    Miss Shaw of Counsel. I accept what was said (the  Respondent  did  not
    attend that hearing) and indeed it was incumbent upon the judge to deal
    with Article 8.  This was not a straightforward Article 8  case  noting
    that various aspects were referred to, including reference to  suicide.
    In the circumstances the decision of Judge Metzer has to be set  aside.
    Only in respect of Article 8 and not the Immigration Rules.

16.   Having made both of those  decisions,  in  my  judgment  it  is  quite
    appropriate for both cases to be consolidated and to be heard together.
     The result is both cases will be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Taylor House and they will not be heard by Judge Abebrese  or  Judge
    Metzer.  Insofar as the son's appeal is concerned that  is  only  being
    remitted in respect of Article 8 ECHR  because  the  Immigration  Rules
    aspect of the appeal remains dismissed.  It is appropriate  for  me  to
    say  now  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  provide  the   further
    directions. One consolidated bundle shall be prepared by the claimants'
    solicitors and it is proper  for  me  to  say  now  that  all  relevant
    documents should be contained within that bundle in readily  accessible
    form including the decision of Judge Chamberlain. None of the  previous
    findings shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First-Tier Tribunal Judges contain material  errors  of
law.
Both decisions are set aside.
The matters are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.
Both cases are consolidated and shall be heard together by one Judge.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed
Date: 20 March 2018

A Mahmood


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
