
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/02579/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 November 2017                    |            On 24 November 2017      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                              Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Seddon, counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  RL
    Walker, promulgated on 19 June 2017. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 14 July 2017.

Anonymity

   2. An anonymity direction  is  made  owing  to  the  age  and  particular
      vulnerability of the respondent's grandchildren.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the  United  Kingdom  during  1989  and  was,
    ultimately, granted indefinite leave to remain during 1995 owing to his
    marriage to a British Citizen (MF).  He was convicted of conspiracy  to
    defraud on 27 February 2004 and was sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment.
    MF and the respondent divorced in 2006. A deportation  order  was  made
    against  the  respondent  on  28  August  2007,  at  a  time  when  his
    whereabouts were unknown. He came to light during  2012  and  appealed,
    out of time, against the deportation order. That appeal  was  dismissed
    in a decision promulgated  on  5  December  2012.  The  respondent  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal but his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 19 July 2013. His appeal rights were  exhausted  as  of  7
    April 2014.

 4. The respondent made a series of further submissions. To  summarise,  he
    stated that he  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  25  years;
    recommenced a relationship with MF; had further family  life  with  his
    adult daughter, adult stepdaughters and  minor  step-grandchildren;  he
    provided substantial practical and financial support  to  his  daughter
    and MF who each had severe ongoing medical problems; he  also  provided
    occasional financial  support  to  his  stepdaughter  (N)  as  well  as
    childcare for his step-grandchildren. In addition, the  respondent  was
    suspected of having bladder cancer, had  an  operation  to  remove  his
    kidney stones and had been referred for tests relating to seizures.  He
    was also a successful businessman. These submissions were supported  by
    the report of an independent social worker and  medical  evidence.  The
    Secretary of State refused to accept these  further  submissions  as  a
    fresh claim. The respondent  was  granted  permission  for  a  judicial
    review of the said decision, which  was,  ultimately,  settled  on  the
    basis that his submissions would be considered as a fresh claim.

 5. The Secretary of State's reasons for refusing to the appellant's  human
    rights claim are set  out  in  a  letter  dated  31  January  2017.  No
    consideration was given  to  the  respondent's  family  life  with  his
    daughter or stepdaughters because they were adults and as such did  not
    come within paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules. It was  accepted
    that the respondent had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  MF
    and that it would be unduly harsh for her to live in Algeria. While the
    Secretary of State also accepted that the respondent was  MF's  primary
    carer it was considered that as  a  British  citizen,  she  could  seek
    support from the NHS and other government bodies and it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for  her  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  while  the
    respondent was removed to Algeria.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept that the respondent met any of the limbs of  paragraph  399A  of
    the Rules. Nor was it accepted that his  business  involvement  was  as
    claimed. The respondent's circumstances were not accepted as  amounting
    to very  compelling  circumstances  which  would  outweigh  the  public
    interest in his deportation.

 6. The respondent's submissions as to his health were  considered  in  the
    context of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR, with the Secretary  of  State  noting
    that he was entitled to medical treatment in  Algeria  and  that  there
    were no illnesses which could not be treated there.



The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent  gave
    evidence along with MF, his step-daughter J and his  business  partner.
    The judge took the Upper Tribunal's consideration of  the  respondent's
    case  on  19  July  2013  as  the  starting  point  but  based  on  the
    unchallenged report of the social worker, he concluded that it would be
    unduly harsh for MF and the step-grandchildren to remain in the  United
    Kingdom without the respondent.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds in support of the appeal argued that Judge Walker failed to
    give clear reasons as to why the appeal had been  allowed  in  that  he
    had, firstly failed  to  acknowledge  or  consider  the  provisions  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act; or, secondly, to indicate  what  part  of
    the Rules were satisfied; thirdly, it was said that the judge failed to
    explain what made the case compelling enough  to  outweigh  the  strong
    public interest in  deportation.  It  was  emphasised  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had not found the respondent's case sufficiently compelling on
    very similar  facts.  Fourthly,  it  was  contended  that  insufficient
    reasons had been given by the judge for the appellant to succeed  as  a
    carer for his family members; BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  357
    applied.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that all the points  made
    by the Secretary of State were arguable.

The hearing

10. There was no Rule 24 response filed because, as  Mr  Seddon  explained,
    those representing the respondent did  not  receive  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal until 21 November 2017. Instead, he handed up
    a brief skeleton argument at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  which,  in
    summary, he argued that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Ms Pal argued that other than a reference to the Rules and section 117C
    of the 2002 Act at [34] of the decision, there was otherwise a complete
    failure by the judge to make any findings in respect of  the  Rules  or
    statutory provisions. She described the complexity of the  respondent's
    circumstances, arguing that the judge made no reference in the decision
    to the applicability of Rule 399a  and  furthermore  did  not  consider
    whether it applied to the step-grandchildren.  Instead  the  judge  had
    quoted from the independent social worker's report and did  not  assess
    whether  the  respondent  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with his grandchildren.

12. Ms Pal went somewhat further  than  grounds  in  arguing  that  it  was
    established that when a deportation  order  had  originally  been  made
    against the respondent, he had gone to ground and as such little weight
    should have been attached to his family or private life. Ms Pal further
    contended  that  the  judge   made   no   findings   on   whether   the
    grandchildren's mother had abdicated responsibility and that there  was
    no consideration of whether the respondent was fit to be  a  carer;  as
    someone facing deportation, either by the independent social worker  or
    social services.

13. Ms Pal criticised the judge's findings at [42-43] to  the  effect  that
    the respondent had not continued to offend  and  was  working;  arguing
    that these findings were made  in  ignorance  of  the  signing  of  the
    deportation order in 2007 following which  the  respondent  had  worked
    unlawfully in defiance of the order. She argued that the judge made  no
    reference to the public interest anywhere in the  decision.  Developing
    an earlier point, Ms Pal suggested that the respondent put down further
    roots from 2007 in that he had gone to ground knowing that there was  a
    deportation order in existence and had been arrested at work  in  2012.
    She argued that none of these features were considered by the judge and
    that the Secretary of State could not see where the judge balanced  the
    competing interests. She submitted that the judge failed to  take  into
    account the role of social  services  and  the  assistance  they  would
    provide in the respondent's absence. Lastly, she said  that  the  judge
    was wrong in finding that  the  passage  of  time  diluted  the  public
    interest. The latter would only be the case after  the  respondent  had
    been excluded for 10 years.

14. Mr Seddon began by emphasising that decisions in  deportation  hearings
    are fact sensitive and factual findings should be difficult to overturn
    on  grounds  of  perversity.  Furthermore,  he  reminded  me  that  the
    Secretary of  State  initially  found  that  the  respondent's  further
    submissions did not amount to a fresh claim, but had conceded the point
    upon the respondent being granted permission for a judicial  review  of
    that decision. He argued that it was implicit in that  concession  that
    this was a case which the First-tier Tribunal were entitled  to  decide
    positively, in that it was a case which was capable of succeeding.

15. Addressing the first ground as  to  the  judge's  failure  to  consider
    section 117B, Mr Seddon took me to multiple places in the  decision  to
    argue the reverse. He did the same for the second ground, where it  was
    said that the judge did not explain the basis either under the Rules or
    section 117C, upon which the appeal was allowed.

16. Mr Seddon contended that contrary to Ms Pal's  submissions,  the  judge
    explained  why  he  considered  that  it  was  unduly  harsh  for   the
    respondent's grandchildren to remain in the United Kingdom without him,
    in that he had cited the social worker's report, whose conclusions were
    not questioned nor disputed by the respondent at the hearing. He argued
    that those expert findings spoke for themselves and that  the  Tribunal
    was entitled to quote from  them.  Furthermore,  the  judge  had  ample
    undisputed medical evidence before  him;  expert  evidence  that  there
    would be a deterioration in the mental health of all  the  respondent's
    family members if he is deported and evidence  that  the  grandchildren
    were already vulnerable and would be likely  to  end  up  in  care.  He
    argued that these matters adequately explained the judge's  conclusions
    as to undue harshness at [40] of the decision.

17. On Ms Pal's submission as to  the  ongoing  parental  relationship,  Mr
    Seddon argued that this was simply not in dispute and drew my attention
    to the previous findings of the Upper Tribunal, which the judge used as
    his starting point at [36]. Indeed, the Upper Tribunal  had  previously
    made findings of family life  between  the  respondent  and  his  step-
    grandchildren.

18. Mr Seddon disputed the Secretary of State's third ground that the judge
    did not  sufficiently  identify  the  public  interest,  with  multiple
    references to the decision and, in relation  to  the  fourth  and  last
    ground distinguished the facts of the respondent's case  from  that  of
    the claimant in BL(Jamaica). Addressing additional matters incorporated
    by Ms Pal into her submissions, he argued that  the  judge  had  in  no
    sense overlooked the role of social services in this case.  The  social
    work report referred to individual long-term care  involving  practical
    and emotional support provided by the respondent to his family members,
    which could not be replicated by social services. It was owing  to  the
    respondent's presence that the state had not had  to  step  in  as  the
    judge had found at [42].  With regard  to  Ms  Pal's  comments  on  the
    respondent's immigration history, he drew my attention to the  findings
    of the Upper Tribunal that the respondent took  no  positive  steps  to
    frustrate immigration enforcement. Lastly, in relation to  the  passage
    of time, the judge's comments went to the reduction of the weight to be
    attached to public interest owing to the decline in  the  risk  to  the
    public in the time that had passed.

19. In reply, Ms Pal simply wished to state  that  the  presenting  officer
    before the First-tier Tribunal did not concede the  issue  of  parental
    responsibility. Mr  Seddon  accepted  this,  but  reiterated  that  the
    presenting officer had not challenged the findings and  conclusions  of
    the independent social worker.

Decision on error of law

20. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made no error of law  and  that  its'  findings  would  be  upheld.  My
    reasons, which address  only  the  grounds  for  which  permission  was
    granted, are as follows.

21. The judge adequately directed  himself  as  to  the  considerations  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. At [7] on page 4  of  the  decision,  the
    judge states; "Consideration also has to be given to the relevant parts
    of 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  which
    contains sections 117A, 117B, 117C and  117D."  As  Mr  Seddon  argued,
    referring to paragraph 15 of the reasons for refusal letter,  no  issue
    was taken with the factors in section 117B.  Indeed,  consideration  of
    section 117B would reveal that the respondent gave evidence in English,
    converses with his family in English, is  economically  independent  in
    that the Tribunal accepted his business was doing  well.  In  terms  of
    immigration history, it is accepted that  the  respondent  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his  relationship  with  his
    current partner and that prior to that he had  been  a  visitor  and  a
    student. Thus, the respondent's family life was established at  a  time
    when he was lawfully in the UK. The first ground  is  simply  not  made
    out.

22. The second ground suggests that there was insufficient focus  on  which
    part of Rules the judge found that the respondent satisfied. As well as
    referring to section 117C at [28], there is a clear  reference  by  the
    judge to it being unduly harsh for both the step-grandchildren and  the
    respondent's partner to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him,
    therefore both limbs of 117C(5)are made out. At [29], the judge made an
    alternative finding that section 117C(6) was satisfied.

23. At [34], under the heading of "Findings of Fact  and  of  Credibility,"
    the relevant Rules are set out as well as a reference to section  117C.
    There is a further reference to both the Rules and the statute at [35].
    At [40] the judge  clearly  states  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh,
    evidently a finding under section 117(C). At [42]  he  considers  other
    factors  relied  upon  in  relation  to  section  117C(6)  as  part  of
    exceptional circumstances, including the  passage  of  time  since  the
    offence was committed, the low risk of reoffending and that  the  state
    will not have to provide for the family if the  respondent  remains  in
    the United Kingdom. Given the multiple references to  the  statute  and
    the Rules both in the judge's self-direction as well  as  his  reasons,
    there is no merit in the second ground.

24. The third ground contends that the judge did not sufficiently  identify
    the public interest. Again, this is not the case. As  indicated  above,
    at [7], the judge cited sections 117A-D and given the  many  subsequent
    references to section 117C, it cannot be seriously contended  that  the
    judge did  not  have  specific  regard  to  section  117C(1)  regarding
    deportation being in the public interest and section 117C(2) as regards
    the level of offending. Furthermore, at [35] the  judge  considers  the
    nature of the offending and sentence imposed and  rightly  finds,  with
    reference to Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC that it does not  fall  within  the
    highest level of offending. at [42] the judge overtly acknowledged  the
    statutory criteria and described the public interest element as  strong
    owing to the seriousness of the respondent's offending.  The judge made
    no error in considering that the  risk  of  reoffending  was  the  most
    serious factor in the public interest  but  at  the  same  time,  being
    cognisant of the fact that the offence took place in 2002,  that  there
    had been only one offence,  there  was  no  further  offending  in  the
    fifteen  years  since  conviction  and  the  pre-sentence  report   had
    indicated a low risk of reoffending, a prediction  which  had  come  to
    pass.

25. The final ground argued that the  judge  was  required  to  give  clear
    reasons for the respondent to succeed as a carer, given the judgment in
    BL Jamaica.  The judge  did  so  and  in  any  event  the  respondent's
    circumstances are easily distinguished from that of the claimant in  BL
    where there was another carer  available  in  circumstances  where  the
    claimant was not available when imprisoned.  The extract from  [53]  of
    the judgment relied upon does no more than say that it is necessary  to
    provide evidence that care is needed. In the  respondent's  case,  this
    evidence was provided in the form  of  the  undisputed  social  workers
    report where the absence of an alternative carer was  explored  as  was
    the conclusion, quoted at [39] that there had been no  improvements  in
    the physical and mental health of the respondent's family  members  and
    that their degree of  dependency  (with  particular  reference  to  the
    partner  and  step-daughter  N)  on  the   respondent   had   increased
    significantly



Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 11 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

























