
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02905/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 3 June 2021                     |On : 22 June 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              KHALIL EJTEMAIYEE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, instructed by SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams.  A  face-to-
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and  all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, whose date of  birth  recorded
   in the above identity is 10 February 1971. He claims to have  arrived  in
   the UK on 26 October 2007, after having left Afghanistan  on  13  October
   2007. He claimed asylum at the Asylum Screening Unit  in  Croydon  on  29
   October  2007,  as  Khalil  Ejtemaiyee  born  on  10  February  1971   in
   Afghanistan and was interviewed about his claim on 29 November 2007.

3. The appellant's claim, as initially stated, was  based  on  his  problems
   with the Taliban and the Jamait-e-Islami whom he claimed  killed  one  of
   his brothers, a commander with the Hezbi-e-Islami, and injured another in
   1993. The appellant claimed that he was a Sunni Muslim from Kandahar  who
   married his wife in 1998. His father had  held  a  number  of  government
   positions including in the Prime Minister's office and was  a  member  of
   parliament but later resigned and concentrated on family  farms  and  his
   business in wholesale medicines in Kandahar. Prior to the Taliban  coming
   to power, the appellant and his family had had  to  move  to  Herat  from
   Kandahar, in 1993, because of problems with the Northern Alliance  and  a
   particular commander called Hashim, but when the Taliban  came  to  power
   they moved back to Kandahar, in 1994/95. In  1998  Commander  Hashim  was
   reported to the Taliban by the appellant's brother  for  his  activities,
   and the appellant's brothers acted as witnesses in a  case  against  him,
   which led to him being convicted and subsequently  hanged  in  1998.  The
   Taliban wanted the appellant and his brothers to fight for them, so  they
   fled to Kabul to avoid them and the appellant then lived  in  Kabul  from
   October 1999 until leaving for the UK in 2007. His family moved  back  to
   Herat from Kandahar in November 2001. When the  Taliban  was  overthrown,
   Commander Hashim's brothers went to their home in Herat and spoke to  his
   mother, which led to  two  of  his  brothers  fleeing  the  country.  The
   commander's brothers sent warning letters in  2003,  2005  and  2007.  In
   April 2003 one of  the  appellant's  brothers  disappeared  and  in  2007
   another went missing.  A  week  later  a  grenade  was  thrown  into  the
   appellant's home and he fled to his uncle's house and then  to  Pakistan.
   He left his wife in Pakistan with his parents and flew to Italy and  came
   to the UK by lorry, accompanied by an agent who retained his passport. He
   currently had three brothers in the  UK  and  one  in  Kandahar  and  his
   sisters lived in Kandahar with their husbands.

4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim and considered it  to
   be a fabrication, refusing it in  a  decision  dated  19  December  2007.
   However, the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  was
   allowed by Immigration Judge Wiseman, in a  decision  dated  13  February
   2008, primarily owing to the fact that two of the appellant's brothers in
   the UK had been granted refugee status on the basis of the same account.

5. The appellant was then granted refugee status on 3 March  2008  and  five
   years' leave to enter and remain as a refugee until 19 February 2013.  He
   applied for a travel document on 9 May 2008, all in  the  same  identity,
   Khalil Ejtemaiyee, born on 10 February 1971.

6. However,  on  11  August  2008,  and  again  on  25  November  2008,  the
   respondent wrote to the appellant advising him that it had come to  light
   that he had  lawful  permanent  residence  in  the  USA  in  a  different
   identity, Hikmatullah Ejtimyee, born on 17 March 1974. It was accordingly
   considered that he was not entitled to refugee status in the UK and  that
   consideration was being given to cancelling his refugee  status.  He  was
   invited to attend an interview, but he did not attend on the given date.

7. Some years later, after the expiry of his leave to remain, the  appellant
   made  written  submissions  to  the  respondent,  on  7  September  2016,
   enclosing a witness statement dated 5 September 2016, in which he  sought
   to respond to the previous allegation and requested that  he  be  granted
   settlement in the UK as he remained at risk on return to Afghanistan.  He
   stated that he had been awaiting an interview date from the Home  Office,
   following the letters of 11 August 2008 and 25 November 2008, but had not
   received a date. He had been  arranging  evidence  to  confirm  that  his
   residence card for the US had been issued for 2 years, from November 2005
   to November 2007, and was not permanent residence as  considered  by  the
   respondent and had in fact expired by the time he  had  his  full  asylum
   interview. He had not applied for settlement at the time of expiry of his
   refugee status, as he was expecting to hear from the Home Office with  an
   interview date, but had now decided to take the  initiative  and  contact
   the Home Office himself, having managed  to  obtain  a  copy  of  his  US
   residence card. He had not mentioned  his  US  residence  permit  at  his
   asylum interview on 29 November 2007 because it had expired by  then  and
   he did not think that it was relevant, as the only  relevant  matter  was
   his fear of returning to Afghanistan.  He was still at risk on return  to
   Afghanistan and even more so, as a result of his political activities  in
   the UK and his appearance on TV and  radio  expressing  his  views  about
   Afghanistan. He claimed that he had met with Hamid Karzai, who  had  been
   to his family home in the UK, and had many pictures taken with  him.  His
   family had high political connections and was well-known in  Afghanistan,
   as a result of which he was at risk on return.

8. The appellant subsequently made a protection  settlement  application  on
   14 December 2016, relying on his witness statement of 5 September 2016.

9. On 11 June  2019  the  respondent  sent  the  appellant  notification  of
   intention to cease his refugee status. The respondent stated that it  had
   come to light that the appellant had entered the USA on 7 May 2003  after
   being issued a visa on 28 April 2003,  in  the  identity  of  Hikmatullah
   Ejtimyee born on 17 March 1974.  On  23  November  2005  his  status  was
   changed to that of permanent residence in the USA and  a  residence  card
   was issued to him in the name of Hikmat Ullah Ejtimyee,  valid  until  23
   November 2007. The respondent considered that the appellant's failure  to
   mention his US residency when he claimed asylum cast doubt on his  claim.
   The respondent stated that Home Office checks had confirmed that  in  two
   entry clearance applications made from New York to come  to  the  UK  the
   appellant had stated that  he  had  a  wife  and  daughter  who  were  US
   nationals and that he would  be  visiting  his  brother  in  the  UK.  He
   provided his Afghanistan passport which was issued  in  the  identity  of
   Hikmatullah Ejtimyee, born on 17 March 1974, valid from 11 May 2005 to 10
   May 2010. That information was different to that  given  for  his  asylum
   claim where he gave a different name and date of birth, he claimed to  be
   married to an Afghan national with no children and  he  claimed  to  have
   never been issued with a passport or applied for or been  issued  with  a
   visa for any country including the UK. Photographic evidence showed  that
   both were the same person. The respondent therefore  proposed  to  cancel
   the appellant's refugee status  on  the  basis  of  misrepresentation  of
   material facts. The appellant was invited to respond.

10. Written representations were made on behalf of the appellant on  8  July
   2019, in which it was asserted that the new information known to the Home
   Office would not have made a material difference to the  outcome  of  the
   appeal before the immigration judge or the grant of  refugee  status,  as
   the findings made by the judge related to events  which  occurred  before
   the appellant left for the USA. In a witness statement dated 19 June 2019
   accompanying the written representations, the appellant  stated  that  he
   had been granted a two-year residence permit in the USA on the  basis  of
   his arranged marriage to Gul Tokhi, whom he had  divorced  in  2007.  The
   Afghan passport in the identity of Hikmatullah Ejtimyee born on 17  March
   1974 was a forged passport, obtained for him by his uncle in  Afghanistan
   so that he could travel to the USA, and he had therefore stated the truth
   at his asylum interview, that he had never had his own  Afghan  passport.
   The appellant stated again that he was well-known in Afghanistan and  had
   been politically involved in the UK, appearing on TV. He also produced  a
   statement from the nephew of President Karzai supporting his claim to  be
   at risk on return.

11. The respondent then informed the UNHCR, in  a  further  letter  dated  3
   October 2019, of the intention to cancel the appellant's  refugee  status
   under paragraph 339AB of the immigration rules. A response  was  invited,
   to which the UNHCR replied on 9 December 2019, urging the Home Office  to
   interview  the  appellant  and  make  a  thorough   assessment   of   the
   misrepresentations and an evaluation of his intentions, as  well  as  the
   international protection needs of the appellant.

12. On 13 January 2020  a  decision  was  made  to  cancel  the  appellant's
   refugee status. The respondent noted in that decision that the  appellant
   had had the opportunity to claim asylum in the USA or to seek  to  extend
   his residence there on the basis of parental access to his daughter,  but
   he had instead allowed his residence to lapse for  unknown  reasons.  The
   respondent considered that the appellant had omitted material facts  with
   regard to his previous life and permanent residence status in the USA and
   that that, together with the fact that he had obtained his visit visa for
   the UK around the time he claimed to be back  in  Afghanistan,  seriously
   undermined the credibility of his asylum claim. The respondent considered
   that the appellant had deliberately  withheld  information  in  order  to
   enhance his chances of being granted refugee status and  that  had  these
   facts been known, his appeal may not have been  allowed.  The  respondent
   did not accept the appellant's claim that the  Afghan  passport  used  to
   apply for his entry to the USA was a  forgery  and  considered  that  the
   identity in that document was his true identity rather than that given in
   his asylum claim. The respondent concluded that the  appellant's  refugee
   status should be revoked and granted him a right of appeal  against  that
   decision under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
   2002. The appellant did not appeal against that decision.

13. On 6 February 2020 the respondent made a further decision, refusing  the
   appellant's settlement protection application and human rights  claim  of
   14 December 2016. The respondent refused the appellant's application  for
   indefinite leave to remain as he failed to meet the requirements  of  the
   immigration rules  in  paragraph  339T(i)  with  reference  to  paragraph
   339R(ii)  as  his  refugee  status  had  been  revoked.  The   respondent
   considered further that the appellant failed to meet the requirements  of
   paragraph 339R(iii) as he had used a false identity to  claim  asylum  in
   the UK. The respondent considered that the appellant  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the immigrations rules  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  on  the
   basis of his private life and that his application  fell  to  be  refused
   under the suitability provisions in section S-LTR of Appendix FM,  in  S-
   LTR.1.6 and  S-LTR.2.2.  It  was  considered  that  there  were  no  very
   significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in  Afghanistan  and
   no exceptional circumstances outside the immigration rules.

14. The appellant appealed against that decision  on  Article  2,  3  and  8
   grounds and it is  that  appeal,  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal promulgated on 16 October 2020 dismissing his appeal,  which  is
   the subject of these proceedings.

15. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moon on  12
   October 2020. The appellant's evidence before the judge was that  he  had
   gone to the USA in 2003 to join his fianc�e who then  became  his  second
   wife, travelling there on a forged passport obtained by  his  uncle,  and
   that he had used the forged passport to obtain  a  new  passport  in  New
   York. He had been granted a spouse visa extended to November 2007. He had
   a child with his second wife. He travelled to the UK to see his  brothers
   three times, using the new passport obtained in New York, which contained
   his false details. The visas had been obtained using an agency.  In  2005
   his wife persuaded him to visit his parents in Afghanistan, but  when  he
   came back to the USA she had left him and he was later divorced from  her
   in 2007. At some  point  between  September  2006  and  October  2007  he
   returned to Afghanistan and patched things up with his first wife. It was
   at that time that one of his brothers disappeared and a  week  later  the
   grenade was thrown into the house where he  was  living  with  his  first
   wife. He therefore feared being killed and decided to leave  Afghanistan.
   He came to the UK and provided his correct name and date of birth.

16. At the hearing it was conceded that the respondent's case gave  rise  to
   a reasonable  suspicion  of  dishonesty,  but  it  was  argued  that  the
   appellant had provided an innocent explanation. However,  the  judge  did
   not accept that there was  an  innocent  explanation  which  reached  the
   minimum level of plausibility for the different identities given  in  the
   2006 visit visa application and the 2007 asylum claim. The judge did  not
   accept the claim that the appellant's non-disclosure about the USA  could
   be adequately explained by his mental state following his separation from
   his second wife.  Neither did the judge accept the  submissions  made  on
   behalf of the appellant that the non-disclosure was immaterial. The judge
   found that the appellant's failure to claim asylum in  the  USA  and  his
   subsequent return to Afghanistan after living in  the  USA  were  factors
   that would have been material in determining whether he  feared  for  his
   life in Afghanistan and, in any event, she considered that  the  relevant
   issue was not whether the appellant's asylum claim was true  but  whether
   paragraph 399R of the immigration rules applied.

17. It  was  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  there  were  very
   significant obstacles to his  integration  into  Afghanistan  because  he
   still feared the Taliban and the Northern Alliance faction, that  he  had
   been absent from Afghanistan since 2007 and that he had been  westernised
   in the time he was in the USA and the UK in that he consumed alcohol, had
   relationships and did not practice his  religion.  The  judge  considered
   that the appellant fell within the suitability provisions under S-LTR 1.6
   and therefore could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)  on
   that basis, but  that  in  any  event  there  were  no  very  significant
   obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  in  Afghanistan.  The  judge
   concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  did   not   amount   to   a
   disproportionate interference with the appellant's private life in the UK
   and that it did not breach his Article 8 human rights and she accordingly
   dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

18. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on  two  grounds:
   firstly, that the judge had made irrational findings and  had  failed  to
   apply the correct test for dishonesty by giving no consideration  to  the
   appellant's  intentions;  and  secondly,  that  the  judge   had   failed
   adequately to consider material factors,  namely  the  underlying  asylum
   claim which was separate  to  the  alleged  deception  and  included  the
   appellant's fear of the Taliban and the fact that his  two  brothers  had
   been granted asylum on the same basis as his own claim.

19. Following the grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal, the  respondent
   filed a Rule 24 response, prepared by Mr Ian Jarvis for the Secretary  of
   State, in which it was submitted that it was relevant to  note  that  the
   appellant had not appealed against the 13 January  2020  decision,  which
   applied paragraph 339AB of  the  immigration  rules,  and  had  therefore
   declined to challenge the revocation decision by reference either to  the
   Refugee Convention or the Qualification Directive. The  appeal  had  been
   against the decision of 6 February 2020, which was  the  refusal  of  the
   application for indefinite leave to remain as a  person  granted  refugee
   status under paragraph 339R, on the basis of his residence permit  having
   been revoked (paragraph 339R(ii)) and his conduct making  it  undesirable
   to grant leave to remain (paragraph 339R(iii)(f)) and the refusal of  his
   Article 8 human rights claim. It was submitted, with regard to the  first
   ground that the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  allegation  of
   deception was properly made out in accordance with the appropriate  test.
   As for the second ground, the failure of the judge  to  directly  address
   the appellant's claim that he feared various armed actors in  Afghanistan
   was not a material error since that element of the claim could  not  have
   led to a different decision, in  particular  as  the  appellant  had  not
   pursued that ground by way of appealing the  protection  decision  or  by
   relying on Article 3, but had appealed solely  on  the  grounds  of  very
   significant obstacles under paragraph 276ADE(1).

20. The matter came before me on 11 March 2021 and I heard submissions  from
   both parties in relation  to  both  grounds  of  appeal.  In  a  decision
   promulgated on 15 March 2021, I found  that  Judge  Moon  had  materially
   erred in law and I set aside the decision on the following basis:


    "Discussion and conclusions


    25. I find no merit in the  first  ground  relating  to  the  deception
    issue, and indeed Mr Gajjar  properly  acknowledged  that  it  was  the
    second ground which was the stronger one. I agree with Mr Kandola that,
    whether or not the case of  Ivey  is  applicable  in  setting  out  the
    correct test for establishing dishonesty and  deception,  the  fact  is
    that the judge properly directed herself on  the  matter  and  provided
    full and cogent reasons for making the adverse findings that  she  did.
    At  [27]  to  [33]  the  judge  gave  detailed  consideration  to   the
    appellant's explanation  for  the  alternative  identity  in  his  visa
    applications and the Afghan passport he had used  and  provided  proper
    reasons for rejecting that explanation. Likewise, at [34] to [39],  the
    judge  carefully  considered  the  appellant's  explanation  about  his
    residence in the USA and his reasons for not disclosing  that  when  he
    made his asylum claim in the UK, and again provided cogent reasons  for
    rejecting his explanation and reasons. There was nothing irrational  or
    unreasonable about the issues taken against the appellant and the judge
    was fully and properly entitled to reach the adverse  conclusions  that
    she did.


    26. As for the second ground, as I pointed out to  Mr  Kandola  at  the
    commencement of the proceedings, I had  difficulty  in  reconciling  Mr
    Jarvis's submissions at [23(d)] and [23(e)] with the grounds of  appeal
    before Judge Moon, as the grounds clearly included Articles 2 and 3 and
    the risk to the appellant on return to Afghanistan  from  his  previous
    persecutors, separately,  and  in  addition  to,  the  issue  of  'very
    significant obstacles to integration' under Article 8. At  [41],  Judge
    Moon referred to the appellant's claimed fear from the Taliban and  the
    Northern Alliance under the heading of  'very  significant  obstacles',
    yet not only was there no separate protection and Article 3  assessment
    in her decision, but the only assessment made  in  regard  to  risk  on
    return was, as Mr Gajjar properly submitted, in relation to  the  risks
    arising from being westernised. As Mr Kandola properly accepted, it was
    incumbent upon the judge to consider all matters raised in the  grounds
    of appeal. The fact that the  appellant  did  not  appeal  against  the
    cessation decision of 13 January 2020, and the fact that  the  decision
    of 6 February 2020 relied upon paragraph 339R to refuse the appellant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain under the protection  route,
    did not preclude the respondent or the Tribunal  from  considering  the
    current protection issues and the Article 3 claim.


    27. As I advised the parties at the  hearing,  I  cannot  see  how  the
    judge's failure to consider Article 3 can be  said  to  be  immaterial,
    particularly when a previous Tribunal found the appellant to be at risk
    on return, albeit in a decision made without knowledge  of  significant
    and material facts. It may well be that, upon a full  consideration  of
    the appellant's claim which  includes  the  matters  now  know  to  the
    respondent and the Tribunal, the same  outcome  is  reached,  but  that
    cannot be considered to be an obvious outcome without the matter  being
    fully and properly assessed.


    28. Accordingly, Judge Moon's decision has to be set aside.  Mr  Gajjar
    requested that the matter be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    there would need to be findings of fact made on the appellant's  claim.
    Mr Kandola was ambivalent on the matter. Whilst it is  the  case  that,
    where fresh findings of fact need to be made,  a  remittal  is  usually
    appropriate, this is not a completely de novo  hearing.  The  cessation
    decision has not been appealed and remains in place, as do the  judge's
    findings  and  conclusions  on  deception  and  dishonesty.   In   such
    circumstances it seems to me that the case ought to be retained in  the
    Upper Tribunal.


    29. The matter will therefore be listed for a resumed  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, to consider the appellant's human rights claim."

Hearing and Submissions

21. The matter then came before me for the decision to be re-made.

22. The appellant  gave  oral  evidence  before  me,  adopting  his  witness
   statement of 21 July 2020. He was cross-examined at length by Mr  Clarke.
   He confirmed that the passport he had used to enter the US was false  and
   contained his nickname rather than his correct name and the wrong date of
   birth. His uncle had obtained the passport  for  him.  He  had  used  the
   passport to visit the UK on two occasions in 2006. The passport had  been
   checked by the immigration controls in the US and the UK.  On  the  third
   occasion he visited the UK he travelled on a new  passport  that  he  had
   obtained in the US.  He  went  from  the  US  to  Afghanistan  in  around
   September 2006. The appellant  confirmed  that  his  three  brothers  had
   supported his asylum claim in 2007. They provided witness statements  for
   the appeal but did not appear in person. They had  not  appeared  at  the
   hearing today because his solicitor had told him that there was  no  need
   for them to do so, but they would come if called. The appellant confirmed
   that when he returned to Afghanistan in 2006 he lost  his  passport  with
   the two-year US residence permit, so his  uncle  obtained  another  false
   passport. He managed to obtain a copy of the US residence  permit  later,
   through his cousin. Mr Clarke suggested to  the  appellant  that  he  had
   entered the UK lawfully on a valid visa with a genuine passport  and  had
   made a false asylum claim in a false identity supported by false evidence
   from people purporting to be  his  brothers  who  had  not  provided  any
   supporting identification. The appellant denied that that  was  the  case
   and said that they were his brothers.

23. The appellant  confirmed  that  his  television  appearances,  where  he
   expressed views on trying to obtain peace in the  country,  had  been  in
   1992 and 1993 and that he had not done anything since then. He said  that
   pictures of him with Hamid Karzai, the ex-President of  Afghanistan,  had
   however gone viral in  2016.  Mr  Clarke  asked  the  appellant  why  his
   brothers  had  not  based  their  asylum  claim  on  such  high   profile
   connections, to which he replied that those people were not in government
   at the time they made their claims. The Home Office  had  not  asked  his
   brothers about their father, whereas he had been specifically asked about
   that when he produced the photographs.  As  for  the  letter  from  Hamid
   Karzai's nephew, that was genuine. Karzai's nephew had gone with  him  to
   his solicitor's office. He had stayed with him for  five  days  and  they
   went to the solicitor together. When asked by Mr Clarke why, if he was as
   wealthy as claimed, and owned as much land as claimed, he had not brought
   his wife to the UK and had given an explanation that he could not  afford
   to do so, the appellant said that his family had been wealthy  but  their
   land was taken from them. Although they had got the  land  back,  it  had
   been occupied as a British base until recently and was in any event split
   between the Taliban and the government areas. Further, he was not working
   here and was dependent upon his brothers. As for the copy of the  taskira
   he had produced for the  Tribunal,  that  was  a  genuine  document.  The
   appellant showed the original document. He said that if he went  back  to
   Afghanistan he would not be able to work as he would be killed  or  would
   disappear at the  hands  of  the  Taliban.  He  had  no  family  left  in
   Afghanistan, aside from his father who was 87 years old. His  family  was
   otherwise in Pakistan, the USA and the UK.

24. Both parties then made submissions before me.

25. Mr Clarke's submission was that the true case  was  that  the  appellant
   had had a genuine passport with which he had travelled between the US and
   the UK, that he had entered the US in 2003 on a genuine passport and  had
   subsequently entered the UK on a visit visa which ran out,  and  that  he
   had then claimed asylum a month later in a false identity. His account of
   returning to Afghanistan  in  2006,  losing  his  passport  with  the  US
   residence permit, and coming to the UK with an agent in October 2007  was
   not true. The appellant had a right of residence in the US until at least
   November 2007 and a valid passport and therefore had  no  need  to  leave
   Afghanistan on a fake passport in October 2007 as he claimed. His alleged
   brothers had never come forward to explain why  they  were  supporting  a
   claim in 2007 when they knew full well that the appellant had been in the
   UK for some time. Mr Clarke relied upon the case of Hussein  and  Another
   (Status of passports: foreign law) [2020] UKUT 250 in submitting that the
   appellant's passport was genuine, having been found as such by the US and
   UK authorities. He submitted that this was a sham claim  where  deception
   had been used by the appellant and that had been confirmed by the  First-
   tier Tribunal in findings which had been  preserved.  The  appellant  had
   made no effort to bring his wife to the UK, despite having stated that he
   was wealthy, and the reason for that was that he had never been  back  to
   Afghanistan but had been in the UK with a visa. No weight should be given
   to the taskira as it had not been verified, whilst the  passport  claimed
   to be fake should be considered as genuine.  The  appellant  had  had  no
   political connections for 30 years and there was  no  evidence  that  his
   current links had gone viral. The letter allegedly  from  Hamid  Karzai's
   nephew was not a genuine document  and  the  people  alleged  to  be  the
   appellant's brothers were not his brothers. The fact that  the  appellant
   made no asylum claim when he was in the US, at a time when he  said  that
   threatening letters were sent  to  his  home,  showed  that  he  was  not
   genuine. On the basis of the new evidence, which  was  not  before  Judge
   Wiseman in 2008, the positive credibility findings did  not  have  to  be
   upheld. There was no Article 3 risk to the appellant on any basis and  no
   very significant obstacles to his integration in Afghanistan.

26.  Mr  Gajjar  submitted  that  notwithstanding  Judge  Moon's   preserved
   findings on deception, the findings of Judge Wiseman on risk on return to
   Afghanistan could be upheld. Judge Wiseman's  decision  had  led  to  the
   grant of asylum and was the starting point,  following  the  guidance  in
   Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  000702.  The  appellant's  concealment  of  his
   residence in the UK did cause problems, but his  evidence  otherwise  had
   the ring of truth. There were photographs showing the appellant with high-
   ranking politicians and he was not to be considered as having a low-level
   profile. There had been no previous suggestion that the appellant was not
   related to his brothers and it was  clear  that  the  relationships  were
   genuine as he had referred to them when applying for his visit visas  and
   they had referred to him in their own protection claims. The  appellant's
   credibility was therefore not undermined by his failure  to  explain  his
   presence in the US. The appellant's explanation as to  why  he  needed  a
   false passport and how he had lost his documents was a credible one.  The
   appellant had given a credible explanation about his financial situation.
   His taskira showed his true identity. His account of how he obtained  the
   letter from Hamid Karzai's nephew was  credible.  On  the  basis  of  the
   appellant's account being credible, it was clear that he was at  risk  on
   return to Afghanistan and would not be able to relocate to  Kabul  as  he
   had no connections there. The appeal should be allowed.

Discussion and Findings

27. Having set aside Judge Moon's decision on the limited basis that I  did,
   the question before me in  re-making  the  decision  in  the  appellant's
   appeal is whether or not he is genuinely at risk on return to Afghanistan
   for the reasons given by Judge Wiseman, namely  as  a  result  of  events
   which occurred in 1993 and  then  from  2001  related  to  his  brother's
   involvement with a Commander Hashim and  their  part  in  his  trial  and
   execution and, more generally, as a result of his family's  high  profile
   background.

28. Mr Clarke made quite forceful submissions on  the  appellant's  lack  of
   credibility and fraudulent claim, his case being that the  appellant  had
   never returned to Afghanistan after coming to the UK on his second  visit
   visa and that he was actually in the UK at the  time  of  the  events  he
   claimed  to  have  occurred  in  October  2007  in  Afghanistan.  I  find
   considerable force in that submission, although I would  not  agree  with
   his additional assertion that the appellant's account of his relationship
   with his three brothers in the UK was also a fabrication, since that  had
   never been claimed before and the relationship had always  been  part  of
   the unchallenged evidence. Having repeatedly read through the appellant's
   four statements and considered his oral evidence before me, I would agree
   with Mr Gajjar that his evidence had the ring of truth about it,  but  it
   is also apparent to me that there are deliberate lacunae in the  evidence
   which suggest that the appellant has expanded upon  true  experiences  in
   order to make out a viable and current claim.

29. In accordance with the guidance in Devaseelan, I  take  as  my  starting
   point the decision of Judge Wiseman in February 2008. It  is  clear  from
   that decision that the judge's conclusion,  that  the  appellant  was  at
   risk, turned ultimately upon the  fact  his  brothers  had  been  granted
   refugee status on the basis of a similar claim. That  is  made  clear  at
   paragraphs 10.10, 10.16 and 10.21 to 10.27. The  appellant's  account  of
   the events of October 2007 leading to his flight from Afghanistan at that
   time is addressed at paragraphs 10.17 to 10.19 and the judge's acceptance
   of those events is clearly based upon the brothers' claims in  regard  to
   earlier events having been accepted.

30. The question is whether Judge Wiseman would have made the same  decision
   had he known that the appellant had not  been  in  hiding  in  Kabul,  as
   stated at paragraph 7.9, but had been living in the  US  from  2003,  had
   returned to Afghanistan on several occasions to visit  his  parents,  and
   had visited the UK several times, making no attempt during that  time  to
   seek international protection, even after his marriage to  a  US  citizen
   had ended and prior to his US residence permit expiring and that  he  had
   lied to the UK authorities about those details.

31. Mr Gajjar's case is that that would have made  no  difference  to  Judge
   Wiseman's decision and did not detract from the appellant being  at  risk
   on return to Afghanistan, since the events giving rise to that  risk  and
   to his fear of return took place before he went to the US and  after  his
   return to Afghanistan from the  US.  The  problem  the  appellant  faces,
   however, is that his credibility as a whole  has  been  undermined  by  a
   finding  that  he  deliberately  concealed  information   and   exercised
   deception. That was the finding of Judge  Moon  in  her  decision  of  16
   October 2020 and that finding has been preserved. Having had the  benefit
   of reading through the papers in this case once  again  for  the  resumed
   hearing, I reach the same conclusion that I did at [25] of that  decision
   in upholding Judge Moon's  findings  in  that  regard  and  I  completely
   endorse her decision. This  was  not  a  case  of  the  appellant  merely
   remaining silent about a period of residence in the US, but  he  actively
   lied on several occasions in making his claim: in his screening interview
   when he claimed to have no children, to have never applied for a visa  to
   enter any country and to have never had an identity card or passport;  in
   his asylum interview when he claimed, directly  or  indirectly,  to  have
   remained continuously living in Afghanistan prior to  coming  to  the  UK
   (questions 82, 106 and 142) and when he claimed never to have applied for
   a visit visa for the UK (question  133);  and  in  his  statement  of  23
   January 2008 when he stated at [8] that he lived in  Kabul  from  October
   1999 until leaving for the UK in 2007. Given that Judge Wiseman  made  it
   quite clear at paragraph 10.21 that  his  decision  depended  upon  there
   being only a modest standard of proof and that there  was  no  reason  to
   depart from the decisions made for the appellant's brothers, it seems  to
   me that it cannot be said that he would have reached  the  same  decision
   had he known the true facts.

32. Turning to the question, therefore, of whether, on my own findings,  the
   appellant has demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that he  is  at
   risk on return Afghanistan, I  conclude  that  he  has  not.  Whilst  his
   brothers were found to be at risk on the basis of  their  involvement  in
   Commander Hashim's fate, that was a matter  determined  around  20  years
   ago, since when the situation in Afghanistan has  changed  substantially.
   Although Judge Wiseman accepted that that risk remained in October  2008,
   that was based upon additional events which the  appellant  claimed  took
   place in April 2003  and  more  recently  in  October  2007,  namely  the
   disappearance of another brother and a  grenade  being  thrown  into  his
   house  and  the  appellant  having  remained  in  hiding  in  Kabul.  The
   respondent at that time submitted that that was a fabrication, but  Judge
   Wiseman accepted that it was true. However, based upon the  evidence  now
   available about the appellant's passport and  residence  in  the  US,  Mr
   Clarke submits again that it was not.

33. For the account to be true, the appellant asks the  Tribunal  to  accept
   his explanation that he had never had his own,  genuine  Afghan  passport
   and that the passport he used to travel to the  US  in  May  2003  was  a
   forgery, obtained by his uncle; that he managed to use that  passport  to
   obtain a renewed passport in New York in the same false identity and then
   travel between the US and the UK on at least two  occasions  and  between
   the US and Afghanistan and Pakistan  on  several  occasions  without  any
   problems at the immigration  controls;  that  he  then  lost  the  second
   passport containing his US residence permit in Afghanistan in 2006/7  but
   somehow managed to obtain a copy of the residence  permit  several  years
   later in 2016 through his cousin; and that  his  uncle  obtained  another
   false passport for him in October 2007 which was  then  retained  by  the
   agent who brought him to the UK. I have to agree with Mr Clarke that that
   account is not plausible or believable, even to  the  lower  standard  of
   proof. I do not find it credible that an educated man  with  the  profile
   and background of the appellant would never have owned his own  passport.
   I agree with Mr Clarke that the most believable explanation is  that  the
   passport used in the US  containing  the  US  residence  permit  was  the
   appellant's own, genuine passport containing his true identity and I find
   that the reason why the appellant claims to  have  lost  it  is  that  it
   contains evidence of the actual periods spent in Afghanistan and  in  the
   UK which are not consistent with his account of  the  events  in  October
   2007 in Afghanistan. Further, I do not accept that a person such  as  the
   appellant would never have had a national identity card, as he claimed in
   his screening interview at 9.2, and indeed, his claim never to have owned
   one undermines his current claim that his true identity is  confirmed  in
   the taskira now produced, a claim which I reject.

34. In addition to the above, just as there was an evident  lack  of  detail
   in the appellant's account given prior to the discovery of his  residence
   in the US, in relation to his movements and the events  between  2003  to
   2006, there  is,  in  his  subsequent  evidence,  a  notable  absence  of
   information about  his  circumstances  between  2006  and  October  2007.
   Despite the detailed accounts given in the appellant's  statements  of  5
   September  2016,  19  June  2019  and  21  July  2020  and  the   written
   representations dated 8 July 2019 and skeleton argument of 21 July  2020,
   there is a clear gap in the chronology of events and  in  none  of  those
   accounts is any information given as to when the  appellant  returned  to
   Afghanistan prior to the October 2007 incidents and what he was doing  in
   Afghanistan during that time. I note from [8] of  Judge  Moon's  decision
   that the account of  that  time  remained  undetermined  and  vague  and,
   likewise, the appellant's evidence before  me  varied  between  September
   2006 and 2007. As Mr Clarke submitted, the appellant's account of  having
   returned to Afghanistan to make up with, and reunite with, his first wife
   is undermined by the fact that he made no application for her to join him
   in the UK with their daughter once he had leave to remain as  a  refugee.
   All of these concerns add weight  to  Mr  Clarke's  submission  that  the
   appellant was not in fact in Afghanistan at all during  that  period  but
   had remained in the UK after his last entry to  visit  his  brothers  and
   that the claimed incidents of October 2007 were a fabrication.


35.  For all of these reasons  I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has
   provided a credible account of having returned to  Afghanistan  and  then
   fled from the country due to  further  adverse  interest  in  his  family
   several years after the incidents which led his  brothers  to  flee.  The
   appellant has failed, in my view, to show any reason for  there  to  have
   been an ongoing adverse interest in him  since  the  events  leading  his
   brothers to flee, some 20 years ago. Indeed, the appellant's own  account
   of having returned to Afghanistan  on  several  occasions  to  visit  his
   family undermines his claim to have been in fear for his  life,  as  does
   the fact that he made no effort to extend his residence permit in the  US
   or to seek to regularise his status in that country  after  his  marriage
   failed, when he had an opportunity to do so. Accordingly, even if he  had
   returned to Afghanistan before coming to the UK, I do not accept that the
   events in October 2007 occurred as claimed.

36. Indeed, the reasons given more recently by  the  appellant  for  fearing
   returning to Afghanistan have had a somewhat different focus. Aside  from
   the references to the old enemies and threats, at [25] of his most recent
   statement of 21 July 2020, his evidence in  that  statement  referred  in
   some detail to his fear as a result of being westernised and having  been
   absent from Afghanistan for many  years.  That  was  fully  and  properly
   addressed by Judge Moon and did not form part of the error of law in  her
   decision. The appellant's evidence before me reflected that  set  out  in
   his statement of 5 September 2016 and 19 June 2019 regarding the risks to
   him in Afghanistan due to his family's links to  high  profile  political
   figures, dating back to his father's activities and friendship  with  the
   King, his own television appearance in Kandahar  and  more  recently  his
   associations in the UK with leading politicians such as Hamid Karzai  and
   his friendship with Hamid Karzai's nephew. At this point I refer again to
   Mr Gajjar's submission that the appellant's  evidence  had  the  ring  of
   truth about it and it is in this respect that I  accept  the  appellant's
   account of his family background and his current  associations.  However,
   the appellant's father's activities took place between 1965 and 1974, the
   appellant's appearances on television in Kandahar were in 1992  and  1993
   and, as already discussed, his brothers' problems were in 2000 and  2001,
   none of which provide any proper basis for concluding that the  appellant
   would be at risk at the current time. As for  his  current  associations,
   whilst these are not disputed, I cannot find anything in the  appellant's
   evidence to show why that would put  him  at  risk  in  Afghanistan.  The
   appellant's evidence before me was that he would be made to disappear  or
   be killed by the Taliban if he went back to Afghanistan, but his  reasons
   for so concluding were generalised and vague and were not based upon  any
   specific evidence. There is  no  evidence  of  any  particular  political
   involvement  other  than  his  family's  association  with   the   former
   President. His fear is not  supported  by  the  country  guidance  in  AS
   (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT  00130  where  the  headnote
   states:

    "Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban
     i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a
        senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not
        at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul."

37. There is no suggestion in the country guidance that an association  with
   the former President would be a risk factor  and  the  appellant  has  no
   background of persecution by  the  Taliban.  The  letter  from  Ezatullah
   Karzai does not amount to evidence of any weight and is simply an opinion
   which lacks any detail or reasoning as to the claimed risk on return. The
   appellant claims that he would not be able to survive in Kabul,  but  the
   country guidance suggests otherwise, particularly as he has spent periods
   of time living there and has had family connections there,  that  he  has
   worked there previously and that he would be able to find  work  and  re-
   establish himself there. His previous appeal was allowed on the basis  of
   his brother's involvement in Commander Hashim's demise  and  not  on  the
   basis  of  his  family  associations  with  high   profile   politicians,
   irrespective of the fact that those politicians were not in power at  the
   time his brothers were granted refugee status.

38. For all of these reasons I conclude that the  appellant  has  failed  to
   demonstrate on any credible basis that he would be at risk on  return  to
   Afghanistan and that his removal to that country would breach his Article
   3 rights. For the same reasons I do not accept that he  has  demonstrated
   any very significant obstacles to integration into that country,  despite
   his  lengthy  absence,  or  any  compelling  circumstances  outside   the
   immigration rules on wider Article 8 grounds. The appeal  is  accordingly
   dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION

39. The original Tribunal was  found  to  have  made  an  error  of  law  in
   relation to the appellant's Article 3 claim  and  the  decision  was  set
   aside on that limited basis. I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 4 June
2021

