
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02606/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2019                          |On 28th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                           Muhammad Noushad Afridi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Vitesh, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on 2nd  October  2018  following  a
    hearing at Taylor  House  on  31st  August  2018.   At  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the Appellant appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights  grounds.   The  Appellant,  Mr  Afridi,  is  a
    national of Pakistan who was born on 1st December 1984.

 2. At the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  had  relied  upon  evidence
    regarding longstanding problems  that  he  had  with  his  hearing  and
    operations that he had  undergone,  in  terms  of  a  cochlear  implant
    assisting his hearing and treatment that he would require on an ongoing
    basis in order to help monitor the cochlear implantation that had  been
    undertaken.

 3. At the First-tier Tribunal, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  it  is
    accepted by both parties and also subsequently by the Judge (and I will
    come on to that in a second), gave an indication that he was  going  to
    be allowing the Appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds.   However,
    when the Judge then came to write up the decision, the Judge  dismissed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.  The Appellant has then  sought  to
    appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal with the grounds being dated
    11th October 2018. In the grounds of appeal it is said that it came  as
    a surprise to the Appellant when he found out that the appeal had  been
    dismissed given that the indication had been given that the appeal  was
    going to be  allowed,  which  is  argued  to  be  wrong,  unlawful  and
    procedurally unfair.  It is argued that  the  Appellant  would  have  a
    legitimate expectation that the decision written would be in accordance
    with an indication given by the Judge.

 4. Counsel who attended at the First-tier Tribunal produced  his  note  of
    the hearing making it quite clear in that note that the judge had given
    an unequivocal and clear indication that he  was  going  to  allow  the
    appeal.  He explained to the Appellant that  the  Respondent  may  well
    obviously  seek  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper   Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Ford on 23rd October 2018 who found at that date that  the  application
    being  accompanied  by  an  unsigned  witness  statement  from  Counsel
    appeared  with  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing,  but  the  Record  of
    Proceedings did not record that the Tribunal indicated that the  appeal
    would be allowed  and  in  the  absence  of  that,  he  did  not  grant
    permission to appeal.  Permission to appeal was however then granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 17th December 2018 who found that  the
    grounds were now supported  by  Counsel's  typed  attendance  note  and
    counsel's signed statement and raised issues which  brought  about  the
    resolution of the issue at a hearing.

 5. The Upper Tribunal through Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  has  actually
    sought comments from First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  himself.   On
    31st December 2018 Judge Devittie made the following observations:-

         "I accept that Counsel's notes are not accurate records of  what  I
         said.  I very much regret the error and its  consequences  for  the
         Appellant.  The Record of Proceedings will show that in  an  effort
         to ensure that I would not miss the fact that  I  had  allowed  the
         appeal when writing up my determination I wrote the  words  'appeal
         allowed' in capital letters twice and underlined them.  Regrettably
         my decision to allow the appeal still escaped my attention  when  I
         came to writing the determination several days later".

 6. In light of that memorandum both parties, Miss Vitish, Counsel for  the
    Appellant and Miss Everett, Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, agreed that  as  the  Judge  has  now
    himself indicated that he had said that he would be allowing the appeal
    but went on in writing to dismiss it, that does amount to a  procedural
    error.  The Appellant was entitled  to  expect  and  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that the decision written would be in accordance  with  the
    indication given and reasons given to support that finding.  It  cannot
    be fair for a judge to give an  indication  that  an  appeal  would  be
    allowed and then go  on  subsequently  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   That
    clearly is a material error of law.  I therefore find that the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  should  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

 7. Both parties also agree that as a result of setting that decision aside
    the case should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing rather than simply the appeal  being  allowed  outright,  for
    although First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  had  given  an  indication
    that he was going to allow the appeal, no  reasons  for  that  decision
    were  given.   Clearly,  both  parties,  both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State  have  a  legitimate  expectation  that  a  reasoned
    decision will be given and both parties will be  entitled  to  look  at
    those reasons to make sure that they are legally sound and to challenge
    that decision if they consider those reasons are not legally sound.

 8. In the absence of any reasons being given by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie I do not consider that this is a case  where  the  appeal  can
    simply be allowed outright on the basis of that indication.  Clearly, I
    have not heard the evidence in this case and obviously I cannot utilise
    findings made by Judge Devittie to allow the appeal  outright  at  this
    stage, given the reasons actually given  by  Judge  Devittie  went  the
    other way and he dismissed the appeal.  I agree with both Counsel  that
    effectively this case has to be reheard with  the  decision  being  set
    aside and therefore I remit the case back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie does contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside in its entirety.  The case  is  remitted  back
to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated 31st January 2019

R McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

