
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                           |On 16 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                   [S L K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A M Kanu, Counsel, instructed by League for Human
Rights
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By my decision promulgated on 17 October 2018 I set aside the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen and determined that the  appellant's
    appeal would be remade at a resumed hearing in the Upper  Tribunal.   I
    now remake the decision.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leonne born 21  September  2003,  is
    appealing against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant her
    entry clearance to settle in the UK with her mother ("the Sponsor") who
    is a British Citizen.

 3. The appellant contends that she has a family life with her mother  that
    engages  the  operation  Article  8  ECHR,  that  she   satisfies   the
    requirements of Paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  that
    refusing her entry to the UK would be disproportionate under Article  8
    (2) ECHR.

Findings of Fact

 4. The following findings of fact are  made  having  considered  the  oral
    evidence and witness statements (dated 14 March 2018 and  13 September
    2018) of the Sponsor, along with  the  documentary  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The following facts are not in dispute:

      a) The Sponsor  entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  April  2005  and
         overstayed.  She subsequently regularised her stay  and  is  now  a
         British Citizen.

      b) The Sponsor left the appellant (aged under  two  at  the  time)  in
         Sierra Leone in the care of a woman named Haja  Sesay  ("HS").   HS
         died on 15 July 2017 and since then the appellant  has  been  under
         the care of a man called Abu Kamara ("AB").

      c) The Sponsor came to the UK following the diagnosis of her sister (a
         British Citizen living in the UK) with cancer.  After  arriving  in
         the UK the Sponsor cared for her sister's children who were born on
         9 March 1995 and 30 July 1997.  The Sponsor's  sister  died  on  22
         January 2010.

      d) The Sponsor lives with her partner, [AK] ("AK") who is  in  the  UK
         unlawfully.  They entered into a relationship in August 2005.

      e) The Sponsor has two  daughters.   Her  younger  daughter,  born  on
         20 December 2007, is a British Citizen and lives with her and  AK.
         The Sponsor's older daughter, born on 21  September  2003,  is  the
         appellant.

      f) Since moving to the UK in 2005 the Sponsor has travelled  twice  to
         Sierra Leonne to visit her  daughter  (in  April  2009  and  August
         2017).

 6. An issue in dispute is the identity and role in the appellant's life of
    her biological father.  The Sponsor claims that  he  is  a  man  called
    Mohamed Kaman ("MK") who abandoned her and  the  appellant  before  the
    appellant was born.  However, the appellant's birth certificate (issued
    in 2013) names AK as her father and a school report for  2015/16  names
    as the appellant's parent/guardian a man called  Lamin  Kamara  ("LK").
    In Ms Everett's  view,  these  are  discrepancies  which  fundamentally
    undermine the sponsor's credibility such that I should not  accept  her
    claim that the appellant has no contact with her father,  even  if  the
    evidence is unclear as to who the father actually is.

 7. The Sponsor's explanation for her partner AK being named on  the  birth
    certificate  is  that  the  original  certificate  was  lost  and  when
    obtaining a new one HS added AK as the 'father' as she thought it would
    assist the appellant (who thinks of AK as her father).

 8. Ms Everett observed that the new birth certificate appears to have been
    obtained in 2013, several years before the appellant's application, and
    no explanation has been given as to why a  new  birth  certificate  was
    sought at that time.  She also noted that the certificate states at the
    top that it is a "Certified true copy" and  it  is  unclear  what  this
    means or whether it is a true version.

 9. Ms Everett  described  the  sponsor's  evidence  concerning  the  birth
    certificate as bewildering and I agree.  It is unclear why a new  birth
    certificate was obtained  in  2013  (given  an  application  for  entry
    clearance was not contemplated at that time) and  it  is  difficult  to
    understand how AK could be named as  the  appellant's  father  when  he
    clearly is not.

10. However, although I am not satisfied that the sponsor has been open and
    honest about the birth certificate, I am nonetheless satisfied that she
    is being truthful when she says that the  appellant  has  not  had  any
    contact with her father.  AK is clearly not the appellant's  biological
    father and the fact that he is named on the birth certificate does  not
    indicate one way or the  other  whether  the  appellant  knows  or  has
    contact with her father.   Likewise, the reference to LK  on  a  school
    report tells us nothing about the identity or role in  the  appellant's
    life of the appellant's father.  On earlier school reports HS is  named
    as the appellant's guardian and I accept the Sponsor's explanation that
    LK is someone who assisted HS and is not the appellant's  father.   The
    documentary evidence supports the view  that  the  appellant  has  been
    under the care of HS, not her father; and there is nothing to  indicate
    the involvement of her father in her life.  Having  heard  the  Sponsor
    respond to  Ms  Everett's  questions  and  considered  the  documentary
    evidence, I am satisfied, and find as a fact, that the  appellant  does
    not have (and throughout  her  life  has  not  had)  contact  with  her
    biological  father.   I  find  therefore  that  the  Sponsor   is   the
    appellant's only biological parent who has had any involvement or  role
    in her life.

11.  A  further  issue  in  contention  is  the  role  of,  and   Sponsor's
    relationship  with,  HS.   In  her  witness  statements  the  appellant
    referred to her as a relative, but in oral evidence she  described  her
    as a neighbour.  The Sponsor explained (and I  accept)  that  the  term
    "relative" is used out of  respect  and  I  find,  as  claimed  by  the
    Sponsor, that HS was a trusted neighbour (without children of her  own)
    who lived in the same compound as the Sponsor and appellant.

12.  I  also   accept,   having   considered   the   remittance   receipts,
    correspondence and oral evidence, that the Sponsor has  regularly  sent
    funds to HS (and since her death to AB) to cover the  cost  of  raising
    the appellant, as well as an additional small sum as  remuneration  for
    undertaking the role.

13. Based on the documentary evidence, I find that the Sponsor has remained
    involved in the appellant's  life  despite  the  distance  and  despite
    visiting her on only one occasion between 2005 and 2017.

14. I also find that the Sponsor had confidence in HS to keep the appellant
    safe and manage the practical aspects of her life, but since her  death
    has been worried about the appellant being adequately cared for by  AB.



15. I also find that the Sponsor does not have family or  friends  able  to
    take on the role previously undertaken by HS,  which  is  why  she  now
    finds herself reliant on AB.

16. In respect of the Sponsor's present finances and accommodation position
    in the UK, the appellant  relies  on  copies  of  pay  slips  and  bank
    statements that were before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  veracity  of
    which have not been challenged, and which I accept are genuine.

Relevant Law

17. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities  and  the  burden
    lies with the appellant.

18. The appellant must establish that denying her entry to the UK  to  join
    the Sponsor is contrary to Article 8  ECHR.   She  therefore,  firstly,
    must show that she and the Sponsor have a  family  life  which  engages
    Article 8(1) ECHR.  If Article 8(1) is engaged, consideration must then
    be given to whether interfering with her family life by refusing  entry
    is proportionate.  If the appellant is able to show that she  would  be
    entitled to leave to  enter  under  the  Immigration  Rules  that  will
    determine the Article 8 proportionality issue in her favour.   See  TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA (Civ 1109 at [34].

19. The relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules is 297, which provides:



         297. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

              (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
              parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                   (a) both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                   Kingdom; or

                   (b) both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
                   for settlement; or

                   (c) one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                   Kingdom and the other  is  being  admitted  on  the  same
                   occasion for settlement; or

                   (d) one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                   Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                   settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                   (e) one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                   Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
                   settlement  and  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
                   child's upbringing; or

                   (f) one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                   the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion
                   for settlement  and  there  are  serious  and  compelling
                   family or other considerations which  make  exclusion  of
                   the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been
                   made for the child's care; and

              (ii)    is under the age of 18; and

              (iii)   is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
              is not a civil partner, and has  not  formed  an  independent
              family unit; and

              (iv)    can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the
              parent, parents or relative the  child  is  seeking  to  join
              without recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  the
              parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join, own
              or occupy exclusively; and

              (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
              parents, or relative the child is seeking  to  join,  without
              recourse to public funds; and

              (vi)    holds a valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
              entry in this capacity; and

              (vii)   does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
              for refusal.

Decision

20. It was not in dispute that the appellant and  Sponsor,  as  parent  and
    minor child who have an ongoing relationship, have a family life within
    the meaning of Article 8(1) ECHR.

21. I now turn to consider proportionality, where my starting point  is  to
    assess whether Paragraph 297 is satisfied.

22. The first question, under 297(i)(e), is whether the Sponsor  has  "sole
    responsibility" for the appellant's upbringing.   As  explained  in  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)) [2006] UKAIT 00049, sole responsibility is a factual
    matter where the test is whether the Sponsor (as the only parent taking
    any responsibility  for  the  appellant)  has  continuing  control  and
    direction  over  the  appellant's  upbringing,  including  making   all
    important decisions in her life.

23. The appellant has resided with HS (and now AB) who have cared and taken
    responsibility for her on a day to day level, attending to matters such
    as her food, clothing, medical and  school  attendance.   However,  the
    Sponsor has covered the financial cost of raising the appellant and has
    maintained a close level of involvement and interaction.  The  decision
    about where and with whom the appellant has lived (first  with  HS  and
    then with AB) has remained with the Sponsor; and the  Sponsor,  as  the
    only parent (or, indeed, family member) taking any  responsibility  for
    the  appellant,  has  retained  ultimate  control  of  the  appellant's
    upbringing.  I am therefore satisfied that the  Sponsor  has  direction
    and control over the appellant's upbringing such  that  she  has  "sole
    responsibility" under paragraph 297(i)(e).

24.  Paragraphs  297(ii)  and  (iii)  are  clearly  satisfied   given   the
    appellant's age.

25. Paragraphs 297(iv) and (v) are satisfied given the evidence  of  income
    and accommodation that was in the bundle of evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Although this evidence was not up to date (in  that  it
    only showed the  position  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, I accept the evidence of the  Sponsor  that  the  position  is
    unchanged.

26. I am satisfied that the appellant meets the requirements for indefinite
    leave to enter the UK under Paragraph 297.  Accordingly,  there  is  no
    public interest in denying her entry to the UK and  therefore  refusing
    her entry is a disproportionate interference with her and the Sponsor's
    right to respect for their family  life  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    appeal is therefore allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  8 January 2019               |

