
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02598/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 January 2020                 |On 6 February 2020                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     H W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson (counsel) instructed by Medlock
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because the appellant is a  minor  and  to
preserve  the  anonymity  direction  deemed  necessary  by  the   First-tier
Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Brookfield promulgated on 4 September 2019,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 23/02/2003 and is  a  Chinese  national.  On
09/11/2018 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to enter the UK to join his mother, stepfather and half-sister.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Brookfield ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  16  December
2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to  appeal
stating inter alia

         "It is arguable that the Judge erred in law (a) by failing to  take
         into consideration a translated copy of the birth  certificate  and
         the death certificate which the Judge specifically  indicated  that
         she would consider if filed with the tribunal  after  the  date  of
         hearing by a specific deadline, which was complied  with  when  the
         Judge then holds in her decision and reasons that the said lack  of
         such evidence goes against the appellant; (b) by  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons for central core findings, such  as  why  (i)  the
         appellant's  mother  had  not  visited  her  child   was   somewhat
         insufficient and (ii) , the mere fact that the grandparent  who  is
         with the child on a daily basis, would decide if the appellant  may
         need to see a doctor somehow contradicts in any way whatsoever  the
         evidence from a paediatrician that it is the appellant's mother who
         makes the actual appointments."

The Hearing

5.    Mr Tan, for the respondent, told me  that  the  respondent  no  longer
resists this appeal.  It  is  conceded  that  the  decision  is  tainted  by
material errors of law because the Judge  did  not  consider  the  documents
which were filed within the time limit set by the Judge.  He  also  told  me
that the decision is not supported by adequate reasoning.

6.    Mr Timson joined with Mr Tan in asking me to set  the  decision  aside
and remit this case the First-tier Tribunal.

Analysis

7.    It is now a matter of agreement that documents  were  tendered  within
the timescale set by the Judge, and those documents were not  considered  by
the Judge. It is  not  clear  whether  or  not  those  documents  were  made
available to the Judge before she wrote her  decision,  but  the  result  is
that procedural unfairness is created. That is a material error of law.

8.    The Judge's findings are set out in 22 subparagraphs of  [10]  of  the
decision. The Judge considers the immigration rules  and  then  at  [10xii)]
finds that article 8 is  engaged.  The  proportionality  balancing  exercise
starts at [10(xiii)] of  the  decision.  Between[10(vii)]  and  [10(x)]  the
Judge provides  inadequate  reasons  for  the  conclusion  she  reaches  for
central core issues relating to the relationship between the  appellant  and
sponsor and the role played by the appellant's grandparents.

9.    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that

    (i)    It was axiomatic that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the
    reasons for a tribunal's decision.

    (ii)   If a tribunal found oral evidence to be implausible,  incredible
    or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not  believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons.

10.   The decision is tainted by material errors of law. I set the  decision
aside. None of the findings of fact can stand. I cannot  substitute  my  own
decision because a further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

11.   A curious feature of this case is that the application was made  under
paragraph 297 of the immigration rules. The  respondent's  decision  against
which the appellant appeals offers no consideration of  paragraph  297.  The
respondent's decision was made by reference to  section  E-ECC  of  appendix
FM.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

12.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

14.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Manchester
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Brookfield.



Decision

15.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

16.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 4 September 2019.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
              Date 31 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


