
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02611/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st November 2016                      |On 07th December 2016          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Marvin Noble
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G B Angammana, instructed by M & S Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Jamaica born on 29th November 1976. His appeal against  the  refusal
    of leave on Article 8 grounds was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D Ross under the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State appealed.

2.   I found that there was an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and I set  it  aside  for  the  reasons  given  in  my
    decision  dated  31st  October  2016.  The  matter  was  adjourned  for
    rehearing on the basis of the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge had erred in law in finding that the Appellant could  satisfy
    the suitability requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  However,  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  his  15  year  old  son,  a  British  citizen,  was
    preserved.

3.   The first issue in the appeal is whether the Appellant can satisfy  the
    suitability requirements under the Immigration Rules. If he cannot then
    the matter falls to be decided under Article 8 outside  the  Rules  and
    the second issue is whether it would be unreasonable to expect  his  15
    year old son to leave the UK.

4.   Mr Angammana relied on further written submissions and stated that  the
    Appellant's conviction was unsafe because the complainant had sought to
    retract her evidence. The Appellant had a 'one  off'  conviction  which
    the complainant wished to withdraw and therefore he could  satisfy  the
    suitability requirements. Mr Angammana also submitted that it  was  not
    in the public interest for the Appellant to be  removed.  He  satisfied
    the Immigration Rules and was not  receiving  benefits.  There  was  no
    further evidence on the best interests of the children and Mr Angammana
    requested an adjournment to obtain further evidence.

5.   Mr Jarvis opposed the adjournment on the basis that the purpose  of  it
    was probably to appeal the conviction and there was nothing to  justify
    an adjournment. If the Appellant wanted to adduce further  evidence  of
    the best interests of the children he should  have  complied  with  the
    Procedure Rules. It was unlikely that the Appellant would  be  able  to
    adduce any further evidence of the best interests of the children given
    that he had been unable to do so for this hearing.

6.   Mr Angammana represented the Appellant at the error of law  hearing  in
    which I found that there was an error of law. Mr Angammana did not seek
    to have the matter remitted, but requested an adjournment for rehearing
    in the Upper Tribunal on the basis of the evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge. It was open to the Appellant in any event to  seek
    permission to adduce further evidence if indeed he wished to do so.

7.   The Appellant has not sought to adduce  any  further  evidence  in  the
    form of a witness statement from himself or any of his children.  There
    was a letter from his son stating that he wanted  to  see  his  grandma
    which was not relevant to the issues before me. I allowed the Appellant
    to adduce the letter from his MP, even though he had not complied  with
    the Procedure Rules, because it  basically  dealt  with  the  situation
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Accordingly, the Appellant has had ample time to  produce  any  further
    evidence that he  would  like  to  rely  on.  Applying  the  overriding
    objective, there was no merit in  adjourning  this  appeal  to  another
    date. The Appellant and Mr Angammana were aware at the  hearing  before
    me on 17th October 2016 of the position at the next hearing. The notice
    of hearing was  sent  out  on  1st  November  2016  and  therefore  the
    Appellant had ample opportunity to seek to adduce any further  evidence
    under the Procedure Rules.   The  adjournment  was  refused  for  those
    reasons.

9.   In relation  to  the  substantive  appeal,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that
    suitability  was  raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and S-LTR 1.6 was a very broad provision. It states that the
    presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good
    because their conduct (including convictions which do not  fall  within
    paragraphs  S-LTR  1.3  to  1.5),  character,  associations,  or  other
    reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.

10.  The Appellant's conviction had not been  overturned  in  spite  of  the
    submissions made by Mr Angammana. It was a serious offence and was  not
    spent at the date of the Respondent's decision on 3rd  July  2015.   It
    cannot be said that this conviction carried no weight. Whether  it  was
    conducive to the public good was a matter for the Secretary  of  State.
    Mr Jarvis submitted that I  should  not  go  behind  the  Secretary  of
    State's finding in the refusal letter.  Paragraph  S-LTR  1.6  was  not
    dependent on whether the conviction was  spent  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's conclusion was only  challengeable  on  irrationality  grounds.
    Accordingly,  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  S-LTR  1.6  and  his
    application was properly  refused  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  His
    appeal should be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

11.  In relation to Article 8 outside the Rules, the test was whether  there
    were compelling circumstances.  Mr  Jarvis  invited  me  to  find  that
    although there was a subsisting parental  relationship,  and  therefore
    family life, the interference was not sufficiently  serious  to  engage
    Article 8 because of the nature of the Appellant's family life.  It was
    conducted somewhat at a distance with  the  Appellant  seeing  his  son
    occasionally.  Therefore, the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  and  the
    Appellant's removal would not amount to an interference on the facts of
    this case.

12.  However, if I was not persuaded by that submission Mr Jarvis  submitted
    that Section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act did not apply and  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 only applied to cases where the entire family would
    be  required  to  leave  the  UK.  That  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    reasonableness assessment  included  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents. The construction of the Rules was such that  they  expect  the
    family to leave.  However, there was  no  expectation  that  a  British
    citizen child should leave the UK, so Section 117B (6) was not intended
    to apply to situations where a British citizen child would not have  to
    leave the UK on removal of the parent.

13.  Mr Jarvis submitted that separation of the family unit was an issue  to
    be considered in the proportionality assessment. Separation  of  family
    life was not objectionable in itself and  legal  argument  allowed  for
    such separation. The Appellant's 15  year  old  son  was  a  qualifying
    child, but if Section 117B (6) applied to a British citizen  child  who
    would not be required to leave the UK with the parent then there  would
    never be separation of  families  and  this  was  not  what  Parliament
    intended.  MA (Pakistan) was not relevant in this case.

14.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the issue was the interpretation of  the  word
    'expect' in Section 117B (6). This was an entirely separate concept  to
    'best interests.' There was a finding in this case  that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship. Therefore, it would be in
    the child's best interests for the Appellant to remain in the UK.

15.  However, there was still a need for a  proportionality  assessment  and
    the public interest was such that little weight should be given to  the
    Appellant's private life given his appalling  immigration  history.  He
    had been an overstayer from 1999, although he was granted a  period  of
    discretionary leave as  an  unmarried  partner.   His  leave  had  been
    precarious and entirely temporary throughout and he had no  expectation
    that it would be renewed.  Relying on Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803, the
    fact that he could speak English and was financially  independent  were
    neutral factors and the  Appellant  was  unable  to  rely  on  unlawful
    working.

16.  The Appellant had been convicted of an  offence  and  given  an  eleven
    month suspended sentence.  In the circumstances, it  was  proportionate
    to remove him. It was a situation where his child should not be used as
    a passport to enable him to remain. The  Appellant's  family  life  was
    such that it did not outweigh the public interest. In  any  event,  the
    Appellant could make an application to come back in. His removal  would
    be proportionate.

17.  Mr Jarvis argued that if the decision was made  under  the  Immigration
    Rules EX.1 did not apply as there was no expectation that the child was
    going anywhere. If  reasonableness  was  to  be  considered  Mr  Jarvis
    accepted that current Home Office guidance considered the effect on the
    child if their parent  had  to  leave.   However,  the  guidance  notes
    referred to the case of Zambrano  and  the  need  for  compulsion.  The
    scenarios in the guidance were extreme. There was no compulsion in this
    case. The Appellant's son would be able to remain living in the UK with
    his mother. The argument in the Rules was the same.  It depended on the
    expectation of leaving.

18.  In response Mr Angammana relied on the letter from the  Appellant's  MP
    stating:


         "I would ask that Mr  Noble's  suitability  is  considered  in  the
         context of seventeen years in the UK and the life he has  built  up
         here and the close relationships he has formed.  Seventeen years in
         the UK is a substantial part of a person's  life  during  which  Mr
         Noble has established deep roots.  I understand Mr Noble has set up
         his own business in the UK and maintains and  accommodates  himself
         and pays taxes and finances and supports his children.


         KN, who is a British citizen, has expressed that his own life would
         be severely diminished if he was deprived of his father's  presence
         in the UK.  His rights and those of his  siblings  should  also  be
         taken into consideration in the balancing exercise.

         Further to this the Secretary of State has a duty  in  Appendix  FM
         under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act to
         ensure that immigration decisions are made  having  regard  to  the
         need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are  in
         the UK.  With this regard the  children's  need  for  their  father
         should be given high importance."

Discussion and Conclusions

21.  The Appellant has a previous conviction for false imprisonment on  29th
    July 2013. He was sentenced by Harrow  Crown  Court  on  21st  February
    2014. On the basis of this conviction the Respondent has concluded that
    the Appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive to the public  good
    because  his  conduct  including  this   conviction,   his   character,
    associations and other reasons make it  undesirable  to  allow  him  to
    remain in the UK.  The Appellant was convicted of  falsely  imprisoning
    his ex-partner.

22.  The Appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor in May 1999.  He  made  an
    application for leave to remain as a  student  which  was  rejected  as
    invalid. A subsequent application was refused with no right of  appeal.
    He then applied for leave to remain as an unmarried partner  which  was
    refused with a right of appeal. The Appellant was served with a  notice
    of removal and, although he had lodged an appeal, he withdrew it  prior
    to the hearing.

23.  On 25th July 2007, the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules. On 2nd June 2008 he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain as an unmarried partner until 1st June  2011.  On  30th
    July 2013 the Appellant was served with notice of  removal  for  having
    remained in the UK beyond the expiry of his  leave.   He  made  several
    applications for leave to remain on the basis  of  family  and  private
    life which all of which were unsuccessful.

24.   I  find  that  the  Appellant's  previous  conviction  and  his   poor
    immigration history make it undesirable to allow him to remain  in  the
    UK and therefore he is unable to satisfy the  suitability  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules.

25.  The fact that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a British citizen  child  is  sufficient  to  warrant
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules.
26.  I acknowledge that the evidence of the  Appellant's  contact  with  his
    children was contradictory. The Appellant's son stated that  there  was
    contact every weekend, his solicitors stated two  to  three  times  per
    month and Ms Dover, the mother of the Appellant's four children, stated
    that the Appellant saw his children once every  two  or  three  months.
    However, this is of no relevance given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge found the evidence of the Appellant's son to  be  credible.  This
    finding was not challenged by the Respondent and it was  accepted  that
    it was in the best interests of the Appellant's son that the  Appellant
    remained in the UK.

27.  The argument that Mr Jarvis has put forward is that  Section  117B  (6)
    does not apply because the Appellant's son is  a  British  citizen  who
    would not be expected to leave the UK should the Appellant  be  removed
    to Jamaica. I am not persuaded by this  submission  for  the  following
    reasons.

28.  Section 117B (6) states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

29.  The definition of a 'qualifying child' in section  117D  is  "a  person
    who is under the age of 18 and who is a British citizen or has lived in
    the UK for a continuous period of seven years or  more."  Section  117B
    (6) clearly applies to a British citizen child.

30.  It has been conceded in previous appeals  by  the  Respondent  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave  the
    UK. Home Office Guidance states that cases must always be  assessed  on
    the basis that it would be unreasonable to  expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the UK with that parent or primary carer.  The  guidance
    also suggests that it may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where
    the conduct of the parent gives rise to considerations of  such  weight
    so as  to  justify  separation  (e.g.  criminality  falling  below  the
    threshold in paragraph 398 and a very poor immigration history), if the
    child could otherwise stay with another parent in the UK. The  decision
    maker must consider the impact on the child.

31.  The Appellant's son is a British citizen and has  lived  here  all  his
    life. He lives  with  his  mother  and  three  siblings.  He  sees  the
    Appellant at weekends. These visits could not continue if the Appellant
    is removed to Jamaica. This establishes a  starting  point  that  leave
    should be granted unless there are strong reasons to the contrary.

32.  The Appellant's poor immigration history and  his  previous  conviction
    are insufficient to displace the significant weight to be  attached  to
    the fact that his son is a British citizen who has been resident in the
    UK for 15 years and it would be in his son's  best  interests  for  the
    Appellant to remain in the UK. It would not be reasonable to expect the
    Appellant's son to leave his mother and siblings in the UK  to  go  and
    live with his father in Jamaica or for  him  to  visit  his  father  in
    Jamaica. On the facts of this case, it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the Appellant's 15 year old son to leave the UK.

33.   The  Appellant  satisfies  Section  117B  (6).  The  fact   that   the
    Appellant's son would not be compelled to leave the UK because he could
    remain here with his mother is not a matter relevant  to  Section  117B
    (6).  There  is  no  element  of  compulsion  recognised  therein.  The
    Appellant was not subject to deportation. The wording of  section  117B
    (6) is unequivocal. The public interest does  not  require  removal  in
    this case.

34.  Accordingly, I find that the Appellant cannot satisfy  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, but he does have a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect his child to leave the UK.  Therefore,  the
    Appellant's removal from  the  UK  would  not  be  proportionate  under
    Article 8.


Notice of Decision

I dismiss the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date 28th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have partly allowed and partly dismissed the appeal I have  decided  to
make no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 28th November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
