
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02505/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2019                 |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  ansar [k]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel, instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Law promulgated on  26  June  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 17 December 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 13 October  1981,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on  24  January  2009  with  leave  to
    remain as a student to 31 May 2010.  A further application for leave to
    remain as a student was rejected and the Appellant has remained in  the
    United Kingdom  unlawfully  since  11  June  2010.   Further  to  being
    encountered by immigration officers during the enforcement  visit,  the
    Appellant made an application on 20 September 2017 leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds, which was refused on 28 September 2017.  His most
    recent application was on 13 March 2018 for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of private and family life.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the immigration status requirements for leave to  remain
    under Appendix FM and could not show that they would be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside of the United  Kingdom  for
    the purposes of paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.   In  particular,  the
    Appellant's partner's father could be cared for by others in the United
    Kingdom and the Appellant would be able to support himself on return to
    Pakistan.  The application was also refused under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules on the basis that there were no very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellants reintegration in Pakistan.  The  Respondent
    did not accept that there were any exceptional circumstances to warrant
    a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules  and  there
    was no evidence of  the  Appellant's  claimed  child  from  a  previous
    relationship, or that there was any  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with that child.

 4. Judge Law dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  26  June
    2019 on all grounds.  At his appeal hearing, the Appellant did not rely
    on any relationship with a child in the United  Kingdom,  pursuing  his
    appeal primarily on the basis of his partner's  care  for  her  father;
    that an application for entry clearance for him to join her as a spouse
    would be bound to  succeed  and  on  the  basis  of  ongoing  fertility
    treatment for the Appellant and his partner.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that there would be no  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration in Pakistan such that he did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    and  that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside of the United Kingdom for the purposes  of  Appendix
    FM.  In particular, the Appellant had not addressed the points  in  the
    refusal letter about alternative care  for  his  partner's  father  and
    there was no right to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  fertility
    treatment.

 6. Overall, the Appellant's removal was not found to be a disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for  private  and  family  life,
    taking into account the public interest factors in section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  including  that  the
    Appellant was not financially independent, that he  had  overstayed  in
    the United Kingdom for many years and the First-tier Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied that  the  application  for  entry  clearance  was  bound  to
    succeed.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  its  assessment  of  whether  an
    application for entry clearance would be likely to  succeed,  following
    cases of Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]
    UKHL 40 and Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    UKSC 11.  Although the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  Appellant
    would be exempt from the financial requirements under  Appendix  FM  as
    his partner was in receipt of carer's allowance, the Judge  found  that
    there were other suitability and communication requirements to be  met.
    However, no suitability issues were raised in  the  refusal  letter  or
    during the course of the appeal and in relation to accommodation, there
    was no dispute that the Appellant is already residing with his  partner
    in the United Kingdom and would do so on return.

 8. Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  determination  of  the
    consequences of the Appellant's partner leaving the United  Kingdom  in
    circumstances where she is the primary carer of her father and  is  his
    registered carer.  This should have been  taken  into  account  in  the
    balancing exercise under Article 8, using a balance sheet type approach
    and with more detailed reasons given for the evidential findings.

 9. At the oral hearing, Mr Karim on behalf of the Appellant relied on  the
    written grounds of  appeal  and  made  further  oral  submissions.   In
    relation to the issue of the care provided by the  Appellant's  partner
    to her father, this is dealt with in paragraph 18 of  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, in which there  is  no  recognition  that  the
    factor may be relevant to the Article 8 assessment as well  as  whether
    there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  abroad.
    The evidence in relation to caring  was  provided  in  the  Appellant's
    written statement at paragraph 5 and in his partner's written statement
    at paragraphs 5 and 7.  This is supported by a letter from  a  GP  that
    the Appellant's partner is  a  registered  carer  for  her  father  and
    entries in the medical records show that both  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner attended an appointment with her  father,  with  the  Appellant
    assisting in interpretation.  There would therefore be a disruption  in
    the care provided if the Appellant were removed even  for  a  temporary
    period to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. In relation to the Chikwamba point, Mr Karim relied  on  paragraphs  35
    and 51 of the Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko and  maintained  that
    the issue was squarely before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  principal
    was not exclusively applicable to  cases  involving  children  and  the
    relevant factors are that there would be disruption to the  Appellant's
    fertility  treatment  and  disruption  to  the  care  provided  to  his
    partner's father.  In these circumstances, if an application for  entry
    clearance is bound to succeed, there would be  no  public  interest  in
    removing the Appellant and nothing therefore to  outweigh  his  private
    and family life established in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in relying on possible reasons for refusal of  an  entry
    clearance application, which were contrary to the Respondent's  refusal
    letter and position in the appeal, in  which  no  suitability  concerns
    were raised.

11. Mr Karim accepted that fertility treatment alone was not sufficient  to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain, but was one factor which needed  to
    be taken into account in  the  proportionality  assessment,  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to do.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kandola submitted that the evidence  in
    relation to the Appellant's partner's father was particularly thin  and
    could  not  establish  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to   family   life
    continuing outside of the United Kingdom.  It was submitted  that  this
    factor did not affect the assessment of Article 8 outside of the rules.

13. In relation to the Chikwamba point, this is not an automatic matter  to
    be considered by a First-tier  Tribunal,  and  it  was  submitted  that
    something exceptional is required for it to benefit an individual,  for
    example the presence of children, although it  was  accepted  that  the
    provision of care may be relevant.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to insurmountable obstacles, the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal are as follows:

         "18. The first factor is that the sponsor was said to be  the  sole
         carer and received carer's allowance in respect of her father.  The
         refusal letter addresses this by saying that her  father  would  be
         entitled to access free healthcare by the NHS.  This is an argument
         which neither the  appellant  nor  sponsor  referred  to  in  their
         statements and so I am not satisfied that this  factor  constitutes
         an insurmountable obstacle.  Many married couples have to live some
         distance away from the parents for employment reasons  and  so  are
         not able to become full-time carers.

         19.  The second factor  is  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  are
         receiving fertility treatment.  However, in Erimako v  SSHD  [2008]
         EWHC 312 the Court rejected the contention that a person or persons
         in this country, otherwise without any  right  to  remain  in  this
         country, should be entitled to remain in this country in  order  to
         undertake fertility treatment (paragraph 8 of the judgement).

         20.  No  other  factors  were  put  forward  on  the  half  of  the
         appellant.  I note that  neither  the  appellant  nor  the  sponsor
         mentioned any health concerns and I find that there are  no  health
         considerations relevant to whether they could live in Pakistan."

 2. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that there
    were any insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  of
    the United Kingdom.

 3. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to care for the
    Appellant's partner's father was very limited indeed.  The  Appellant's
    written statement states that his partner is the  only  carer  for  her
    father, who was paralysed in 1974 following  a  stroke,  and  that  the
    Appellant also shares the caring  responsibilities  for  him.   In  her
    written  statement,  the  Appellant's  partner  states  the  same   and
    additionally that the Appellant helps with  doctor's  appointments  and
    cares for her father sometimes whilst she is out shopping.  She  states
    that there is no one else to look after her  father.   The  Appellant's
    partner's GP confirmed  in  writing  that  she  is  registered  as  her
    father's carer and attaches his medical records which set out a  number
    of minor ongoing problems and medication.  The Appellant's  partner  is
    in receipt of carers allowance, meaning that the  Department  for  Work
    and Pensions are satisfied that she provides at least 16 hours care per
    week for her father.

 4. There is a letter in the bundle from the Appellant's  partner's  father
    stating that he cannot walk, or can only walk a few  steps  with  great
    difficulty and that he needs  constant  care  throughout  the  day  and
    night.  He said that his daughter cares for him and helps him to dress,
    eat, undress, giving medication, cooks  for  him,  helps  him  use  the
    toilet and generally keeps an eye on him.  It is however  unclear  from
    the evidence as to whether  the  Appellant's  partner  lives  with  the
    Appellant or with her father, her written statement gives  her  address
    as the same as the Appellant, but some correspondence is also addressed
    to her at her father's address.

 5. On the basis of the limited evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  I
    find  no  error  of  law  in  the  assessment  of  whether  there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom.  There was no evidence about  whether  any  alternative
    care would be available for the Appellant's partner's father and if so,
    no reason given as to why this would not be appropriate.  The statement
    from the Appellant's  partner's  father  suggesting  that  he  requires
    constant live in care is also not supported by what  the  Appellant  or
    his partner themselves say, nor is it supported  by  the  contradictory
    evidence  of  where  the  Appellant's  partner  actually  lives.    The
    Appellant's desire  to  continue  fertility  treatment  in  the  United
    Kingdom does not assist his claim insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life being continued abroad for the reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and further, there  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that such treatment would not in any  event  be  available  in
    Pakistan.  For  these  reasons,  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of insurmountable obstacles.

 6. In relation to Article 8 more generally, the First-tier  Tribunal  sets
    out relevant case law and findings that the Appellant and  his  partner
    in a  genuine  subsisting  relationship  and  that  the  Appellant  has
    established some degree of private life in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    public interest factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 are applied in paragraph 31 of  the  decision.   In
    particular, it  was  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  financially
    independent, his relationship was established at a time when he was  in
    the United Kingdom  unlawfully  and  little  weight  can  therefore  be
    attached to his private and family life.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal refers to the cases of Chikwamba and R (on  the
    application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC), noting that it would be comparatively  rarely,
    certainly family cases involving  children,  that  an  Article  8  case
    should be dismissed on the basis it would  be  proportionate  and  more
    appropriate  for  an  individual  to  apply  for  leave  from   abroad.
    Specifically, in relation to Chen, it was noted that in all  cases,  it
    will be for the individual to  place  before  the  Secretary  of  State
    evidence   that    such    temporary    separation    will    interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights.

 8. In paragraph 35 of the decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    although the Appellant would not have to satisfy the income requirement
    because his partner received carer's allowance, there are other  issues
    such as accommodation and suitability which would have to be considered
    on the application for entry clearance.   In  these  circumstances  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the  application  for  entry
    clearance would be bound to succeed.

 9. In the reasons for refusal letter, the  Respondent  expressly  accepted
    that  the  Appellant's  application  did  not  fall  for   refusal   on
    suitability grounds and the relationship eligibility requirements  were
    all  met.   There  was  no  express  reference  to  the  financial   or
    accommodation requirements, although  as  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Appellant would be exempt from the financial requirements
    because his partner is in receipt of carer's allowance.  The First-tier
    Tribunal erred in raising suitability requirements as a possible reason
    for  refusal  of  an  entry  clearance  application  in  light  of  the
    Respondent's acceptance that  these  did  not  provide  any  basis  for
    refusal.  However, accommodation requirements would still be  required.
    It had not been accepted by the Respondent that these were or would  be
    met and there was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  this
    matter.  In particular,  as  above,  there  was  instead  contradictory
    evidence as to where the Appellant's partner was  living  and  evidence
    that the  Appellant  was  supported  by  his  partner,  herself  wholly
    supported by public funds.  For these  reasons  there  is  no  material
    error  of  law  in  the  assessment  of  whether  an  entry   clearance
    application would be bound to succeed despite the error in  relying  on
    suitability criteria, as its success had not been  established  on  all
    other grounds.

10. In any event, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Kaur  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 (at paragraphs 43
    to 45), the facts in Chikwamba were striking and the application of the
    principle does not trump all public interest  matters,  including,  for
    example a poor immigration history.  Even in cases where  an  applicant
    was certain to be granted leave to enter,  there  might  be  no  public
    interest in removing the  applicant.   What  is  required  is  a  fact-
    specific assessment in each case, the principle will only  apply  in  a
    very clear case and even then, will not necessarily result in  a  grant
    of leave to remain.  On the facts and evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which did not include any evidence at all of the impact of  a
    temporary separation if the Appellant were to return  to  Pakistan  and
    make an entry clearance application, this is not a very clear  case  in
    which Chikwamba would in any event have assisted the Appellant.

11.  Finally,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom was a different question to whether  there  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with  family  and  private  life  if  the
    Appellant were removed.  On the latter, having taken into  account  all
    of the considerations set out in the decision, the decision  was  found
    to be proportionate.  Although the Court of Appeal  and  Supreme  Court
    have advocated the benefits of using  a  balance  sheet  approach  when
    assessing proportionality for the purposes of Article 8, this is not  a
    requirement and not an error of law if the First-tier Tribunal sets out
    its findings in a  different  way.   In  this  appeal,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal reached findings which were open to it  on  the  evidence  and
    which were adequately reasoned, such that I find no error of law in the
    Article 8 assessment.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         14th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

