

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02555/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|on 5 March 2018                     |on 7 March 2018                       |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               SUKHPREET KAUR

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2.  The  SSHD  appeals  against  a  determination  by  FtT  Judge   Blair,
    promulgated on 30 May 2017, on grounds stated in her application  dated
    6 June 2018.

 3. Paragraphs 2 - 14 of the  grounds  contend  that  the  judge  erred  in
    finding that the SSHD had not  shown  that  the  appellant  obtained  a
    language test result by fraud.

 4. Those parts of the grounds are met  by  a  rule  24  response  for  the
    appellant.

 5. Paragraphs 2 - 14 of the grounds are only  re-argument  of  the  SSHD's
    case from the FtT.  They do not show that in resolving that case as  it
    did the FtT made any error on a point of law.

 6. The grounds at paragraphs 15 and 16 raise the question whether  success
    on the language test issue led to the appeal being allowed on article 8
    grounds, which is not immediately  obvious.   However,  parties  agreed
    that such was effectively the basis on which the case was approached in
    the FtT and that the further working out of the outcome  was  a  matter
    now between the parties, not for the UT in present proceedings.

 7. Parties agreed that it would be appropriate for the SSHD to invite  the
    appellant to make representations on the nature  and  period  of  leave
    which it would be appropriate for the SSHD to grant, in  light  of  the
    decision of the FtT, and for that  approach  to  be  recorded  in  this
    decision.

 8. The SSHD's appeal to the UT is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            6 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




