
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02410/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 October 2017                  |On 18 December 2017                   |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR PASAINEY KANYI

                          (Anonymity not DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent: Mr Ceesay (Legal Representative)




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  a
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince hereinafter "the  Judge")
   whereupon the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
   of 8 January 2016 refusing to grant him leave to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)
   was allowed.

2. For the reasons set out below I have decided to  set  aside  the  Judge's
   decision because the making of it involved the making of an error of law.
   However, in remaking the decision  I  too  have  allowed  the  claimant's
   appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

3. The claimant was born on 7 August 1997. He is a national  of  Gambia.  He
   has a brother called Modou who is lawfully resident in the UK. He  has  a
   sister, Bintou who resides in the USA albeit that  she  once  spent  some
   time in the UK as a student.

4. According to the evidence given to the Judge by the appellant and  Modou,
   the claimant previously lived in the family home in Ghana with his father
   and various other relatives. His mother passed away in 2012. By that time
   Modou was already resident in the UK but, upon his mother's  passing,  he
   travelled to Ghana. He  says  he  discovered  that  his  father  was  not
   properly looking after the claimant. So,  on  return  to  the  UK,  Modou
   started sending money to the claimant. But the claimant struggled to cope
   without his mother and sought a visit visa, which was  granted,  enabling
   him to come to the UK. He arrived on 30 July 2013 and was, at that  time,
   aged 15 years. Since his arrival he has  lived  with  Modou  and  Modou's
   family.  Prior  to  the  expiry  of  his  visit  visa  he   was   granted
   discretionary leave to remain until 7 August 2015  (the  date  he  turned
   18). Prior to the expiry of that leave he applied for further  leave  and
   it was that application which led to the refusal of 8  January  2016  and
   ultimately to the appeal before the Judge.

5. The Judge found the oral evidence concerning  in  particular,  the  close
   relationship between the claimant and Modou to be  persuasive.  He  found
   that the claimant could  not  bring  himself  within  the  scope  of  the
   Immigration Rules (it does not seem to have been argued  that  he  could)
   but allowed the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules.  In  explaining
   why he was doing so he referred to and set out the  content  of  Sections
   117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  He
   then said this;

           "29.  I pause there to note that: the Appellant  speaks  English
           (he gave his evidence in such); he is  financially  independent,
           on account of his brother's support and his own earnings; he has
           never been in the UK unlawfully and that I do not consider  that
           his immigration status has been "precarious" merely  because  he
           has only been here with limited leave, since he has  always  had
           the right to apply to  extend  that  leave  and  to  appeal  any
           adverse decision if he made such an application in  time,  which
           he has."

6. He then referred  to  various  well-known  authorities  including  Razgar
   [2004] UKHL 27 and said that  he  was  satisfied  that  both  family  and
   private life  in  the  UK  had  been  established  by  the  claimant.  In
   explaining why he thought it would not be proportionate  to  require  the
   claimant to leave the UK he said this;

           "35.  The crucial factors in this case are that the Appellant is
           not leading a life independent of his  brother  Modou  -  he  is
           still financially dependent upon him for accommodation and food,
           as well as being emotionally  dependent  upon  him.  In  essence
           Modou has taken on the role of  parent  due  to  their  mother's
           death and their father's neglect, a role  which  the  Respondent
           acknowledged when giving the Appellant DLR in  2014.  I  further
           note  and  accept  Modou's  assessment  that  he  considers  the
           Appellant still to be a "minor" since he still requires support.
           On that basis I consider that the Appellant still enjoys  family
           life with his brother notwithstanding that he is now  an  adult.
           It follows  that  he  also  has  private  life,  with  both  his
           footballing activities and his studies.

           36.   I further consider that it is clear that  the  Appellant's
           removal would seriously interfere with that right. He  would  be
           leaving behind his only current close family (he being estranged
           from his father, who I find neglected him when he was in  Gambia
           and who has continued to show no interest in him  following  his
           move to the UK - I rely upon Modou's evidence that their  father
           has never specifically enquired about the Appellant in  all  the
           telephone conversations since he came to the UK), in  particular
           his brother, who stepped into  the  role  of  parent   following
           their mother's death and who continues  to  give  the  Appellant
           significant emotional and financial support.  Given  the  nature
           and closeness of their relationship during the past three  years
           I  do  not  consider  that  contact   by   modern   methods   of
           communication or visits by his family to Gambia would negate the
           fact that there would be serious interference with that right.

           37.   It is equally clear that the Appellant's removal is lawful
           and for a legitimate purpose. The question before me is  whether
           the Appellant's removal is proportionate.

           38.   Against the Appellant is the fact that he has no right  to
           remain in the UK under  the  Immigrations  Rules.  I  also  take
           account of the public interest requirements of section 117B - it
           is in the public  interest  to  maintain  effective  immigration
           controls. However, as stated above, the Appellant speaks English
           fluently, he is financially independent, he has  never  been  in
           the UK unlawfully  and  his  immigration  status  has  not  been
           "precarious".

           39.   I note the Respondent's argument that the Appellant  would
           be able to return to live in his father's home  in  Gambia,  but
           consider that this is  not  necessarily  a  correct  assumption.
           Whilst it  appears  that  Fatou  still  lives  there,  the  last
           information (from Modou's visit in March 2015) is that the house
           is also occupied by strangers. Moreover, in view of the father's
           manifest disinterest in the Appellant since he came to  the  UK,
           it cannot  be  assumed  that  the  father  would  agree  to  the
           Appellant living there.

           40.   I also note that the Appellant is  now  over  18  and  has
           educational qualifications and some  construction  skills  which
           could be  utilised  by  him  to  obtain  employment  in  Gambia.
           However, it is also the case that he has never lived by  himself
           independently.

           41.   In his favour, I note the reasons why he came to  the  UK,
           namely because his father neglected him following the  death  of
           his mother, and that he  has  since  then,  predominantly  as  a
           child, established a strong family life with  his  brother,  his
           brother's family, his aunt, his  half-sister  and  a  number  of
           cousins. Essentially, this is the only family life he now has. I
           do not consider that his father has any interest in him or in re-
           establishing any relationship with him and any  relationship  he
           may re-establish  with  Fatou  would  be,  in  my  judgment,  no
           substitute to the family life that he now has.

           42.   I also note that, in the opinion of his brother  (which  I
           see no reason no to place weight upon) the Appellant is not  yet
           ready  to  live  independently  and  repeat  that,   given   the
           disinterest of his father, it cannot be assumed that he would be
           able to go back and live in the former family home.

           43.   I note  that  during  his  time  here  the  Appellant  has
           developed a strong private life,  engaging  with  the  community
           (playing for a local youth football team) and doing well in  his
           studies. He has no criminal record (although this is the minimum
           that is to be expected of visitors to our shores).

           44.   In addition, the Appellant speaks fluent English, he would
           be able to support himself financially, and he  has  always  had
           leave to be in the  UK  during  his  time  here  in  the  UK.  I
           therefore place significant weight upon the  strong  family  and
           private life that he has developed, which was in part,  approved
           by the Respondent as she granted him DLR.

           45.   I consider that the question before me  (bearing  in  mind
           the   strong   compassionate   circumstances   surrounding   the
           Appellant's arrival in the UK; the neglect of him by his father;
           his strong emotional reliance upon his brother and the fact that
           his only close family  is  here  in  the  UK)  is  that:  is  it
           disproportionate to remove the Appellant to Gambia where a  very
           uncertain future awaits him? Bearing all the  above  factors  in
           mind I conclude that the Respondent has failed to discharge  the
           burden of proof upon her to demonstrate that his  removal  would
           not be disproportionate.

           46.   I therefore allow the appeal under Article 8."

7.    The Secretary of State, in seeking permission to appeal,  argued  that
   the Judge had erred in failing to apply a "compelling circumstances" test
   with respect to Article 8 outside the Rules. It was also  said  that  the
   Judge had erred in failing to conclude that  the  claimant's  immigration
   status had been "precarious" during the time that the family and  private
   life  had  developed.  Reference  was  made,  in  that  context,  to  the
   interpretation of the word "precarious"  as  explained  in  AM  (S  117b)
   Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC). Since permission to appeal was granted the
   case was listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  so
   that it could be considered whether the Judge had erred in law and if so,
   what should flow from that. Directions also made provision for me  to  go
   onto re-make the decision in the event of the Judge's decision being  set
   aside.

8.    I heard submissions from each representative as to the  error  of  law
   issue. Having heard from  them  I  concluded  that,  whilst  the  Judge's
   decision is a most careful and thorough one there was  an  error  of  law
   which was capable of impacting upon the outcome.

9.    In that context, I agree with the Secretary of  State  that  following
   Treebhawon and others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test)
   [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) the claimant was  required  to  demonstrate  that
   there were, in his case, compelling circumstances such as to justify  the
   allowing of the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules. The  Judge  did
   not expressly remind himself of that and I do not  feel  able  to  simply
   assume that he had it in mind. Further, notwithstanding what  appears  to
   be cogent reasoning, I am not satisfied that if he had  reminded  himself
   as to the requirement for  compelling  circumstances  the  outcome  would
   nevertheless have been inevitable. So, I  informed  the  parties  that  I
   would set aside the decision.

10.   Matters moved on to remaking. My having set aside the decision it  was
   necessary for me to have regard to the circumstances as they were  as  at
   the date of the hearing before me. There had, indeed, been a  development
   of some significance in that it was said  the  claimant  had  cemented  a
   relationship with one Lisa Williams, a  British  citizen,  and  that  the
   couple now had a British citizen child. At my request Mr Ceesay helpfully
   prepared a handwritten statement  from  the  claimant  and  one  from  Ms
   Williams addressing their relationship. I was also provided with  a  copy
   of  the  birth  certificate  relating  to  the   couple's   child.   That
   documentation was admitted by me pursuant to  Rule  15(2)  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Rules.

11.   I then heard oral evidence from the claimant. He told me that  he  now
   lives with Ms Williams, their seven-week-old child and her daughter  from
   a previous relationship. They had been living together since 1 June 2017.
   Previously the claimant had  been  residing  with  Modou.  Initially  the
   relationship was of a casual nature but had become more serious. When  Ms
   Williams became pregnant the claimant was initially "in  shock"  but  had
   adapted. The claimant was now in employment. Ms Williams  said  that  the
   two had first met in November of 2016. They became  "partners"  once  she
   had discovered that she was pregnant.

12.   I then heard submissions from the  representatives.  Mr  Diwnycz  said
   that the Secretary of State had been "overtaken by events".  He  said  he
   would accept that the claimant is the father of a British citizen  child.
   He did not make any further submissions. Mr Ceesay argued that there were
   "compelling circumstances".

13.   Although I did decide to set aside the  Judge's  decision  I  did  not
   interfere with  the  factual  findings.  So,  there  remains  the  strong
   relationship  the  claimant  has  with  Modou.  But  there  is  also  his
   relationship with Ms Williams which I accept is a genuine and  subsisting
   one. Mr Diwnycz  did  not  seek  to  challenge  the  genuineness  of  the
   relationship. I accept that the claimant does now have a British  citizen
   child. Again, there was no challenge as to that from Mr Diwnycz.

14.   Mr Ceesay has not specifically directed me to  any  Article  8-related
   immigration rules in respect of which  he  now  says  the  appeal  should
   succeed. So I have looked at matters outside the rules.  I  am  satisfied
   that there are compelling circumstances in this case such as  to  justify
   the allowing of the appeal outside the rules.  That  is  based  upon  the
   cumulative effect of the claimant's unusually  strong  relationship  with
   his brother Modou,  his  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  Ms
   Williams, his British citizen child and his membership of a  family  unit
   including Ms Williams own child. I also attach weight to the fact that Mr
   Diwnycz did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

15.   So, in remaking  the  decision,  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  on
   Article 8 grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. In  remaking  the  decision  I  allow  the  claimant's
appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  8  January  2016  on
Article 8 grounds.

I make no anonymity direction. None was sought before me.



                       Signed

                                             M R Hemingway
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                           Dated                                          18
   December 2017



To the Respondent
Fee award

I make no fee award.



                       Signed

                                             M R Hemingway
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                       Dated                                    18  December
   2017

