


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/02146/2016

                                                       HU/02148/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons           |
|On 22 December 2017                       |Promulgated      On 4 January    |
|                                          |2018                             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                             KAZI AMDADUL HAQUE
                                SHARMIN AKTER
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan (counsel for Kilby Jones Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These are the appeals of Kazi Amdadul Haque, a citizen of Bangladesh,
       and of his dependent wife Sharmin Akter, against the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal, dated 9 March 2017, to refuse  their  appeal  on
       human rights against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse
       their applications for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds,
       itself dated 12 January 2016.


    2. Their application was made on the basis of  the  private  and  family
       life they claimed to have built up during the period  over  which  Mr
       Haque had been present as a Tier 4 general student with his  wife  as
       his partner, since their  arrival  this  country  in  2013  and  2014
       respectively. Mr Haque had been unable to  secure  further  leave  to
       remain, having completed a level 7 MBA on International Business from
       Anglia Ruskin University. They had nevertheless  become  attached  to
       the society, culture and community of the United  Kingdom,  and  they
       feared for Mrs Akter's well-being if  they  travelled  following  her
       recent health problems; furthermore they were  concerned  that  their
       infant child A (born 21 August 2015) would be prejudiced if  she  was
       required to rely on the lower standard of medical and other  care  in
       Bangladesh.


    3. The application was refused because it  was  not  accepted  that  the
       child's best interests called for the grant of leave, and  given  the
       lack of evidence that the parents would  face  any  very  significant
       obstacles to their integration  back  in  Bangladesh;  there  was  no
       settled Sponsor who could found a viable  partner  application  under
       Appendix FM. They had only resided in this country from 19 June  2013
       and 26 January 2014 and the child's circumstances were not considered
       exceptional, given there  was  no  evidence  confirming  the  child's
       medical condition or that any immunisation programme was ongoing.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant,  in
       English, recording that he had lived with his parents and  family  in
       Dhaka before coming to this country. The family home had been sold to
       fund his studies and accommodation here. His father had taken  out  a
       loan which he still paying back at high interest rates. The Appellant
       had a urinal condition that caused him discomfort and which was being
       treated here; his wife had a fungal infection, and his daughter had a
       sticky eye.  It  would  expensive  to  replicate  this  treatment  in
       Bangladesh, and he could not find work there, as there  were  no  job
       prospects for a person of his age.


    5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  Appellants  faced   no   very
       significant obstacles to integration back in their country of  origin
       given Mr  Haque  had  completed  his  studies  here,  had  spent  his
       formative years in Bangladesh where he  had  studied  and  worked  in
       accounts and administration, and where his family lived. His claim to
       be supported by his uncle was uncorroborated, and his claim as to his
       parents' diminished financial circumstances was not  fully  supported
       by evidence, beyond a document from the Dhaka North City  Corporation
       which only showed that that entity had taken some interest  in  their
       financial situation. The only evidence regarding Mrs  Akter's  health
       advising against her taking a flight related to  the  period  shortly
       after her had given birth. The child's emotional  and  welfare  needs
       would foreseeably be met by the care of her parents  and  any  health
       problems were minor, and any difficulties in their  future  treatment
       would be down to their cost rather than their non-availability.


    6. Reviewing the appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Appellant
       could speak English, claimed to be supported by his uncle, but  there
       were nevertheless no exceptional or compelling circumstances counting
       against the return of him and his wife, given they could  foreseeably
       access medical assistance and make arrangements  for  the  daughter's
       education. Neither he nor Mrs Akter had any  significant  connections
       with this country and both were fully conversant with the culture  of
       Bangladesh.


    7. Grounds of appeal contended that inadequate  consideration  had  been
       given to the private and family life of the  Appellants,  to  section
       117A and 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and
       to the best interests of the child.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
       that  the  child's  best  interests  may  not  have  been  adequately
       assessed.


    9. Before me, Mr Chowdhury submitted that  there  were  essentially  two
       errors in the approach to  best  interests:  firstly  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had failed to  consider  the  extent  to  which  Mr  Haque's
       documented  kidney  condition  might  diminish   his   prospects   of
       supporting the family in  circumstances  where  his  wife  would  not
       necessarily be able to support the family alone given  the  difficult
       labour market conditions in Bangladesh, and secondly, the  First-tier
       Tribunal had wholly failed to consider the child's own ill-health. Mr
       Duffy responded that the decision represented a  rational  and  well-
       reasoned adjudication of all relevant issues, fully in line with  the
       governing authorities such as Azimi-Moayed.


Decision and reasons


   10. I indicated that I  would  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at the hearing, and these are my reasons.


   11. The submissions by Mr Chowdhury essentially  amount  to  a  disguised
       rationality challenge. The issues upon which he focussed were  by  no
       means matters that were overlooked by  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  it
       referenced Mr Haque's kidney condition, and it was plainly  alive  to
       the child's health issue, which is a rather mild one,  "sticky"  eye.
       So the question is whether the decision actually made was beyond  the
       range of reasonable responses to the evidence before the Tribunal.


   12. Jackson LJ in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [35] stated: "A
       decision as to what is in the best interests of children will  depend
       on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of  time
       that they have been here; (c) how long they have been  in  education;
       (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they
       have become distanced from the country to which it is  proposed  that
       they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may  be;  (f)
       to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,  medical   or   other
       difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the  extent
       to which the course proposed will interfere with  their  family  life
       ..." Jeunesse as cited in MM  Lebanon  (UKSC)  stated  that  national
       decision-makers should:


           "... advert to and assess evidence in respect of the
           practicality, feasibility and proportionality [of any such
           removal of a non-national parent] in order to give effective
           protection and sufficient weight to the best interests of the
           children directly affected by it."


   13. It seems to me that the principles identified  in  those  authorities
       were effectively applied in this case. The reality is that for a very
       young child such as the infant in question, it is rather difficult to
       see what factors could possibly point to her departure to her country
       of nationality where her extended family live being contrary  to  her
       best interests. She is of an age where the entirety of her needs  can
       be met by the care provided by the parents, who are  clearly  devoted
       to her, with the additional emotional support that  can  be  presumed
       available from the extended family. There is  no  suggestion  in  the
       medical evidence that her eye condition is anything other than minor,
       nor  is  there  objective  evidence  to  suggest  that   the   health
       authorities in Bangladesh would be unable to treat her in  the  event
       it endures. Although the First-tier Tribunal posited the  possibility
       that Mr Haque's parents might lack funds, it  expressed  reservations
       about the lack  of  corroborative  evidence  regarding  his  father's
       attempts to put his finances on a more secure footing. It  cannot  be
       said that the case as put was accepted at its highest on  balance  of
       probabilities. The evidence as to any financial difficulties suffered
       by the family was found  wanting  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  when
       assessed, given the paucity of supporting  documents,  unsurprisingly
       given the vagueness of the case as put below.


   14. There is no evidence to suggest that Mr Haque's health  problem  will
       foreseeably deteriorate to a level that prevents  him  from  working,
       and Mr Chowdhury directed me to no objective or independent  evidence
       to corroborate his submission that it  would  be  impossible  for  Ms
       Akter to work in Bangladesh even were his health to worsen.


   15.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  was
       sufficiently detailed to fully address the rather limited case put to
       it.


   16. Stepping back to review the case put by the  Appellants  objectively,
       they have lived in the United Kingdom for rather a short period, only
       four years for the longest resident of them, Mr Haque. They came in a
       capacity that was temporary in  nature,  with  a  view  to  Mr  Haque
       studying for a course which he completed, to his  credit,  at  Anglia
       Ruskin University. It is not obvious why they  would  not  have  made
       plans to cater for  their  inevitable  return  to  their  country  of
       nationality. The difficulties they  had  to  confront,  arising  from
       their decision to start a family at this  moment  in  time  and  from
       their chosen mode of financing the studies, were inevitably ones  for
       which they would need to make arrangements. It is very  difficult  to
       accept that educated individuals would in  truth  have  had  no  such
       plans in place. The connections put forward  with  this  country  are
       extremely fragile and barely evidenced. The reaction  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to their case is unsurprising.



   17. I do not consider that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  were
       irrational or took into account irrelevant considerations. The appeal
       is dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 22 December 2017


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


