
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02655/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2020                      |On 20 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                PARMVIR SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Joshi, Legal Representative, Joshi Advocates
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Meichen dated 28 August 2019  in  which  the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer  dated  30  January  2018  refusing  him  entry
    clearance and refusing his human rights  claim.   The  Appellant  is  a
    national of India who had previously been present in the United Kingdom
    from 2012 when he entered with entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4  Student
    valid until 22 February 2013.  However, the Appellant  remained  beyond
    that date and became an overstayer.  In July 2017  he  was  encountered
    working illegally at a Subway  restaurant  and  detained.   He  claimed
    asylum on 17 August 2017 but withdrew the application on  22  September
    2017.  Papers were served for his removal on 3 October  2017.   It  was
    said in the Respondent's decision that the Appellant became  disruptive
    and refused to be transferred to an alternative  detention  centre  but
    that on  9  October  2017  the  Appellant  voluntarily  departed.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that the cost of that departure was  borne  by
    the Appellant's partner.

2.   Indeed, whilst in the United Kingdom the Appellant had entered  into  a
    relationship with Ms Sukhjinder Kaur Boora, a  British  national,  that
    relationship  commencing  in  around  March  2016  at  which  time  the
    Appellant had already been an overstayer in the UK  for  a  significant
    period.  The couple married in India in September 2018, i.e. after  his
    removal, and the Appellant made an application for entry clearance on 5
    October 2018 under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules to enter the UK
    as Ms Boora's spouse.

3.   In the decision of 30 January 2018 the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant met the relevant relationship eligibility  requirements,  the
    financial eligibility requirements and the English language eligibility
    requirements (decision page 2) but the application for entry  clearance
    was nonetheless refused on the grounds that the Appellant's application
    fell to be refused under paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which provides as follows:

         "Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way
         to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

         (i)  overstaying; or

         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

         (iv) using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
             to enter or remain or in order to obtain  documents  from  the
             Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
             application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances such  as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process".

4.    The  Respondent  asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules by
    overstaying, and that there were other  aggravating  circumstances,  as
    the Appellant had (i) illegally worked in the UK  and,  (ii)  had  been
    disruptive in detention  and  had  refused  to  be  transferred  to  an
    alternate detention centre.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager review of the Respondent's decision  dated  29  April
    2019 the Respondent also asserted as  follows:  "The  Appellant's  five
    year period of overstaying, arrested  (sic)  for  illegal  working  and
    making a frivolous application for international protection when he did
    not have a genuine fear of  returning  to  India  are  all  aggravating
    features".  The Respondent  there  clearly  raised  a  third  potential
    aggravating factor, being the 'frivolous' asylum claim.

5.   The Respondent also stated in the decision letter that the  Appellant's
    application for entry  clearance  was  to  be  refused  on  grounds  of
    suitability under Appendix FM as he had shown disregard for the law  by
    overstaying his Tier 4 visa and there were aggravating factors in  that
    he was working illegally in the  UK  and  was  disruptive  as  detailed
    previously.  It was  said  that  the  application  therefore  fell  for
    refusal under paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM with reference to S-
    EC.1.5 relating to suitability.  The decision also  stated  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances in which it would render the  refusal
    of entry clearance a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis  that
    it would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  him  or  his
    partner.

6.   The Appellant appealed that decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    judge at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  on  14  August  2019.   The
    Appellant was of course in India,  but  the  Sponsor,  Ms  Boora,  gave
    evidence in support of the appeal.

7.   The judge's findings may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  The Appellant had worked illegally at Subway in July 2017 but  had
         also been working at Subway for some time before he was caught  and
         he had been paid to do so [24].

    (ii) The explanation offered by the  Appellant  for  making  an  asylum
         application (i.e. that his  then  solicitor  had  made  the  asylum
         application  without  his  consent  and  contrary  to  his  express
         instructions), was rejected [26]. The Appellant went along with the
         application knowing it  to  be  false  [25].   The  making  of  the
         Appellant's asylum application was frivolous and should never  have
         been made [26], and [35].

    (iii)    The Respondent had not provided  sufficient  evidence  of  the
         Appellant having behaved  disruptively.   That  allegation  by  the
         Respondent was not made out [27].

    (iv)     The judge noted  that  the  Appellant  accepted  that  he  had
         overstayed in the United Kingdom for a period of more than four and
         a half years and that the  first  limb  of  paragraph  320(11)  was
         therefore satisfied [30].

    (v)  The judge noted at [32] that the  application  of  320(11)  was  a
         discretionary ground for refusal.

    (vi) On the issue of whether the Appellant's illegal working was to  be
         treated as an aggravating factor, I set  out  the  content  of  the
         judge's findings at [33]-[34] in full:

         "33. As first set out in the appeal grounds  the  Appellant  relied
             upon ZH (a reference to ZH (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
             8) to the effect that illegally working was 'part and  parcel'
             of overstaying and therefore did  not  constitute  a  separate
             aggravating circumstance.  I should note however that  ZH  was
             not  a  case  which  was  specifically  concerned   with   the
             application of paragraph 320(11) and I do not think that  that
             decision can be read as imposing a bar on illegal working ever
             being  considered  as  an  aggravating  circumstance  for  the
             purposes of paragraph 320(11).  Moreover I would observe  that
             the Home Office guidance on paragraph 320(11) gives a  further
             example of an aggravating circumstance,  previous  working  in
             breach on visitor conditions within a short time of arrival in
             the UK (that is, premeditated intention to work).  This  would
             imply that there are least some cases in which illegal working
             should be considered as an aggravating  circumstance.   In  my
             judgment it is important to take each case on its  own  facts.
             There may be cases where illegal working does  not  constitute
             an aggravating feature but the opposite may  equally  be  true
             (as per the guidance).

         34.  In this case I think that the Appellant's illegal working  was
             an aggravating circumstance.  This is because I do not believe
             that the Appellant has been straightforward and  honest  about
             his illegal working.  The Appellant in his  witness  statement
             made reference to covering a shift in his friend's shop (as  a
             favour) but the Sponsor told me in evidence that in  fact  the
             Appellant had worked shifts at various different Subways.  The
             Appellant's  witness  statement   does   not   explain   this.
             Similarly the Appellant  in  his  witness  statement  gave  no
             explanation as to how he had been paid for the work he did and
             the  Appellant's  Sponsor  in  her  evidence   was   obviously
             reluctant to admit that he had in fact been paid (at least  by
             way of his friends paying for  him to  go  out).   It  is  not
             credible to suggest that the Appellant would  have  worked  at
             various different  Subways  unless  he  was  being  adequately
             remunerated for doing so.  I would  contrast  the  Appellant's
             case with the case  of  ZH  where  it  is  apparent  from  the
             judgment that the applicant there had  been  extremely  candid
             about the extent and nature of his illegal working.  Taking as
             a whole I think there has been  a  distinct  lack  of  similar
             candour in this Appellant's evidence".

    (vii)    The Respondent  was  justified  in  finding  that  there  were
         aggravating circumstances and was therefore correct to exercise his
         discretion to refuse the Appellant's  application  under  paragraph
         320(11) [36].

    (viii)   The term 'frivolous applications' was not to be constructed as
         requiring  more  than  one  frivolous  application  in  order   for
         paragraph 320(11) to be engaged [37].

    (ix) Regarding the application PS (paragraph 320(11)  discretion:  care
         needed) India [2010] UKUT  440  (IAC),  the  judge  considered  the
         timing and circumstances of  the  Appellant's  voluntary  departure
         from the UK and upheld at the end of [39] that were it not for  the
         fact that the Appellant had been found to be illegally working  and
         detained, he would not have made any voluntary departure and  would
         have continued in employment.

8.   The Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

9.   The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  in  grounds  dated  3
    September 2019.  Under the heading 'Undisputed  matters  -  identifying
    issues' was the following passage within the grounds at [5]:

         "5.  During the appeal hearing the Respondent accepted that:

             (i)   there  was  no  record  of  the  Appellant's  disruptive
                  behaviour which the FtT IJ records at paragraph 27,

             (ii)  the  Appellant's  legal  representative  submitted  that
                  working illegally is part and parcel of illegal  residence
                  in the UK applying ZH (Bangladesh), paragraph  10  of  the
                  grounds of appeal.

             The FtT IJ asked the Respondent whether she  agreed  this  was
             the case and that working  illegally  did  not  amount  to  an
             aggravating factor.  The Respondent agreed  that  it  did  not
             amount to an aggravating factor - however this is not recorded
             on the determination.  Note of proceedings is  requested  from
             the court as a result".

10.  The actual grounds of appeal are set out at [7] onwards and argue  that
    the judge erred in law, in summary, as follows:

    (1)  The judge misdirected himself in law as to the application  of  ZH
         (Bangladesh), in which it was said that the Court of  Appeal  noted
         that working illegally was part and parcel of illegal residence  in
         the United Kingdom  and  did  not  exclude  success  under  a  Rule
         designed to regularise such persons, therefore it did not amount to
         an  aggravating  factor  under  the  Immigration   Rules   320(11).
         Further, the judge failed to make any reference to  the  concession
         said to have  been  made  by  the  Respondent  agreeing  with  that
         proposition [7].

    (2)  In purporting to distinguish  at  [34]  within  the  decision  the
         behaviour of the Appellant in ZH and  the  present  Appellant,  the
         judge failed to take into account the assertion  that  the  present
         Appellant had admitted from the outset that he had  worked  in  the
         United Kingdom illegally [10].

    (3)  The judge erred in purporting  to  attach  little  weight  to  the
         private and family life developed by the Appellant  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The judge had failed to appreciate that the  relationship
         was not disputed in the present case and  that  the  Appellant  had
         returned to India and did not marry the Sponsor in the UK  when  he
         was unlawfully resident [14].

    (4)  The judge erred in finding  that  one  frivolous  application  was
         sufficient to engage the terms of paragraph 320(11) [15].

11.  Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly in  a
    decision of 11 December 2011, finding that  it  was  arguable  for  the
    reasons given in the application that the Tribunal  had  misinterpreted
    what constituted an aggravating factor for the purposes  of  exercising
    discretion to refuse entry clearance under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

12.  Upon considering the papers prior  to  the  hearing  I  issued  certain
    directions to the parties which were, in summary, to remind the parties
    that any allegation of procedural irregularity (Grounds, paras [5]  and
    [7]) must be supported by evidence and the Appellant  was  reminded  of
    the guidance in the case of HA (Conduct of hearing: evidence  required)
    Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00018.

13.  I further  directed  that  the  parties  be  prepared  to  address  the
    Tribunal on the following matters:

    (1)  the actual ratio of ZH (Bangladesh);

    (2)  the proper  construction  to  be  given  to  the  term  'frivolous
         applications' in paragraph 320(11); and

    (3)  in relation to (2)  above  the  role,  if  any,  bearing  in  mind
         paragraph 47 of Odelola  v  Secretary  of  State  [2009]  UKHL,  of
         Section 6C of the Interpretation Act 1978; and

    (4)  the relevance, if any, of the following two  unreported  decisions
         of the Upper Tribunal: HU/08282/2017 and HU/14094/2016.

    Submissions

14.  It was apparent that the Appellant's request made  within  the  grounds
    of appeal that the judge's Record of Proceedings  be  provided  to  the
    parties had been complied with by  the  Upper  Tribunal  administrative
    staff.  Ms Joshi at least had been provided with  a  photocopy  of  the
    judge's handwritten note of proceedings.  Unfortunately  Mr  Bates  did
    not seem to have a copy but one was provided to  him.   Mr  Bates  also
    provided a copy of a hearing  minute  prepared  by  Ms  Venables,  Home
    Office Presenting  Officer  before  the  judge,  and  prepared  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing before the judge.

15.  The parties addressed me first  of  all  on  the  potential  procedural
    fairness point as to whether or not Ms Venables had made  a  concession
    that illegal working was not in the present case to be  treated  as  an
    aggravating factor.  It appears from the judge's handwritten note  that
    Ms Venables argued in her own submissions that  the  refusal  could  be
    sustained under paragraph 320(11), and  that  she  did  rely  upon  the
    Appellant's   illegal   working   as   representing   an    aggravating
    circumstance. The judge's note includes the  following  when  recording
    the Respondent's submissions:

         "... Refused under 320(11)

         Overstayed, worked illegally, false asylum claim.

         No med evidence produced ...

         Heard worked on numerous occasions.

         It is likely he got a financial reward."

16.  Ms Joshi's submissions are recorded on the next  page  of  the  judge's
    record and include the following:

         "... Nothing in this case is an aggravating factor.

         Not enough weight is being placed on him leaving voluntarily.

         He can't make a fresh application in 2/3 yrs, here its not limited.






         Accept illegal working not agg circ..




         No partics of disruptive conduct (?)

         So boils down to frivolous application".

17.  The typed minute prepared by Ms Venables after the hearing provides  as
    follows:

         "I argue 320(11) - contrived prev in a  signiff  way  to  frustrate
         immig rules.

         1 -  overstaying - applt accepted (...)

         2 -  working illegally - why believe applt that he did this work at
             different subway restaurants w o pay - not just  a  one-off  -
             rep relied on ZH - cannot say illegal working aggravating fact
             but I said when challenged by Ij - look at  all  evidence  not
             just that to look at.

         3 -  disruptive (...)

         4 -  false claim (frivolous applications) (...)"

18.  Ms Joshi also sought to rely on a witness  statement  prepared  by  the
    Sponsor, Ms Boora, in this matter dated 4 March 2020, i.e. the date  of
    the hearing before me.  This, no doubt, was prepared in response to  my
    reminder to the Appellant that any allegation  of  procedural  fairness
    needed to be properly evidenced.  That statement provides,  insofar  as
    relevant, as follows:

         "(3) I attended the  appeal  hearing  on  14  August  2019  at  IAC
             Birmingham and gave  oral  evidence  for  this  appeal  before
             Immigration Judge Meichen.

         (4)  I distinctly remember that when my oral evidence finished  the
             Home Office officer lady talked and then my lawyer  Ms  Khyati
             Joshi spoke.

         (5)  When my lawyer said that  my  husband  had  lived  in  the  UK
             illegally and had worked in the UK illegally  she  added  that
             working in the UK illegally is not an aggravating factor as it
             is part of living in the UK illegally and then she mentioned a
             case.  At this exact  point  the  judge  turned  to  the  Home
             Officer lady and asked her 'do you agree with that?'  The Home
             Office lady said 'yes that it a  correct'(sic)  so  my  lawyer
             said that the only point in this appeal was whether the asylum
             claim my husband made and withdrew as soon  as  he  found  out
             what it was not frivolous claim (sic) because it was only  one
             and she pointed out to the papers where it said more than  one
             or plural".

19.  Mr Bates did not object  to  this  new  evidence  being  admitted  into
    evidence.  It was not evidence as to matters postdating the hearing  or
    matters on which evidence could have been adduced before the judge, but
    rather, evidence which relates  to  the  manner  in  which  the  appeal
    proceeded before the judge.

20.  I observed to Ms Joshi that the  usual  way  for  a  party  wishing  to
    adduce evidence of alleged procedural irregularity  would  be  for  the
    irregularity to be asserted within  grounds  of  appeal,  and  for  the
    grounds of appeal to be  signed  with  a  statement  of  truth  by  the
    advocate, exhibiting a copy of any contemporaneous note  taken  by  the
    advocate.  I pointed out to Ms Joshi that although I agreed to admit Ms
    Boora's statement into evidence as evidence which spoke to the issue of
    whether there was any procedural irregularity before the judge, it  was
    more usual for a statement of truth to be given by the advocate, who is
    much more likely to have taken a verbatim and contemporaneous minute of
    the proceedings than would any witness  sitting  at  the  back  of  the
    court.  Indeed, it was not asserted that Ms Boora had taken any note of
    the hearing at all.

21.  Ms Joshi submitted that evidence of a concession having  been  made  by
    the respondent was therefore contained in the three documents:

     (1) the judge's own Record of Proceedings,

    (2)  the Presenting Officer's minute of the hearing, and

    (3)  the Sponsor's witness statement.

22.  Ms Joshi argued that such  evidence  established  that  the  Presenting
    Officer did make a discrete concession that working illegally was not a
    factor which was to  be  treated  as  an  aggravating  factor  for  the
    purposes of 320(11).  Ms Joshi argued that the judge erred  in  law  in
    not only failing to make any reference to this concession, but also  to
    rule to the contrary, that the Appellant's illegal working  in  the  UK
    did represent an aggravating  circumstance,  and  the  judge  proceeded
    unfairly and contrary to the law.

23.  Further and in any event, even if there was  no  concession,  Ms  Joshi
    argued that the ratio of ZH was that illegal working  should not defeat
    an application such as the present.

24.  For his part Mr Bates argued that the evidence, such  as  it  was,  did
    not establish with any degree of clarity that Ms Venables  had  made  a
    discrete concession before the judge.  Mr Bates argued that the  manner
    in which the observations had been recorded in the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings could equally have represented simply  what  Ms  Joshi  had
    been arguing, as they appeared within the body of the judge's  note  of
    Ms  Joshi's  submissions,  rather  than   representing   any   specific
    concession made by Ms Venables.

25.  Mr Bates argued in any event that  even  if  Ms  Venables  had  made  a
    concession, the judge gave cogent reasons  at  [33]  and  [34]  of  the
    decision for finding that in  the  present  case  illegal  working  did
    represent an aggravating circumstance  capable  of  engaging  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.

26.  The parties also made submissions on the other matters  in  the  appeal
    including the construction to be given to the  question  of  whether  a
    single frivolous application  satisfied  the  definition  of  frivolous
    applications within paragraph 320(11).  The parties addressed me on the
    unreported decisions which I had drawn to their attention.

27.  I had also prior to the hearing provided the  parties  with  a  further
    unreported decision on this issue, that being the case of HU/13634/2016
    by Deputy Immigration Judge Woodcraft decided on 5 January 2018.  Judge
    Woodcraft had considered an appeal brought by an applicant whose appeal
    had been dismissed by a First-tier Judge on the  basis  that  paragraph
    320(11) was invoked in their application.  One of  the  arguments  that
    Judge Woodcraft contended with was that whilst the  Appellant  in  that
    case had overstayed in  the  UK,  there  were  not  'other  aggravating
    circumstances'  including  making  'frivolous  applications'   (plural)
    because only one application which had been deemed to be frivolous  had
    been made.

28.  Judge Woodcraft dealt with this  argument  at  paragraph  [23]  of  his
    decision as follows:

         "23. A further argument made in the Rule 24 response to  the  grant
             of permission was that the paragraph appeared  to  acknowledge
             that more than one frivolous application would have to be made
             before the paragraph could be engaged.  It is correct that the
             paragraph refers  to  making  frivolous  applications  in  the
             plural but it cannot have been the intention of the drafter of
             the Rules that every applicant should be entitled to make  one
             frivolous  application  without  adverse  consequences.   That
             would plainly be an absurd result.  To give  efficacy  to  the
             Rules it must be intended that the paragraph should be read as
             making 'one or more' frivolous applications".

29.  It transpired  upon  more  detailed  consideration  of  the  other  two
    unreported decisions which I had brought to the parties' attention that
    no ruling had been given by the judges of the Upper Tribunal  in  those
    matters  as  to  the  issue  of  the  construction  of  the  expression
    'frivolous applications'.

30.  Ms Joshi maintained, notwithstanding the  reasoning  applied  by  Judge
    Woodcraft,  that  the  term  'frivolous  applications'  clearly   meant
    applications in the plural, and that one  frivolous  application  would
    not suffice to engage the rule. Mr Bates argued to the contrary.

31.  It is to be recalled that I had drawn the  parties'  attention  to  the
    provision in s.6 Interpretation Act 1978, which provides as follows:

         "6. Gender and number.

         In any Act, unless the contrary intention appears, -

             (a) words importing the masculine gender include the feminine;

             (b) words importing the feminine gender include the masculine;

             (c) words in the singular include the plural and words in  the
             plural include the singular."

    Both parties submitted that the provision applied to  the  construction
    of Acts of Parliament, but did  not  apply  to  the  interpretation  of
    immigration rules, which were not an Act  of  parliament.  However,  Mr
    Bates had already  argued  that  the  ordinary  meaning  of  'frivolous
    applications' included a single frivolous application, even without the
    assistance of section 6 of the Act.

    Discussion

    Procedural irregularity issue

32.  I do not find that it is made out to a balance  of  probabilities  that
    any specific concession was made by Ms Venables as to the relevance  of
    illegal working to the application  of  paragraph  320(11)  immigration
    rules.  The  judge's  note  of  Ms  Venables'  submissions  appears  to
    establish that she continued to rely upon illegal working as a relevant
    factor in the application of the rule. I do not find that  it  is  made
    out that where the judge records, during Ms  Joshi's  submissions,  the
    words 'Accept illegal  working  no  agg  circ',  that  this  represents
    anything said by Ms Venables, when questioned about her position in the
    middle of Ms Joshi submissions. There is nothing within  the  way  that
    that expression is set out  within  the  judge's  note  of  Ms  Joshi's
    submissions that establishes  at  the  note  represented  the  position
    adopted by the respondent, as opposed to the submission being  made  by
    the Appellant.

33.  Ms Venables' note does appear to confirm that  there  was  an  exchange
    between the judge and Ms Venables on this issue in submissions. It  was
    Ms Joshi's assertion that within the section of Ms Venables' note which
    read: 'rep relied on ZH - cannot say illegal working  aggravating  fact
    ...,  the  words  'cannot  say  illegal   working   aggravating   fact'
    represented the position taken by Ms Venables. However, I do  not  find
    that point is made out. The whole expression 'rep relied on ZH - cannot
    say illegal working aggravating fact ...'  could  easily  represent  Ms
    Venables' note of Ms Joshi's submission. Further,  it  is  not  at  all
    clear from what follows;  '...but I said when challenged by Ij  -  look
    at all evidence not just that to look  at...",  that  Ms  Venables  was
    there making any concession in the law that illegal working  could  not
    amount to aggravating circumstances.

34.  The final piece of evidence is the  recent  witness  statement  by  the
    sponsor. Whatever impression  the  sponsor  may  have  been  left  with
    listening to the submissions of the parties,  there  is  no  suggestion
    that she took a contemporaneous note. There are also typing  errors  in
    the most relevant  part  of  her  statement  representing  the  alleged
    exchange between the judge and Ms Venables: "...  'do  you  agree  with
    that?'  The Home Office lady said 'yes that it a correct'(sic)".  I  am
    not satisfied, considering  the  quality  of  that  evidence,  that  it
    represents clear evidence of a concession in law having  been  made  by
    the respondent during submissions.

35.  There remains, then, the assertion within the grounds  of  appeal  that
    Ms Venables made  a  concession  on  the  law.  The  assertion  is  not
    accompanied by any statement of truth by Ms Joshi  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, and Ms Joshi has not attempted to  adduce  any  contemporaneous
    note that she may or may not have taken at the time. The Appellant  was
    reminded as to the requirement for evidence to establish any allegation
    of procedural irregularity, and the Appellant has  chosen  to  evidence
    that allegation in the manner that he has, i.e. by  way  of  a  witness
    statement from the sponsor.

36.  I do not find that it has been established that the respondent  made  a
    concession in law before the judge.

    Relevance of illegal working

37.  The Appellant also argued that the authority  of  ZH  establishes  that
    illegal working was not to be treated as  an  aggravating  circumstance
    under 320(11) in any event.

38.  I do not find that such an argument is made out by  the  Appellant.  In
    ZH, the Court of Appeal  was  considering  the  application  of  former
    paragraph 276B of the rules, as it related to a person who had remained
    in United Kingdom unlawfully for 14 years. One requirement of the  rule
    was that having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
    it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to  remain
    on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

         (a)  age; and

         (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

         (c)  personal history, including character,  conduct,  associations
         and employment record; and

         (d)  domestic circumstances; and

         (e)  previous criminal record and the  nature  of  any  offence  of
         which the person has been convicted; and

         (f)  compassionate circumstances; and

         (g)  any representations received on the person's behalf;

39.  The Court of Appeal allowed ZH's appeal on the basis that the  Tribunal
    had made findings of fact which were unsustainable on the basis of  the
    evidence [14], and that the Tribunal had not  taken  into  account  the
    reason offered by ZH as to his use of a false identity  [16].  Further,
    'the practical question for the immigration judge is whether there  are
    any reasons in the public  interest  why  the  Appellant,  despite  his
    prolonged evasion of immigration controls, should not now be allowed to
    stay. To use the evasion itself as a reason is to defeat the purpose of
    the rule.' [18]. Further, in every r.276B case, the relevant nature  of
    the Appellant's stay was that it was unlawful, and its  extent  was  by
    definition 14 years or more. Since those were treated by  the  rule  as
    neutral gateway factors, they  could  not  be  double-counted  by  then
    placing them in the public interest  debit  column  [20].   The  public
    interest in an unlawful stay which had lasted  14  years  or  more  was
    treated by the rule as met by a grant of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    provided there were no countervailing factors which tilted  the  public
    interest balance the other way [20]. The use of a false identity  might
    be a relevant factor in gauging where  the  public  interest  lay,  but
    nothing in the rule accorded it any given weight,  much  less  made  it
    decisive [23].

40.  The 'gateway factors' for potential  entitlement  to  leave  to  remain
    under 276B of the rules for that Appellant, which the Court  of  Appeal
    described as being 'neutral' factors, were that his residence had  been
    unlawful, and was of 14 years. (In fact, the 14 years did not all  have
    to have been unlawful - under 276B, a  person  may  have  relied  on  a
    period of lawful leave followed by a period of overstaying.) The  Court
    held that to count evasion of immigration control itself  as  a  reason
    why leave to remain should not be grated was to defeat the  purpose  of
    the rule. But in so finding, the Court was not, I  find,  finding  that
    any and  all  forms  of  illegal  working  were  not  relevant  to  the
    application of that rule, which in any event is  a  different  rule  to
    paragraph 320(11).

41.  I find that the judge directed himself appropriately in  law  at  [33]-
    [34] and  gave  reasons  in  those  paragraphs  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant's working amounted to an aggravating circumstance, which  are
    sustainable in law.

42.  My finding in this particular case should not be taken as a  suggestion
    that illegal working will always amount to an aggravating  circumstance
    when considering the application of paragraph 320(11); rather,  I  find
    that in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  reasoned
    approached by the judge does not disclose any material  error  of  law,
    and the judge was entitled in the present case to treat the Appellant's
    illegal working as an aggravating circumstance.

    Construction of 'frivolous applications'

43   The Interpretation Act 1978 indicates  that  in  any  Act,  unless  the
    contrary intention appears, words in the singular  include  the  plural
    and words in the plural include the singular.  Applying  that  rule  of
    construction,  any  requirement  of   the   existence   of   'frivolous
    applications' would clearly  be  satisfied  by  the  existence  of  one
    frivolous application. However, the parties did not agree that the  act
    applied to immigration rules.

44.  However, even if it is the case that the Act does  not  apply  directly
    to  the  construction  of  the  immigration  rules,  the  Act  provides
    commonsense approach to the construction of legal terms  involving  the
    use of the singular, or plural, and that  one  should  be  taken  as  a
    reference to the other, unless the contrary intention appears.  I  note
    that there is no contrary intention expressed under 320(11);  there  is
    nothing within the rule which explicitly requires two or more frivolous
    applications.

45.  Further, the Immigration Rules  should  be  read  sensibly  recognising
    that they are statements of the  Secretary  of  State's  administrative
    policy (see the observations of Lord  Brown,  Justice  of  the  Supreme
    Court in the case of Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009]  UKSC  16).
    I am of the view that the words 'frivolous applications' can include  a
    single application, if deemed frivolous. I adopt the reasoning of Judge
    Woodcraft in his decision in HU/13634/2016, that 'it cannot  have  been
    the intention of the drafter of the Rules that every  applicant  should
    be  entitled  to  make  one  frivolous  application   without   adverse
    consequences.  That  would  plainly  be  an  absurd  result.   To  give
    efficacy to the Rules it must be intended that the paragraph should  be
    read as making 'one or more' frivolous applications".

46.  Although Ms Joshi attempted to address me on numerous  occasions  about
    the seriousness and circumstances of the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum, and whether as a matter of fact the application amounted  to  a
    'frivolous application', I pointed out to her that  there  was  not  in
    fact any challenge in the Appellant's grounds of appeal to the  judge's
    finding that the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  represented  a
    frivolous application.  That finding therefore  remains  extant  and  I
    reject any proposition that there needed to be more than one  frivolous
    application for that part of 320(11) to be engaged.

    Other matters

47.  The judge was aware that the application of 320(11) was  discretionary,
    and gave reasons at  [38]-[39]  for  finding  that  the  discretion  to
    exclude the Appellant should be exercised  in  the  present  case.  The
    judge  was  fully  aware  that  the  Appellant  had  made  a  voluntary
    departure, but the judge considered the circumstances in which that had
    taken place, and held that had the Appellant  not  been  found  working
    unlawfully, he would have remained at large in United Kingdom.

48.  Addressing paragraph 14 of  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    judge was manifestly aware that the application had been one for  leave
    to enter from abroad, and had been  aware  that  the  relationship  had
    formed whilst the Appellant  had  previously  been  present  in  United
    Kingdom. The grounds do not represent any form of cogent  challenge  to
    the judge's decision as to  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to
    refuse the human rights claim.

49.  I find no error in the judge's decision




    Notice of Decision

    The decision did not involve the making of any error of law

    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed


Signed   Date 16.3.20
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

