
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02118/2016
                                                               HU/02121/2016
                                                               HU/02125/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2018                             |On 2 May 2018                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    T V Y
                                    B S O
                                    E A O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. H. Anyiam, Counsel instructed by Universe
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore, promulgated  on  21  August  2017,  in
     which he allowed Ms TVY, Mr. BSO and Master EAO's appeals  against  the
     Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  to  grant  further  leave  to
     remain.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent,  and  to  Ms  TVY,  Mr.  BSO  and  Master  EAO  as  the
    Appellants, reflecting their positions as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that in  assessing  the  "reasonableness  test"  in
         section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the Judge  erred  in  law  due  to
         failure to take into account the  public  interests  consideration,
         including the immigration history of  the  parents  (MA  (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705)."

 4. The Appellants attended the hearing.  I heard  brief  submissions  from
    Mr. Clarke, following  which  I  stated  that,  although  the  decision
    involved the making of an error of law, this error was not material.


Error of law


  5. Paragraphs [19] to [21] of the decision contain  the  totality  of  the
     Judge's consideration of whether or not it is reasonable to expect  the
     third Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  At [20] the Judge states:

         "It is not reasonable to expect the Third Appellant  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom, where he was born and has lived his entire life and
         that the public interest therefore does not require the removal  of
         the First and Second Appellants."

  6. There is no consideration of the best interests of the third  Appellant
     with reference to the evidence.   There  is  no  consideration  of  the
     factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act, including  the  public
     interest.  The Judge simply states that because the third Appellant was
     born here, and has lived his entire life here, it is not reasonable  to
     expect  him  to  leave.   There  is  no  consideration  of  the   wider
     circumstances of the Appellants.  I find that this failure to  consider
     the overall circumstances of  the  Appellants  with  reference  to  the
     factors set out in section 117B, is an error of law.


  7. However, as accepted by Mr. Clarke at the hearing, the Respondent's own
     guidance indicates that, given that the third Appellant  is  a  British
     citizen, this error is not material.  He referred to the case of SF and
     others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).


  8. Further, Mr. Clarke stated that he was at a loss as to why the  grounds
     relied on a caution which the first Appellant had received, given  that
     it had not been raised in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  was  not
     raised at the hearing, and in circumstances where the Respondent's  own
     bundle was not served on the Tribunal until after the hearing ([11]  of
     the decision).  I do not attach any weight to this.


  9. Given that the third Appellant is a British citizen, and given that the
     Respondent's own guidance therefore indicates that it is not reasonable
     to expect him to leave the United Kingdom, his  parents,  who  are  his
     carers, should be granted leave  to  remain  in  accordance  with  this
     guidance.  The case  of  SF  stresses  the  importance  of  consistency
     between those cases which come before the Tribunal, and those which  do
     not.


 10. I therefore find that, although the Judge should  have  carried  out  a
     full assessment of the Appellants' circumstances, including the factors
     set out in section 117B, his failure to do so is not material,  as  was
     accepted by Mr. Clarke on behalf of the Respondent.


Decision


 11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
     a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


 12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   Date 27 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

