
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03766/2017
     HU/03768/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th October 2018                          |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                          mrs Ma (first Appellant)
                          ms Da (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Slatter, Counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal directed that there should be anonymity.  This
    direction continues.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Albania.  This appeal arises from the
    decision of the respondent on 17 February 2017 to refuse their
    application for leave to remain in the UK.  The appellants appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal where their appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Povey.  In a decision promulgated on 21 May 2018
    Judge Povey dismissed their appeals.  The appellants are now appealing
    against that decision.

 3. The first appellant was born in March 1989.  She is the mother of the
    second appellant who was born in November 2011.  The appellants entered
    the UK illegally on 5 December 2014.

 4. The second appellant has a number of health problems, most
    significantly a diagnosis of alacrimia in respect of which she
    undergoes close monitoring and has had surgical interventions.  It is
    noted in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that those treating
    the second appellant have concerns about the standard of care she would
    be likely to receive for her conditions in Albania.

 5. The judge considered the appeals under both Article 3 ECHR and Article
    8 ECHR.  In respect of Article 3 ECHR the judge found that the very
    high threshold in such cases was not satisfied.  In respect of Article
    8 ECHR the judge found that Article 8 was not engaged and as a
    consequence the second applicant's best interests and medical condition
    did not fall to be considered.

 6. At the error of law hearing Mr Jarvis accepted that the judge had
    materially erred in the approach taken to Article 8(1) ECHR by imposing
    too high a hurdle and that he ought to have considered Article 8(2).
    He emphasised that the Secretary of State's view was that the high
    threshold for Article 8(2) in medical cases was extremely unlikely to
    be met but acknowledged that he could not say that this outcome would
    be inevitable.  He agreed that the decision should be considered afresh
    given the absence of any Article 8 balancing exercise by the judge.

 7. Both Mr Jarvis and Mr Slatter submitted that the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I agree with Mr Jarvis, for the reasons he gave, that the decision
    contains an error of law.  I also agree that the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal given that a full assessment under
    Article 8, taking into account the best interests of the second
    appellant, is required.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a
judge other than Judge Povey.







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 31 October 2018               |




























