

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03357/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 August 2017                        |On 22 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                MUHARREM NELI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Raw, counsel instructed by Kilby Jones,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION
   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet who, by a  determination
      promulgated on 11 May 2017, dismissed his appeal  against  refusal  of
      his human rights claim, the appellant having asserted that there would
      be an impermissible infringement of rights protected by Article  8  of
      the ECHR if he were not granted leave to remain to enjoy  his  private
      and family life with his  wife,  a  British  citizen,  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The application  made  by  the  appellant  that  led  to  the
      decision under appeal in these proceedings was made  on  form  FLR(FP)
      and on it the applicant indicated that he wished it to  be  considered
      under the Partner Route.


   2. The judge summarised the appellant's immigration history  and  history
      of immigration applications as follows:
           "The appellant came to this country illegally in 1999.  Although
           he was an Albanian  national  he  made  an  asylum  claim  as  a
           Kosovan. His application was refused in  2000  but  he  did  not
           leave. He was removed on 22.4.4004. On 10.11.2004 he was refused
           a visa on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  Donna  Louise
           Woodward,  although  he  claims  that  he  based  it   on   that
           relationship because Peppy (his wife) did  not  have  indefinite
           leave to remain in the UK at  that  time.  His  application  for
           leave to enter the UK as the partner of Pepe Christiane  Prabowo
           was refused on 22.2.2006.  Disregarding the  fact  that  he  had
           been refused entry clearance twice, he entered the UK unlawfully
           2006 and spent 10 years illegally in the country  before  making
           the present application.


           On his application form, when asked at question 4.9  if  he  had
           ever been refused a visa for any country including the  UK,  the
           No box was ticked. When asked at question 4.10 if  he  had  ever
           been deported,  removed  or  otherwise  required  to  leave  any
           country including the UK in the past 10 years  the  No  box  was
           ticked."


   3.  The judge explained why, as this meant that the appellant  could  not
      meet the suitability requirements of the applicable immigration rules,
      this was an application that the respondent was correct to refuse:
           "The requirements for limited leave to remain as a  partner  are
           set out in  R-LTR  1.1.  R0LTR  1.1(d)  provides  that  (i)  the
           applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTR  Suitability
           Leave to Remain; (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of E-
           LTRP.1.2-1.2 and 2.1 and 2.2. and paragraph EX.1 applies....
           S-LTR.2.1 provides that the applicant will normally  be  refused
           on grounds of suitability if any of the paragraphs S-LTR.2.2-2.4
           apply. S-LTR.2.2 states  "Whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
           knowledge (a) false information,  representations  or  documents
           have been submitted in relation  to  the  application  including
           false information submitted to any person to obtain  a  document
           used in support of the application; or  (b)  there  has  been  a
           failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in   relation   to   the
           application". In this case the appellant's form did not disclose
           the fact that he had been refused two visas, even  though  there
           was a specific question asking if this had happened. I find that
           there was a failure to disclose  a  material  fact  relating  to
           whether he was refused a visa."
   4.  As  the  judge  had  observed,  that  meant  that   the   Suitability
      Requirements of the rule were not met, whether or not the  failure  to
      disclose was with the  appellant's  knowledge.  This  meant  that  the
      application fell to be refused  on  the  basis  that  the  Suitability
      Requirements had not been met:
           "At the hearing, Mr  O'Callaghan  (counsel  for  the  appellant)
           stated that the appellant's representatives had told him on  the
           phone that the error on the form was theirs.  The  appellant  in
           his statement had said the caseworker made  a  mistake.  In  the
           event that someone employed by the solicitor had  completed  the
           form incorrectly, I find it reasonable  to  expect  a  statement
           from the firm or  the  relevant  person  to  have  attended  the
           hearing.  The  drafted  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  by   the
           appellant's solicitors do not make any mention of it being their
           fault that the visa refusals were not disclosed. In any event S-
           LTR 2.2 states whether or not the failure to  disclose  material
           facts was to the applicant's knowledge  and  in  this  case  the
           appellant had signed the declaration  on  the  application  form
           stating that the information in the form was accurate  and  that
           he was aware that it was an  offence  to  make  a  statement  or
           declaration that he knew to be false or did not  believe  to  be
           true. I find that as a material  fact  was  not  disclosed,  the
           present application is one that would  normally  be  refused  on
           grounds of suitability. I find that as the application falls  to
           be  refused  under  Sections  S-LTR  he  does  not  satisfy  the
           requirements of R-LTR 1.1(d)(i)"

   5. Next, the judge found that, in any event, the application fell  to  be
      refused on the basis that the appellant did not meet  the  Eligibility
      Requirements of the rules. This was  because  he  was  in  the  United
      Kingdom in breach of immigration rules so that he could not satisfy E-
      LTRP2.2 and he could not meet the requirements of EX.1 because  absent
      were the insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  his  partner
      continuing outside the United Kingdom.


   6. In explaining why she arrived at  that  conclusion,  the  judge  noted
      that:
           "The appellant is aged 37, who speaks Albanian, the language  of
           his home country. His parents live there. He has not  given  any
           satisfactory  explanation  why  he  would  be  unable  to   seek
           employment in his country of birth, where he lived until he  was
           19 and where he lived from 2004 to 2006. He spent his  childhood
           and formative years there.


           The appellant's wife is now a British citizen. However,  she  is
           of Indonesian ethnicity. She has learned to speak  English.  She
           has not put forward any satisfactory explanation why  she  could
           not learn Albanian, especially as the appellant would be able to
           help her. It  is  claimed  she  would  have  difficulty  finding
           employment. She is a nursery nurse and no information  has  been
           provided from Albania of research undertaken  into  finding  the
           possibilities of  employment.  The  appellant's  family  are  in
           Albania and would be in a position to offer  support  whist  the
           appellant and his wife settle into life in  Albania.  I  do  not
           find  that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  that  there   are
           insurmountable obstacles and that the  "high  hurdle"  has  been
           overcome..."


      The reference to a "high hurdle" to be confronted was taken from a
      reference by the judge to Agyago [2015] EWCA Civ 440 in which, the
      judge noted:


           "Sales LJ stated "the phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used
           in this paragraph (EX.1) of the Rules clearly imposes a high
           hurdle to overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the
           Rules. The test is significantly more demanding that a mere test
           of whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to continue
           their family life outside the United Kingdom."
   7. There are two grounds upon which the appellant  sought  permission  to
      appeal. The first ground is that the  judge  "acted  unreasonably"  in
      rejecting the appellant's application for his failure  to  declare  in
      the application form the two entry clearance refusals and his  removal
      in 2004. The grounds assert that:
           "The First Tier Judge rejected  the  explanation  for  the  sole
           reason that the appellant's solicitor  had  neither  provided  a
           statement, nor  attended  the  hearing...  it  was  nevertheless
           incumbent upon  the  FTJ  to  have  given  some  weight  to  the
           representations of a solicitor, an officer of the  court,  which
           were conveyed to the First Tier Tribunal by a member of the Bar.
           The First Tier Judge gave no weight  to  the  instructions  that
           were relayed to the court by  counsel  and  thereby  adopted  an
           erroneous and unreasonable approach to the evidence."
      The grounds continue by complaining that the judge was wrong  to  find
      that the asserted error by the solicitor was not  significant  because
      the appellant had himself signed the declaration on the  form  to  the
      effect that the information contained within was accurate.
   8. There are several difficulties with that ground. First,  there  is  no
      specific finding of fact made by the judge, anywhere in her  decision,
      that this was a deliberate misrepresentation by the appellant. To that
      extent, the grounds are simply wrong to assert that  the  sole  reason
      for rejecting the appellant's account was the absence of evidence from
      the appellant's solicitors. Certainly, the judge was  sceptical  about
      the appellant's claim that  he  was  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the
      refusals had not been disclosed, because he  had  himself  signed  the
      declaration at the end of the form to the effect that the  information
      provided was true to the best of his knowledge. The judge recorded the
      submission made to the effect that this was an error by the solicitors
      but observed that, in any event  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
      suitability requirement whether or not the failure to disclose was  to
      his knowledge. As I have said above, the judge then went on to explain
      why the application failed also on the basis of the  failure  to  meet
      the Eligibility Requirements.


   9. Secondly, we now have a  witness  statement  from  the  solicitor  who
      assisted the appellant in completing the form. In that  statement  she
      confirms that it was  her  who  completed  the  form.  Addressing  the
      question posed on the form as to whether the appellant had  previously
      been refused a visa, she explained why she ticked the box indicating a
      negative answer:
           "I did ask the appellant this question  and  he  did  answer  no
           hence I ticked this box. However we  do  not  sit  next  to  the
           client to read the question whilst we speak and I do believe  he
           could have genuinely misheard me thus  causing  me  to  make  an
           error in completing this form."
      The solicitor added that the applicant has  since  confirmed  that  he
      would have answered "yes" if he had properly understood  the  question
      that had been read out to him. Thus, this was  not  an  error  by  the
      solicitor at all. She completed the form precisely in accordance  with
      the instructions given to her by her client.


  10. A further difficulty with this ground of challenge is that it requires
      the Tribunal to accept that the fact of the appellant having signed  a
      declaration to the effect that the information provided in  completing
      the form  is  correct  is  completely  meaningless  and  that  nothing
      whatsoever flows from the fact of that declaration having been  signed
      by the  appellant.  If  that  were  so,  then  taken  to  its  logical
      conclusion, despite the significant nature of this particular form  in
      terms of national interest considerations, this  would  mean  that  no
      weight could properly  be  placed  upon  such  a  declaration  on  any
      official application form. A further example serves to illustrate that
      this cannot be correct.   The  certificate  signed  by  a  witness  in
      criminal proceedings  whose  statement  is  introduced  into  evidence
      pursuant to  section  9  of  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  1967  is  no
      different, the witness certifying under his own signature the contents
      of a witness statement not  written  or  typed  by  himself,  as  will
      usually be the case, are true and that he risks prosecution if he says
      in it anything he knows to be false or does not believe to be true. As
      with the form with which we  are  concerned  in  this  appeal,  it  is
      inconceivable that the signatory of such a declaration could or should
      be excused liability for it on the basis that he had not  bothered  to
      read the information that he had certified to be correct.


  11. For the appellant, Mr Raw submitted that the judge fell into error  in
      failing to give appropriate weight to the confirmation by counsel  for
      the appellant that he had spoken to the solicitor that it was her  who
      had made the mistake in giving the wrong answer.  Ms  Ahmed  submitted
      that the judge was plainly entitled to reach the view  he  did.  There
      was no mention in the grounds of appeal of a mistake by the solicitor;
      the appellant had himself signed the declaration that the  information
      provided was true and there was no evidence filed by the solicitors to
      confirm that the error was theirs.


  12. Ms Ahmad is plainly correct. As I have observed  above,  we  now  know
      that, despite the vocabulary used by the solicitor in  her  statement,
      she made no mistake at all and so the judge  was  clearly  correct  to
      reject the suggestion that the error was that of the  solicitor.  That
      disposes of the first ground, which falls away  both  because  of  the
      absence of a specific finding of fact to  the  effect  that  the  non-
      disclosure was something that  occurred  with  the  knowledge  of  the
      appellant and because if, properly understood, it is implicit  in  the
      finding articulated by the judge  that  she  did  find  the  appellant
      knowingly made a false statement,  that  was  a  rational  and  lawful
      finding open on the evidence.

  13. Mr Raw did not pursue the second ground, recognising  that  permission
      to appeal was granted only in respect of the first  ground,  discussed
      above.  However, for the sake of  completeness,  I  record  that  this
      ground complains that the reasoning of the judge, reproduced above  at
      paragraph 6, leading to  the  finding  of  fact  that  there  were  no
      exceptional circumstances or insurmountable obstacles  preventing  the
      appellant's wife from relocating to Albania with her husband disclosed
      material legal error.  It is not altogether easy  to  draw  from  that
      ground the nature of the legal error said to have  been  made  by  the
      judge. This ground  expresses  disagreement  with  the  reasoning  and
      findings of the judge and categorises her conclusion  as  unreasonable
      but there is nothing at all unreasonable, irrational or unlawful about
      the logic and reasoning that led to this conclusion.


  14. This was a fact-based assessment for the judge  to  make  and,  having
      heard oral evidence and submissions from both representatives, she was
      best placed to do so. She  directed  herself  correctly  in  law,  had
      regard to all that the parties chose to put before her,  left  out  of
      account no material consideration and gave clear, cogent  and  legally
      sufficient reasons for arriving at conclusions that were plainly  open
      to her on the evidence. In short, her conclusion is unassailable.
Summary of decision:
  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet made no error of  law,  material  or
      otherwise, and her decision to dismiss the appeal is to stand


  16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
Signed           [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 21 August 2017
