
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03093/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2017                  |On 11th December 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford, promulgated on 28th January 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 19th January 2017.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on [ ]  1992.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  20th  January
    2016, refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his marriage to a British partner, [GD], who was expecting his
    child.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence both from the  Appellant  and  from  [GD]  and
    found neither to be credible witnesses.  This was because the Appellant
    was asked when his relationship had started  and  he  said  it  was  in
    September 2015.  He was asked when he and [GD] started living  together
    and he said it was in March 2016.  They had both agreed to  marry.   He
    had proposed to  her  (paragraph  8).   In  the  photographs  that  the
    Appellant and his partner produced, however,  there  are  date  stamps,
    which showed that they were together in June 2015.  When the  Appellant
    had been asked in cross-examination, "Were you kissing like that  three
    months before the relationship started", he had said "yes" and when the
    question was put again, the ambiguity was not resolved  (see  paragraph
    15).  The judge held that the parties had been given "ample opportunity
    to explain why several of the photographs predated the time  when  they
    said they met for the first time even though the  photographs  were  of
    them spending time together" (paragraph 20).  There  was  evidence,  by
    the time of the appeal hearing, of the birth of their  son,  with  whom
    the Appellant spent time, but the judge was  not  satisfied  that  they
    shared family life together or that the Appellant and his partner  were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship together (see paragraph 22).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grant of Permission

 5. On 6th September 2017, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge, in focusing on the discrepancy between the  photographs
    which bore dates of June, July, and August 2015,  and  the  declaration
    that they met in September 2015, may have led the judge  to  fall  into
    error in assessing the relationship, and the Appellant's  paternity  of
    his partner's child, when considering the evidence as a whole.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me on 17th November 2017 Mr Maqsood, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the primary  issue  had  always
    been whether the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his  British
    citizen partner was genuine and subsisting.  They had  said  that  they
    started the relationship in September 2015.   There  were  photographs,
    however, that predated what had been declared, showing that  they  were
    together in an intimate pose in June, July and August  2015.   However,
    Mr Maqsood submitted that  this  was  the  only  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence that the parties gave (see paragraph 8 of the  determination).
    However, this was a wholly inadequate basis  upon  which  to  determine
    that the parties, who by this stage were  living  together  and  had  a
    child, were not in a genuine and subsisting relationship,  or  did  not
    enjoy family life together.

 7. Second, it was  also  inadequate  because  it  ignored  other  evidence
    provided at the hearing, which the judge found to have been  plausible.
    For example, the judge recorded how the Appellant "takes care of  their
    son who was born in Kettering on 15th July  2016"  and  is  "a  British
    national", and both the Appellant and his partner were consistent as to
    the poor relationship which the Appellant's partner  enjoyed  with  her
    mother, together with  the  causes  for  that  poor  relationship  (see
    paragraph 10).  The  judge  was  also  satisfied  that,  "she  and  the
    Appellant were consistent in their evidence about what he had given her
    as a Christmas present" (paragraph 14).

 8. Third, the  GP's  letters  showed  that  the  Appellant's  partner  was
    undergoing depression pending  the  application  for  a  visa  for  the
    Appellant, and this too pointed towards demonstrating that they were in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship  together.   The  judge  did  not
    refer to this.

 9. Fourth, it was also ignored that prior  to  the  marriage  application,
    there had been a previous application on the basis that the two of them
    were living together as "unmarried partners" on 8th October  2015,  and
    this had been refused on the basis that they did not share a family and
    private  life  on  25th  January  2016  (see   paragraph   1   of   the
    determination).  The judge had stated this fact at the outset  but  had
    failed to draw upon the  implications  of  this  for  the  purposes  of
    deciding  whether  they  were  now  in   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship, having married and had a son together.

10. Fifth, at page 31 of the Appellant's bundle, there was a  letter  dated
    21st December 2016, from the Appellant's wife, that she  was  receiving
    counselling, and this was less than a month  before  the  date  of  the
    hearing, and it plainly showed that she was  going  through  a  lot  of
    worry and stress on behalf of her husband,  wanting  to  stay  in  this
    country as her husband.  No reference was made to this by the judge.

11. Sixth, the judge stated (at paragraph 26) that the Appellant had a poor
    immigration history, but there was no suggestion to this effect in  the
    refusal letter, and the judge failed to make out a case  for  why  this
    conclusion had been arrived at.  Finally, there was  now  DNA  evidence
    provided, showing that the Appellant is the  father  of  the  child  in
    question, which is evidence from a government approved organisation.

12. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the DNA evidence was  not  before
    the judge and it had not been presented in a proper manner today,  with
    samples from other relatives shown.

13. Second, both parties to the relationship had married after the date  of
    the decision against them given by the Respondent Secretary of State.

14. Third, there was no duty upon the Secretary of State  to  undertake  an
    investigation into the nature and quality of the relationship  for  the
    ensuing 70 days after their marriage.

15. Fourth, the judge gave adequate reasons, which were rational,  and  not
    perverse,  for  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  she  did,  and   the
    ambiguities between the photographs taken, and the  statement  of  when
    the relationship began, still have not been clarified or resolved.

16. Fifth, the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been  named  on  the  birth
    certificate as the father of the  child  was  not  dispositive  of  the
    question that he was the genuine father, and the  judge  had  so  said,
    explaining that the naming of the father on a  birth  certificate  does
    not mean legally that he is to be recognised as the natural  father  of
    the child (see paragraph 21).

17. Sixth, the judge observed that the parties before the hearing had  been
    "given  repeated  opportunities"  (paragraph   18)   to   clarify   the
    discrepancy raised by their evidence, and had failed to do so.

18. Seventh, there were alleged witnesses to the relationship, including  a
    letter from a [US], the  Appellant's  landlady,  but  neither  she  nor
    anybody else was in attendance at the hearing to be cross-examined.

19. Finally, it was not "unduly harsh" to expect the Appellant  to  return,
    with or without his wife, to India, and  to  make  a  new  application,
    given the Court of Appeal judgment in Agyarko, which  showed  that  the
    threshold for so demonstrating, was a high one.

20. In reply, Mr Maqsood submitted that the criticism of  the  findings  of
    the judge were not that she was drawing attention to  an  inconsistency
    in the  evidence,  which  was  plainly  known  to  exist  and  remained
    unexplained, but to the fact that she had attached undue weight to this
    inconsistency, in the light of other  compelling  evidence,  that  went
    both to the genuineness of  the  relationship,  and  the  existence  of
    family life between the parties and their child.

Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

22. First, whereas it is right that the Appellant and  his  partner  failed
    consistently to provide an explanation for why there were  photographs,
    which preceded by some three months, the date of their claimed start of
    relationship, there was plainly other evidence which helped dispel  any
    doubts about the genuineness of the relationship and the claimed  right
    to family life.   This  evidence  consisted  of  such  matters  as  the
    Christmas present that the Appellant gave his wife (paragraph  14)  and
    detailed knowledge on the part of the Appellant about reasons  why  his
    wife had a poor relationship with her mother, together with "the  cause
    of that relationship not being a good one" (paragraph 10).  At the same
    time also, there is evidence that, with the child  being  born  to  the
    couple, the Appellant "takes care of their son" (paragraph 10).

23. Second, there is the question as to what the  identified  inconsistency
    in the evidence actually went to.  If  there  were  photographs,  which
    preceded by three months, the date when the Appellant and  his  partner
    claimed to have started their relationship, namely, in September  2015,
    this did not show that they were not in  a  relationship  at  all.   If
    anything, it showed that the claim that  their  relationship  began  in
    September 2015 was incorrect,  because  there  were  photographs,  date
    marked, going back to June, July  and  August,  which  showed  them  in
    intimate pose, which only demonstrated the depth of  the  relationship,
    and one which was subsequently  borne  out  by  events  that  followed,
    namely, the marriage and birth of their son, with whom they are  living
    at present.  The error, therefore, was not a material one on  the  part
    of the parties to the appeal.  The frustration, at their not being able
    to explain the discrepancy, may  well  have  been  evident,  given  the
    answer that the Appellant repeatedly gave when asked, "Were you kissing
    like that three months before the relationship started",  to  which  he
    replied, "yes"  (paragraph  15),  but  this  does  not  show  that  the
    relationship had not actually started as early as June 2015, or was not
    in existence at the time when they claimed  the  relationship  to  have
    started, namely, in September 2015.

Re-making the Decision

24. I re-make the decision on the basis of the findings of the  Immigration
    Judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed.

26. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th December 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or  is  payable
I make a fee award of the amount that has been paid or is payable.

Signed                                  Date

Judge Juss

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal                 6th December 2017

