
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03902/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2 March 2020                     |On: 17 March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     DB
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Cheng, instructed by Topstone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 17 July  1985.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cockrill dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision of 15 February 2019 refusing his human rights  claim  further
      to a Deportation Order issued against him under section 32(5)  of  the
      UK Borders Act 2007 on the same day.



Background to the Appeal

   2. The background  to  this  case  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
      appellant entered the United Kingdom on 14 August 2002 as  a  visitor,
      at the age of 17 years. On 28 March 2003  he  applied  for  indefinite
      leave to remain as a dependant of his mother and was granted ILR on 28
      August 2003.

   3. On 30 September 2013 the appellant  was  convicted  of  one  count  of
      dangerous driving and one count of handling stolen goods and  received
      a sentence for each of four  months'  imprisonment  suspended  for  24
      months, to run consecutively. On 19 August 2018 he  was  convicted  of
      conspiracy to supply class A drugs,  crack  cocaine,  diamorphine  and
      heroin, and was sentenced to 69 months' imprisonment. As a  result  of
      that conviction the appellant was served with a decision to deport him
      pursuant to the Immigration Act 1971 and  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,
      dated 19 October 2018, and was invited to respond to the decision.

   4. The appellant responded on 15 November 2018, in a notice under section
      120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in  which  he
      made a human rights claim based on his family life  with  his  British
      partner OF and British children, M (born 5 October 2017) and  D  (born
      27 November 2006) with whom he had had,  prior  to  his  detention,  a
      direct and active involvement. The appellant also referred to the fact
      that his mother had a lot of medical  issues  and  that  he  was  also
      involved in looking after her in the UK. It was submitted that removal
      of the appellant would be  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  his
      children and would be in breach of Article 8 owing to the strength  of
      his family life.

   5. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  in  a
      decision of 15 February  2019.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant did not have a Zambrano derivative right of residence as his
      children could remain in the UK and be cared for by their  mother,  as
      was the case  currently.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  best
      interests of the children were to remain in the UK with  their  mother
      and that it would not be unduly harsh for his partner and children  to
      remain in the UK without him. He could not, therefore, meet the family
      life exception to deportation. Neither could he meet the private  life
      exception since, whilst it was accepted  that  he  had  been  lawfully
      resident in the UK for most of his life, it was not accepted  that  he
      was socially and culturally integrated in the UK or that  there  would
      be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Jamaica.  The
      respondent considered that there were no very compelling circumstances
      outweighing the public interest in  the  appellant's  deportation  and
      that his deportation would not breach Article 8.

   6.   The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal  was  heard
      by Judge Cockrill in the First-tier Tribunal on 6 September  2019  and
      was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  17  September  2019.  The
      judge heard from the appellant and his partner, noting that  prior  to
      his imprisonment they had been spending five  to  six  nights  a  week
      together at his partner's  address  but  that  he  used  his  mother's
      address as his official address to prevent his partner from losing her
      benefits. The appellant's  partner's  evidence  was  that  she  was  a
      teacher and had not known of the appellant's criminal activities, that
      their son could not cope if his father was deported,  that  she  could
      not afford to go to Jamaica to visit the appellant, that she had  been
      in the UK for 31 years and had no roots in Jamaica and  that  she  had
      had various medical scares. The judge also heard from the  appellant's
      mother and from his friends. The judge noted that the appellant  could
      not avail himself of the exceptions in paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  or
      paragraph 399A of the immigration rules because of the length  of  his
      sentence, which was over four years, and concluded that he  could  not
      meet the test of very compelling  circumstances.  He  found  that  the
      appellant's  deportation  would  not  constitute  a   disproportionate
      interference with his family and private life and that there would  be
      no breach of Article 8 and he accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on lengthy grounds which I attempt to summarise as  follows:  firstly,
      that the judge had made perverse or irrational  findings  on  material
      matters and that he had  failed  to  apply  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
      independent social worker's report and other evidence  concerning  the
      appellant's son as well as to the evidence of the  appellant's  caring
      responsibilities for his mother; secondly that the judge  had  made  a
      misdirection in law, in particular in his consideration of the 'unduly
      harsh' test; thirdly that the judge had failed to  consider  the  best
      interests of the appellant's children; and fourthly that the judge had
      failed to consider the human rights of the applicant and  his  British
      born children.

   8. Permission was granted on 16 January 2020 in the  First-tier  Tribunal
      on the basis that the judge had arguably failed to consider  the  best
      interests of the appellant's children.



Appeal Hearing and Submissions

   9. At the hearing both parties made submissions. Ms Cheng submitted  that
      the judge made a perverse and irrational decision in  concluding  that
      there was nothing  exceptional  about  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and his son, particularly in light of the independent social
      worker's report of the special bond between them. The judge had failed
      to give proper consideration to the strong relationship between father
      and son and had failed to give proper consideration to  the  emotional
      impact of separation on the appellant's son.  He  failed  to  consider
      that the appellant and his son would not see each other  again  if  he
      was deported. The judge also failed to consider that the appellant had
      no links to Jamaica as his family was all in the UK  and  his  brother
      had been shot dead in Jamaica. There was also a  failure  to  consider
      that there were no aggravating factors  and  that  the  appellant  had
      shown remorse. There was no risk of the appellant re-offending.

  10. Ms Isherwood submitted  that  the  appellant's  submissions  had  gone
      beyond the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission, and  in  any
      event were simply a re-arguing of the case. She relied upon  the  case
      of RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT
      123 in  submitting  that  the  tests  for  'unduly  harsh'  and  'very
      compelling circumstances' were  extremely  demanding.  The  judge  had
      taken all  relevant  matters  into  account  and  had  considered  the
      independent social worker's report  and  the  best  interests  of  the
      children. Nothing presented by the appellant met the high threshold of
      showing 'very compelling circumstances'.



Consideration and findings

  11.  I agree with Ms Isherwood that the  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  and
      submissions were essentially a re-arguing of the appellant's  case.  I
      find no merit at all in the assertion that the judge did not  consider
      the strong relationship between the appellant and his son, or  in  the
      assertion in Ms Cheng's submissions that the  judge  focussed  on  the
      appellant's son performance in football but  failed  to  consider  the
      emotional impact on his son of separation.

  12.  On  the  contrary,  the  judge  clearly  gave   full   and   detailed
      consideration to all the evidence relating to the relationship between
      father and son, referring to the specific evidence at [16], namely the
      letter written by the appellant's son, a letter from his son's  school
      referring to some incidents of disruptive behaviour,  the  appellant's
      partner's statement and the report from the independent social worker.
      At [28] to [31] the judge noted  the  appellant's  partner's  evidence
      about the role he played in his son's life and  the  impact  upon  the
      children of his removal from the UK. At [51] the judge took account of
      the  fact  that  the  appellant's  son  had  been  able,  despite  the
      separation  caused  by  his  father's  imprisonment,  to  progress  in
      developing his skills as a footballer and to perform satisfactorily at
      school, but he also considered, at [49] and  [51],  the  negative  and
      emotionally adverse impact that separation would cause. In so doing he
      had full regard to the report from the independent social worker as to
      the situation of the appellant's children, to  which  he  referred  at
      [49], and he went on to apply the social worker's conclusions  in  his
      assessment of the children's best interests. Permission was granted on
      the basis  that  the  judge  arguably  failed  to  consider  the  best
      interests of the children, a view which  I  find  somewhat  surprising
      when it is plain that the judge had full regard to the children's best
      interests and considered the matter in the  context  of  the  relevant
      case law.

  13. Although the main focus of the grounds and submissions was the judge's
      assessment of the impact of deportation on the appellant's son,  there
      were also  assertions  about  the  judge's  failure  to  consider  the
      appellant's relationship with his partner and mother, his lack of ties
      to Jamaica, the lack of  aggravating  factors  and  the  prospects  of
      rehabilitation with his partner's support. However, the judge  plainly
      had regard to all relevant matters, considering at [52] and  [53]  the
      appellant's partner and mother and, at [55], his family and other ties
      to the UK and to Jamaica. At [47] the judge considered the appellant's
      offending and the strong public interest in deportation  in  light  of
      the gravity of the offence. As Ms Isherwood submitted with  regard  to
      rehabilitation and family support, the  appellant's  family  were  all
      present and supporting him at the time he committed the offences.

  14. Accordingly, the judge gave full  and  careful  consideration  to  all
      relevant matters and accorded appropriate weight  to  the  appellant's
      close relationship with his family members, to the best  interests  of
      his children and to the impact of deportation upon his family.  As  Ms
      Isherwood  properly  submitted,  the  test  for   demonstrating   that
      separation is 'unduly harsh' is a high one. The Upper Tribunal  in  RA
      at [17], quoting from [27] of KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC  53,  confirmed  that
      there had to be something more than  the  outcome  being  'severe'  or
      'bleak'. The test for showing 'very compelling circumstances' over and
      above undue harshness was particularly high and, as found  in  RA,  at
      [22], was "extremely demanding". For the reasons  fully  and  properly
      given by the judge, there was nothing  in  the  appellant's  evidence,
      including his close relationship with his  son,  which  went  anywhere
      near meeting that threshold. The judge was fully and properly entitled
      to reach such a conclusion. There was nothing perverse in his findings
      and, on the contrary,  his  decision  was  one  which  was  fully  and
      properly open to him on the evidence before him.

  15. For all of these reasons I find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision and I uphold the decision.



DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity



    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  In  view  of  the
    involvement of children in these  proceedings,  I  continue  the  order
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 3 March 2020

