
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/03174/2017
      & HU/03176/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 November 2018                  |On 29 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 YVR and AGY
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, of Counsel, instructed by BIC Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants are minors and half siblings born respectively on  3
         February 2002 and 12 October 2005. They are South African nationals
         and entered the UK on 5 July 2016 as visitors accompanied by AY who
         is the father of the second appellant and step-father of the first.
         AY is a British  national.  He  was  previously  in  a  nine-  year
         relationship with M, the mother of the appellants, but is now in  a
         relationship with MD who entered the UK on a Tier 2  visa  and  was
         subsequently granted 30 months' discretionary leave as a partner on
         27 July 2018. AY was awarded full custody rights by a South African
         court in September 2013 because the mother of  the  appellants  was
         not considered to be a fit parent.


      2. On 30 November 2016, the appellants sought to remain  with  AY  but
         their application was refused under paragraph 322(1) and (2) on the
         basis that there was no provision to vary  their  visitors'  status
         and that deception had been used to obtain their  entry  clearance.
         AY accepts he always intended for them to  stay  here  permanently.
         They appealed on human rights grounds and their  appeal  was  heard
         and dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  by  way  of  a
         determination promulgated on 26 March 2018.


      3. The appellants had been living with AY and  his  partner  in  South
         Africa but it is claimed that following  a  particularly  harrowing
         experience of burglary, AY and his  partner  moved  to  the  UK  in
         December 2015 leaving the children with their maternal  grandfather
         until they could settle themselves here.


      4. Judge Fox considered that whilst the children  themselves  had  not
         practised deception under paragraph 322(2), overlooking  that  fact
         would  essentially  mean  that   any   adult   could   make   false
         representations  involving   children   and   suffer   no   adverse
         consequences.  He found that this  rule  fell  within  the  general
         rules for refusing applications under paragraph 298 and accordingly
         concluded  that  the  appellants  could  not  succeed   under   the
         Immigration Rules.


      5. The judge then went on to consider article 8 and the best interests
         of the children. He found that although they had a good family life
         with AY, they had been unilaterally removed from South  Africa  and
         hence from the contact with their mother that had been  recommended
         in the court order.  He concluded that their best interests were to
         return to South Africa  and  for  an  informed  assessment  of  the
         position and future best interests of the children to be undertaken
         in conjunction with the authorities.


      6. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         O'Brien on 4 July 2018 and the matter then  came  before  me  on  6
         September 2018. Three grounds were argued. The first was  that  the
         appellants had not themselves practised deception,  that  paragraph
         322(2) required the applicant himself to be the one using deception
         but that the rule was, in any event,  discretionary  and  that  the
         judge  had  failed  to  consider   the   exercise   of   discretion
         particularly given that all the other requirements of the rules had
         been met. The second ground was that the judge's  approach  to  the
         court order was erroneous  and  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
         children had been unlawfully removed from South Africa.  The  third
         complaint concerned the best interests of the children.  They  were
         now established in school and had settled down well.  AY's  partner
         had been granted leave on the basis of her relationship to him  and
         they had established a close family unit.


      7. On 13 September 2018 I set aside Judge Fox's determination for  the
         reasons given in my  judgement  and  which  I  reproduce  here  for
         convenience:


           "20. I deal with each of the grounds in turn although I take the
           view that it is the cumulative effect of all three  issues  that
           lead me to conclude that the decision is not sustainable.



           21. There is logic in the judge's  interpretation  of  paragraph
           322(2). Plainly the rules cannot  have  meant  to  permit  false
           representations and deception made by an  adult  in  respect  of
           children to draw no  adverse  consequences.  Plainly  also,  the
           relevant provision  of  the  rule  does  not  require  that  the
           deception has to have been  practised  by  the  applicant.  That
           ground on its own would not therefore have persuaded me that the
           judge had erred. The stronger point in respect of this  argument
           is that the application of this provision was discretionary  and
           given the  particular  circumstances,  there  should  have  been
           consideration as to  whether  the  provision  should  have  been
           applied. I cannot see that the judge has engaged with this issue
           at all.   Nor has there been any consideration of the  Chikwamba
           principles in assessing proportionality.  This  is  particularly
           important given the inference that the requirements of the rules
           have been met. These are errors and they  are  material  because
           they impact of the possible outcome of the appeal.




           22. The issue of the court order is  a  further  difficulty.  It
           does appear that the order is a final document and that there is
           scope within it for a  change  of  residence  for  the  children
           without further intervention. To  that  extent,  therefore,  the
           judge's focus on the order appears to have skewed  his  findings
           to some  extent.  Given  the  importance  of  the  issues  under
           consideration, I am unable to find that  the  conclusions  about
           the court document are sustainable. There  are,  however,  valid
           concerns raised  about  the  probative  value  of  the  mother's
           statement particularly when it is maintained that she  is  unfit
           to make decisions (at 71 and 75) and where the signature differs
           so greatly from that which appears on the court order and  where
           the signature on the  more  recent  letters  are  not  sworn  or
           witnessed and where I have no copy  of  her  passport  or  other
           document bearing  a  signature  to  compare  it  with.  I  would
           therefore direct that a  sworn  affidavit  be  obtained  by  the
           appellants' representative to resolve this concern.




           23. Finally, there is the question of the best interests of  the
           children. They had written statements setting out their  wishes,
           but these were not given any weight  by  the  judge  who  found,
           without any good reason, that they would have been influenced by
           AY. A balance assessment of their best interests  has  not  been
           undertaken given the lack of importance given to their views and
           the undue weight given to the court order".



      8.  The  following  findings  were  preserved:  (1)  AY   made   false
         representations when bringing the appellants to the UK; (2) AY is a
         British citizen and is present and settled in the UK; (3) the first
         appellant is his step daughter and  the  second  appellant  is  his
         biological son; (4) the appellants do not lead  independent  lives;
         (5) the maintenance and accommodation requirements of paragraph 298
         are met; (6) there is family life between the  appellants  and  AY;
         (7)  AY  and  his  partner  are  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship; (8) AY is a  positive  influence  and  a  stabilising
         force for the appellants and  is  devoted  to  them;  (9)  AGY  has
         developmental issues and is susceptible to depression; (10) AY  has
         a good relationship with the maternal grandfather of the appellants
         ; (11) AY is not subject to immigration control in South Africa and
         his partner, MD, has maintained her  professional  ties  there  and
         (12) AY is financially self-sufficient.


      9. The Hearing


     10. I heard evidence from the sponsor, AY, the  second  appellant,  YVR
         and the sponsor's partner, MD.  AY gave evidence first. He  adopted
         his statements and confirmed the contents as true and accurate.  He
         stated that he was now working as a postman but his  hours  allowed
         him to be home for the children after school. He  stated  that  his
         parents were deceased and he had no family left in South Africa. He
         had uncles, cousins and a stepbrother in the UK.  He  said  that  M
         lived with her  father,  OJR,  and  his  partner.  M's  mother  was
         deceased. MY was his eldest child.  She  had  lived  with  her  own
         mother in South  Africa  and  when  she  completed  schooling,  she
         applied for an ancestral visa and was now living with him. She  had
         entered the UK earlier this year.


     11. When asked about the  contact  between  the  appellants  and  their
         mother, he stated that they spoke on the phone every week. She  had
         been living with them at her father's house before they came to the
         UK. He said that he had discussed future visits with her and it was
         planned that the appellants would visit South Africa  annually  and
         stay with OJR during school holidays. AY would  provide  them  with
         funds for their maintenance. OJR was in his  sixties  and  in  good
         health. Long term, he was concerned that the children would not  be
         happy there. There were accommodation issues and they had to  share
         a room. He was also concerned about M so  they  would  have  to  be
         under OJR's care. It would also be difficult to them to  return  to
         school there and they would behind in Afrikaans  as  they  had  not
         used it since they left.


     12. AY said that M had found some work but had now taken  up  studying.
         He did not know whether she was currently in good health.  He  said
         the children did not speak to him about her. He confirmed that  she
         had been in a position to make a  decision  about  their  departure
         from South Africa. He and M had never married.


     13. In cross-examination, AY confirmed that only MY had been to the  UK
         before. AGY had received speech therapy in South  Africa,  not  the
         UK. They had lived in North Riding (in  Johannesburg).  M  obtained
         her ancestry visa through her British  mother.  There  was  no  re-
         examination.


     14. I then heard evidence  from  YVR  who  confirmed  and  adopted  the
         contents of her statement. She stated that she was now studying for
         her A levels at school. She spoke to her mother a couple of times a
         week and they texted too. AGY also spoke to her. YVR said that  she
         felt happier in the UK. She had been unhappy living with her mother
         and there had been bullying at school. It was also dangerous to  go
         out alone whereas here she was more independent; she  enjoyed  life
         at home and school was good.


     15. In cross-examination, YVR  confirmed  plans  to  visit  her  mother
         during school holidays when they would  stay  with  her  and  their
         grandfather. She said that M had been in rehab for a few years  and
         she was currently studying. When she and AGY had lived there,  they
         had to share a room.


     16. There was no re-examination. In response to my questions, YVR  said
         that she was happy here and that although she missed her mother she
         would prefer to remain here with AY.


     17. Lastly, I heard from MD. She adopted her statements  and  confirmed
         that's he was still employed. She had  a  sister  in  the  USA  and
         parents, a brother and a sister in the UK. She  had  and  aunt  and
         uncle in South Africa. She stated that all decisions regarding  the
         children were made by AY.


     18. There was no re-examination. That completed the oral evidence.


     19. In submissions Mr Melvin stated that the Tribunal was  required  to
         balance the false representations made by the sponsor  against  the
         best interests of the children.  He  helpfully  confirmed  that  no
         issue was taken by the  respondent  to  any  of  the  evidence  put
         forward  and  he  expressed  a  view   that   in   the   particular
         circumstances of this case  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  the
         Tribunal found in favour of the  appellants.  I  indicated  that  I
         would not need to hear  from  Ms  Akinbolu  and  that  I  would  be
         allowing the appeals. I now give my reasons for so doing.


     20. Findings and Conclusions


     21. I have considered the large amount of documentary and oral evidence
         before  me  with  care.  I  am  satisfied  that  apart  from   AY's
         misrepresentations to the ECO, I have been given a  full  and  true
         picture of the family and private lives of this family.


     22. Whilst not condoning the false representations made,  and  agreeing
         with  Judge  Fox  that  it  is  not  acceptable  for  an  adult  to
         misrepresent the situation  for  minors  and  to  face  no  adverse
         consequences, the fact remains  that  the  children  were  entirely
         innocent in this whole matter. That alone, however, does  not  mean
         that AY's behaviour should be disregarded.  It  is  the  particular
         circumstances of the case that lead me to conclude that  discretion
         should have been exercised in favour of  the  appellants  and  that
         paragraph 322(2) should not have been applied. Once that ground for
         refusal is set aside, all the requirements  of  paragraph  298  are
         met.


     23. I  turn  now  to  the  specific  circumstances  of  the  case.  M's
         psychiatric condition and dependency upon alcohol and drugs led  to
         a South African court granting full custody of the children  to  AY
         in 2013. Their mother retained visitation rights and  the  evidence
         confirms that AY has  not  prevented  the  appellants  from  having
         contact with their mother; indeed, they shared  accommodation  with
         her whilst they lived with their grandfather after  AY  left  South
         Africa to settle himself here. Even now, I find that he  encourages
         contact and  the  first  appellant  has  confirmed  that  there  is
         communication with M and that annual visits to see her are planned.
         It is quite  clear  from  the  substantial  amount  of  documentary
         evidence adduced, that all decisions regarding  the  children  were
         taken by AY, even to the extent of  choosing  their  bunkbeds.  The
         evidence confirms that whilst under the care of their  grandfather,
         AY was in frequent contact, was consulted both by OJR and YVR about
         all kinds of daily matters and that he met all expenses  for  their
         maintenance and schooling. That dependency has continued since they
         left.


     24. Mr Melvin did not seek to argue that the requirements of the  rules
         had not been met and that AY did not have sole  responsibility  for
         their upbringing.


     25. I am satisfied when considering the best interests of the children,
         that these are met by the  continuation  of  their  current  family
         life. They are back with AY after what appears to  be  a  difficult
         period of separation and they are clearly well settled and enjoy  a
         stable and loving family environment with their father, M  and  MD.
         The children are doing well at school, have made friends, set  down
         roots and are blossoming. AY appears to be a devoted and  committed
         father and has arranged his life so that he is able to be  a  full-
         time father out of school hours. In circumstances where their  best
         interests are to remain here in a safe and stable  environment  and
         where their unchallenged ability to meet the  requirements  of  the
         rules is a weighty matter against  the  public  interest  in  their
         removal, I can see no basis on  which  these  joint  appeals  could
         fail.


     26.  Decision


     27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside.  I  re-make
         the decision and allow these joint appeals on article 8 grounds.


     28. Anonymity


     29. The anonymity order is continued.



    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 23 November 2018








