
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03400/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2021                              |On 24 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               MANJINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                           Entry Clearance Officer


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Johal
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, who was born on 24 December 1987, is a citizen of India.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 8 January 2018, refusing him entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom for settlement. The finding First-tier Tribunal,  in
    a decision promulgated on 28 January 2020, dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The parties agreed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  third  party
    financial support would be forthcoming from the appellant's brother  in
    law. It was accepted by the appellant [7] that the appellant could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules as he should  be  excluded  on  the
    ground of unsuitability; before the appellant was removed to  India  in
    November 2015 (he remains living abroad), he worked illegally whilst an
    overstayer for 7 years. The appellant and his  United  Kingdom  sponsor
    entered a religious marriage in India in November 2016. They  have  one
    child, a daughter born in the United Kingdom in February 2014.

 3. The judge considered the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.  He  found
    [20] that it would be reasonable for the appellant's daughter and  wife
    to enjoy family life with him by moving to live in India.

 4. The judge's  analysis  is  problematic.  At  [12],  he  refers  to  the
    'extremely  thorough  and  helpful'  report  of   Carol   Norcott,   an
    independent social worker. He records that Ms Norcott  considered  that
    the family living in India would not be 'viable' and 'would  cause  too
    much distress' but he does not say why she reached that  conclusion  or
    on what evidence. The judge finds that the report's conclusion is  'not
    necessarily the  case'  but  fails  to  give  any  reasons.  The  judge
    concludes this paragraph by finding that the  continued  separation  of
    the family would cause 'hardship' whilst for the family to relocate  to
    India would cause 'a great deal of hardship'. Both findings  are  light
    on hard reasoning. Moreover, notwithstanding that  the  he  finds  that
    living in India will have harsher  consequences  for  the  family  than
    remaining separated, the judge goes on, without giving  clear  reasons,
    at  [20]  to  find  that  the  option  of  living  in  India  would  be
    'reasonable.' The judge's findings are  clear  enough  but  at  crucial
    points in his analysis, where reasons for his findings are required, he
    has failed to provide these. I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  has  been
    clearly explained to the appellant why he lost this appeal.

 5. I also note the comments made by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb who granted
    permission. The First-tier Tribunal judge has concluded that  it  would
    be reasonable for the family to live in India  without  addressing  the
    fact that this is a mixed religious marriage; the appellant is  a  Sikh
    whilst the sponsor is a Muslim. It is unclear  whether  the  judge  has
    considered the difficulties which that fact may  cause  the  family  on
    relocation to India. If he has discounted the difficulties,  the  judge
    has not explained why.

 6. I find that, for the reasons discussed above, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside.  Mr  Johal,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal,  asked  me
    to remake the decision on the existing evidence in the Upper  Tribunal.
    I do not propose to do that. Nearly 18 months  have  passed  since  the
    hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal;  this  is  a  significant  period,
    especially in the life of the appellant's young daughter. Further fact-
    finding is required to bring evidence of the family's circumstances  up
    to date. That task is better undertaken in the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    which this appeal is returned for it to remake the  decision.  Finally,
    Mr Johal pointed out that the appellant and sponsor's child is now over
    7 years old. I draw his attention to Judge Grubb's comment  at  [5]  of
    the grant of permission regarding section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  (as
    amended).



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision at a hearing de novo.
    (Not Judge I F Taylor; Birmingham (Nottingham) hearing  centre;  First-
    tier Tribunal  to  decide  if  face  to  face  or  remote  hearing;  no
    interpreter; no agreed date so list on first available date; 1.5 hours)



Signed                              Date 12 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane













