




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03133/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |               Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 4 April 2019                  |               On: 16 April 2019         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Miss Betty Mpinyuri
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant. The claimant is a  national  of  Zimbabwe,
      born on 28 November 1953.

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  promulgated  on  30  November  2018,
      allowing her appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

   3. The chronology presented to the First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
      claimant entered on 27 August 1999. The Judge stated that she came  to
      the UK in August 1999 [1].  However,  Ms  Bond,  who  represented  the
      claimant before the First-tier Tribunal, informed me that  it  is  now
      asserted that the claimant entered the UK as a visitor on 27  February
      1999.

   4. Judge Rai noted that the claimant has two sons and a  daughter  living
      in  the  UK  along  with  other  extended  family  members   including
      grandchildren. She also has a son who remains in Zimbabwe.

   5. She stated that the claimant's Immigration history "is chequered"  and
      is not disputed. She made several applications for leave to remain  as
      a student which were rejected or which were invalid  over  the  years.
      Two of  her  applications  were  granted.  She  also  made  an  asylum
      application in March 2009 which was refused  in  September  2009.  Two
      applications for leave to remain as a student were granted, namely  in
      August 2013 until 31 October 2005 and a further application made on 25
      October 2005 was granted until 31 January 2007.

   6. She applied on 15 March 2016 for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  the
      basis of her private life. This was considered as further  submissions
      and not a fresh claim. Her application was refused with  no  right  of
      appeal. Judicial proceedings followed and a consent order  was  sealed
      on 5 October 2017 and the secretary of state undertook  to  reconsider
      her application. The claimant's application was refused on 11  January
      2018 which was the decision before the Tribunal.

   7. In her Decision and Reasons, Judge Rai stated that the main  issue  is
      whether the claimant met  the  "very  high  threshold  test"  of  very
      significant obstacles if she was required to return to  Zimbabwe.  She
      considered this in the context of her age, health, family  connections
      to Zimbabwe and the like. She is 64 years old and was in her  mid  40s
      when she left Zimbabwe and had  spent  much  of  her  life  there.  If
      returned she would have to seek out rented accommodation and  may  not
      as easily be able to find employment.

   8. She had acquired a diploma which would provide  her  with  skills  and
      qualifications to her benefit [23]. In any event she  would  have  the
      continued support of her family  in  the  UK  who  could  support  her
      financially. She does not have any medical issues which would  prevent
      her return.

   9. Having considered all those factors,  she  found  that  there  are  no
      significant obstacles to her return. She accepted that there would  be
      hardship and inconvenience which may prove to be an unsettling  period
      for her but this  did  not  mean  that  she  met  the  test  for  very
      significant obstacles. She thus did not meet the Rules [23].

  10. She considered Article 8 outside the Rules. The appellant had been  in
      the UK for sixteen and a half years at the date of application and for
      over 19 years  at  the  date  of  hearing.  This  fell  short  of  the
      recognised period of 20 years under the Rules. She made  friends,  has
      two sons and a  daughter,  a  sister,  grandson  and  extended  family
      members here. Her daughter is a British  citizen  and  her  sons  have
      indefinite leave to remain. She  found  that  private  life  has  been
      engaged given the long period that she has remained here [25].

  11. She considered whether her return would be  unjustifiably  harsh  such
      that it would be disproportionate [26]. She noted that the  Rules  are
      there to maintain effective immigration  control  which  the  claimant
      circumvented by remaining in the UK following the expiry of  her  visa
      in 1999. Although there were periods  of  leave  thereafter,  had  her
      career in the NHS as a nurse been as important  as  she  claimed,  she
      would have returned to Zimbabwe and applied under the correct Rules.

  12. She balanced that against the significant ties she has built up in the
      last 19 years and the  consequence  of  expecting  her  to  return  to
      Zimbabwe with no home or employment. Her ties to  Zimbabwe  will  have
      reduced significantly, and she accepted that her life is  now  in  the
      UK. She found that on return she would  be  without  family  or  other
      support. That would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
      claimant such that it would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
      her private life to remove her [28].

  13. She had earlier noted at [11]  that  the  assessment  of  whether  any
      interference is justified under Article 8  (2),  the  public  interest
      "factors"  set  out  in  s.117B  must  be  taken  into  account   when
      considering the public interest. At [29] she noted that there  was  no
      issue taken with the claimant's ability to speak English. She was  not
      in receipt of benefits but was supported by her family and was  not  a
      burden  on  the  taxpayer.  She  stated  that  once   the   claimant's
      immigration status has been resolved, she will be entitled to work and
      contribute as a taxpayer [29].

  14. She allowed the claimant's appeal "with reference to Article 8 ECHR".

  15. The secretary of state contended in the grounds seeking permission  to
      appeal that the claimant entered the UK in August 1999 on a visit visa
      but overstayed until August 2003 when she was granted leave to  remain
      as a student until January 2007. Since then she remained unlawfully in
      the UK.

  16. It was noted that the Judge considered her claim  outside  the  Rules,
      finding that the decision to remove her  would  be  disproportionately
      interfering with her private life after such a long period in the UK.

  17. It was contended that the Judge fell into material error by failing to
      "invoke the mandatory public interest requirements under  s.117B".  In
      particular, she  failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
      appellant's  residence  has  always  been  unlawful   or   precarious.
      Accordingly, the Judge failed to  give  the  claimant's  private  life
      "little weight" as is required under s.117B(4) and the proportionality
      assessment is flawed.

  18. On 31 December 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal,  albeit  that  he  stated  at
      paragraph 5 of his decision that the grounds  disclosed  'no  arguable
      error of law' and permission to appeal is  granted.  Under  the  "slip
      rule", Resident Judge Zucker amended paragraph 5 to read "the  grounds
      are arguable and permission to appeal is granted."

  19. Ms Pal on behalf of the secretary of state referred  to  [23]  of  the
      decision. The Judge found that the  claimant  did  not  succeed  under
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. She found that  she  would  have
      the continued support of her family in the UK  who  could  financially
      support her. She did not have any medical issues. Although there would
      be hardship and inconvenience which might be unsettling for a  period,
      this did not meet the test of very significant obstacles.

  20. When considering the  claim  outside  the  Rules  she  considered  the
      proportionality of the decision, finding that the claimant  would,  on
      return, be without family or  other  support.  That  would  amount  to
      unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  claimant  amounting  to  a
      disproportionate interference with her private life [28].

  21. Ms Pal submitted that the finding at  [28]  was  clearly  inconsistent
      with her earlier  finding  at  [23]  that  there  would  not  be  very
      significant obstacles to the claimant's  integration for  the  purpose
      of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as she would have the continued support  of
      her family in the UK who could financially support her. She  had  also
      acquired qualifications and skills in the UK which  would  be  to  her
      benefit.

  22. Ms Pal submitted that the Judge also failed to make any findings under
      s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act. Whilst she took into account  some  of  the
      s.117B  considerations,  she  did  not  consider  claimant's   largely
      precarious status and did not give only "little  weight"  as  required
      under the  section.  For  a  very  substantial  period,  the  claimant
      remained without leave. A proper assessment was moreover important  as
      the claimant had worked as a nurse when she did not have any leave  to
      remain here.

  23. There has accordingly been a material error and the decision should be
      set aside and  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  proper
      assessment to be made.

  24. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Bond referred to her  skeleton  argument
      produced to the First-tier Tribunal. She stated that she had  recently
      received instructions that the claimant had in fact entered the UK  on
      27 February 1999. It was not correct as  asserted  in  the  chronology
      before the First-tier Tribunal that she  arrived  only  on  27  August
      1999.

  25. In refusing her asylum claim it was noted by the  secretary  of  state
      that she claimed to have entered the UK in February 1999. That however
      was not a matter that was made known to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
      The secretary of state accepted  that  even  if  she  had  arrived  in
      February 1999, the claimant had still not resided  in  the  UK  for  a
      period of 20 years under the Rule. There must have been 20 years  that
      she had lived here from the date  of  application.  Nevertheless,  the
      Judge noted that she was running up against the 20 year  period  under
      the Rules.

  26. She submitted that contention regarding  the  "inconsistent  findings"
      did not form part of the grounds of appeal. In any  event,  the  Judge
      has undertaken a s.117B assessment. It  must  accordingly  be  assumed
      that the Judge was aware of the need to assess  'the  public  interest
      question' having referred to section 117B at [11].  She  has  properly
      considered it. This was referred to in the skeleton argument  produced
      before her. There was also reference to the decision of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Ruhppiah. On the facts of the appeal, it was open  to  Judge
      Rai to make that finding.

  27. Even if there was not a dependency in the Kugathas sense, there was  a
      sufficiently lengthy private life. No material error was made. In  the
      event that an error is found,  further fact finding is  necessary  and
      the decision should be remitted for a fresh hearing.

  28. In reply, Ms Pal denied that she had not sought to raise a new ground.
      She noted that the Judge found at [23], that the claimant  was  unable
      to meet the relevant requirements under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.
      The grounds seeking permission referred to [28] where the secretary of
      state's decision was found to be disproportionate on  the  basis  that
      the claimant had been in the UK for 19  years  and  would  be  without
      support. The fact that she had been here unlawfully outside the  Rules
      was not factored in which is a  serious  omission  in  the  light  her
      finding at [23] and the contradictory finding at [28].

      Assessment

  29. I find that there has been a material error of law in  the  making  of
      the decision.

  30. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  there  would  not  be  very
      significant obstacles to the claimant's re-integration into  Zimbabwe.
      In particular, even if she were unable to secure employment, she would
      have the  continued  support  of  her  family  in  the  UK  who  could
      financially support her.

  31. However, when assessing the  proportionality  of  the  decision  under
      Article 8, she found that on her  return  to  Zimbabwe,  the  claimant
      would be without family or other support. There was no explanation why
      this would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for her  in  the
      light of her  earlier  finding  that  there  would  be  not   be  very
      significant obstacles to her return.

  32. As noted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes,  her  evidence  did  not
      show that she could not return to Zimbabwe and  the  findings  of  the
      Judge did not address what significant difficulties  she  would  face,
      given her skills and family  there.  The  Judge  may  have  identified
      reasons why the claimant might not have wanted  to  return  and  might
      find some challenges, but that was not the test.

  33. Further, although she did refer to s.117B of the 2002 Act, she did not
      consider that the claimant's presence in the UK had been unlawful  for
      a considerable period  and  therefore  attracted  little  weight.  The
      failure to consider a mandatory requirement under s.117B is  an  error
      of law.

  34. In the circumstances, I set aside the  decision.  The  parties  agreed
      that in those circumstances, the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

  35. Further fact finding is necessary. This includes  a  consideration  of
      when the claimant first entered the UK. Although she  claimed  in  her
      witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal that she  arrived  in
      the UK on 27 February 1999, the Judge stated that she came to  the  UK
      in August 1999. There was no clear  evidence  that  she  had  in  fact
      entered the UK on 27 February 1999. It is said to be supported on  the
      secretary of state's decision refusing her earlier asylum  claim.  The
      asylum decision was not produced. That date is also at  variance  with
      the chronology presented to the First-tier Tribunal,


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.


      The decision is set aside and is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.


      Signed                             Date 12 April 2019






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

