
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03554/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2019                   |On 03 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                   I.M.E.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright of Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Moore
    promulgated on 25  September  2018  dismissing  the  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated  23  January  2018  refusing  a  human
    rights claim.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 18 September  1964.  His
    claim to remain in the United Kingdom on Article 8 grounds was  focused
    upon his relationship with Ms G.I. (d.o.b. 25 February 1975),  and  her
    two British citizen sons E (d.o.b. 4 May 2005), and J (d.o.b. 30  April
    2008). (GI was born in Ghana but moved with her family  to  Nigeria  at
    the age of 3 months; she grew up in Nigeria and is a dual  national  of
    Nigeria and the UK.)

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  she  was  "not  satisfied
    that the oral and documentary evidence establishes that Appellant has a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the   children"
    (paragraph 21).

4.   In reaching this conclusion the Judge  appropriately  directed  herself
    that the notion of a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  was
    not confined to biological  parental  relationships,  but  extended  to
    circumstances where "the individual is  playing  a  genuinely  parental
    role in the child's life"  (paragraph  17).  The  Judge  accepted  GI's
    evidence that the children's biological father had not been in  contact
    for several years (paragraph 18). The  Judge  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had lived  with  GI  and  her  children  since  approximately
    December 2015 (paragraph 19). It was also accepted  that  he  took  the
    children to and from school, cooked in the evening,  had  on  occasions
    taken them to the doctor when GI was unavailable  to  do  so,  and  had
    attended some events at school (paragraph 19).

5.   The  Judge  also  noted  supporting  letters  from  the  children,  but
    considered "the content  and  tone  of  the  longer  letters  a  little
    problematic in the sense that they don't  read  like  letters  a  child
    would write if left to their own devices"  (paragraph  20).  The  Judge
    explained her observation in this regard by way of citing passages from
    the letters. In my  judgement  it  is  entirely  clear  why  the  Judge
    detected the hand of someone other than the children in the composition
    of these letters.

6.   The Judge also noted the absence of evidence from any "third person  or
    outside institution" addressing the relationship between the  Appellant
    and the children (paragraph 20).

7.   It was against this background that the Judge  reached  the  conclusion
    indicated above. In its entirety paragraph 21 is in these terms:

         "Overall, on  balance,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence establishes that Appellant has a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with the children. I note that the
         children are not small (there are 13 years and 10 years  old),  and
         until they  were  respectively  10  years  and  7  years  old  they
         continued to have contact with their  biological  father.  For  the
         Appellant to form a parental relationship with the children, rather
         than simply a caring and affectionate relationship with them, would
         therefore require him to replace the children's  biological  father
         rather than  step  into  empty  shoes.  While  I  accept  that  the
         Appellant has an involvement in their life, and  that  he  provides
         practical care and that there is a degree of  mutual  affection,  I
         consider the evidence  falls  short  of  establishing  a  de  facto
         parental relationship, which must encompass, as well  as  practical
         care, deeper bonds of commitment, as well as shared  responsibility
         and decision-making as regards the children's upbringing."

8.   This finding as to  the  absence  of  a  parental  relationship  was  a
    significant part of the rest of the Judge's consideration of the issues
    in the appeal. Although this was  a  human  rights  appeal,  the  Judge
    appropriately had regard to the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    in respect of Article 8 family life: although the Appellant  could  not
    in any event meet the rules because his relationship  did  not  satisfy
    the requirements under GEN 1.2 (the couple had not been cohabiting  for
    a period of 2 years prior to the application),  the  Judge  nonetheless
    had regard to paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM,  but  concluded  that  its
    terms were not satisfied in circumstances where there was  no  parental
    relationship (paragraph 22).

9.   Other findings/conclusions of the Judge included:

         (i)  That there would be no obstacle to GI  relocating  to  Nigeria
         with the Appellant, she had family  living  there,  there  were  no
         language or cultural barriers to relocation, and both the Appellant
         and GI had skills which would make it possible for one or  both  of
         them to find employment. In this  context  the  Judge  acknowledged
         that this would involve displacement of British  citizen  children,
         but this did not in itself constitute insurmountable  obstacles  to
         continuing the relationship between the Appellant and  his  partner
         outside the UK (cf. EX.1.(b)) (paragraphs 27 and 28).

         (ii) The Appellant did not rely upon paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
         Immigration Rules (paragraph 29) - which in  any  event  the  Judge
         concluded he could not satisfy (paragraph 31).

         (iii)    The children's best interests were served by staying  with
         their mother whether in the UK or in  Nigeria  (paragraph  40).  In
         this context, in the event that GI chose to remain in the  UK  with
         the children, the Judge acknowledged that there would be a negative
         impact in consequence of the Appellant's departure, but  considered
         this from the perspective that the Appellant was  not  a  de  facto
         parent, that the  affectionate  relationship  could  be  maintained
         through modern means of communication, and although GI  would  find
         it difficult to manage without the  Appellant  she  had  previously
         done  so  for  7  years  after  the  departure  of  the  children's
         biological father and there was no evidence to think that she could
         not avail herself again of the assistance of her cousin  (paragraph
         40).

         (iv) The public interest considerations pursuant to section 117B(1)-
         (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 "weight the
         scales heavily against the Appellant" in respect of proportionality
         (paragraph 41)

         (v)  "In this case I do not consider that the provisions of section
         117B... are outweighed by the interest the  children  have  in  the
         Appellant remaining part of the family unit in the  UK.  ...  [T]he
         primary interest of the children is remaining  with  their  mother,
         and this interest is not under threat." (paragraph 42)

10.  The first basis of challenge pleaded in the grounds in support  of  the
    application for permission  to  appeal  seeks  to  impugn  the  Judge's
    conclusion that  there  was  not  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellant and the children (Grounds of  Appeal
    at paragraphs 4.1-4.4).

11.  During the course of submissions  Mr  Plowright  acknowledged  that  to
    make good such a challenge he was driven  to  argue  that  the  Judge's
    decision in this regard was perverse - that is to say a  decision  that
    no reasonable judge could have reached. Mr Plowright  had  to  put  the
    case in such a way because it was manifest that the Judge had correctly
    identified the scope and meaning of  'genuine  parental  relationship',
    had not overlooked any relevant evidence, and had offered  reasons  for
    her conclusion. A mere disagreement with the  Judge's  conclusion  does
    not establish  an  error  of  law;  accordingly,  where  it  cannot  be
    sustainably argued that the Judge misdirected  herself  or  disregarded
    relevant evidence,  or  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons,  the  only
    remaining basis of challenge is that her conclusion was perverse.

12.  I do not agree with that submission.  In my  judgement  the  conclusion
    of 'genuine parental relationship' was a finding open to the  judge  on
    the evidence and bears no hallmarks of perversity or irrationality.

13.  As regards the other grounds of challenge,  Mr  Plowright  acknowledged
    that although there was potentially scope in general terms for argument
    as  to  the  inter-relationship  between  EX.1.(a)  and  EX.1.(b),  any
    freestanding assessment of Article 8 outside the scope of the Rules  in
    the circumstances of this  particular  case  would  come  back  to  the
    question of 'genuine parental relationship'. He acknowledged that if he
    was in difficulties on this ground - and  as  indicated  above  I  have
    concluded that he is - he would be in  difficulty  in  prosecuting  the
    appeal more generally.

14.  For the avoidance of any doubt, I note that the third ground of  appeal
    (paragraphs 6.1-6.3) - that the Judge was in error in  concluding  that
    section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act  did  not  apply  -  was  pleaded  as
    contingent upon the  Judge  being  in  error  in  respect  of  'genuine
    parental relationship'.

15.  The only remaining pleaded ground of challenge is ground 2  (paragraphs
    5.1-5.4) which seeks to raise criticism in respect of paragraphs  23-27
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, with particular reference to the
    Judge's consideration of the case of Jeunesse v Netherlands  (2015)  60
    EHRR 17. This is in  the  context  of  insurmountable  obstacles  under
    paragraph EX.1.(b).

16.  I note that  paragraphs  23-26  serve  to  set  out  the  framework  of
    consideration of the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles.  It  is  only
    really at paragraph 27 that the Judge's reasoning and  finding  on  the
    facts of the particular case are set out. It seems to  me  irrespective
    of what might or might not be derived from the case  of  Jeunesse,  the
    Judge's actual findings and reasoning in the following passage  is  not
    to be impugned:

         "Although ... it is true that the children are British citizens ...
         this is not enough to  amount  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
         family relocation outside the UK. Further, both the  Appellant  and
         [GI] have family living  in  Nigeria,  there  are  no  language  or
         cultural barriers to relocation, and both the  Appellant  and  [GI]
         have skills which would make it possible for one or both of them to
         find employment".

17.  In such circumstances I find no substance to  this  line  of  challenge
    either

18.  Yet further, and generally,  it  seems  to  me  that  approaching  this
    appeal in a 'real world' context the reality is that if  the  Appellant
    leaves the UK, or is  removed  from  the  UK,  in  consequence  of  the
    Respondent's decision the reality of the situation is that GI  and  the
    children will  not  accompany  him.  The  Judge  fully  considered  the
    consequent disruption to the respective lives  of  the  Appellant,  his
    partner, and her children,  and  concluded  that  the  public  interest
    considerations did not outweigh the Article 8 rights involved. Again, I
    am unable to identify that the Judge misdirected herself as to the  law
    in this regard, or otherwise failed to consider the evidence  that  was
    before her.

Notice of Decision

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.

20.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 1 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


