
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03455/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams                   |                              |
|On 17 June 2021                               |On 29 June 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KEHINDE SOGBAMU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Mustafa instructed by Waterhouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: Kehinde Sogbamu (the appellant); the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department (the respondent).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 16 April 1986.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8  March  2012  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  The appellant overstayed when his leave  as  a
    visitor expired.  On 17  July  2019,  the  appellant  was  served  with
    RED.0001.

 4. On 14 November 2019, the appellant made an application for leave  based
    upon his private and family life in the United Kingdom and under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

 5. The basis of that claim was his relationship with his daughter ("E"), a
    British Citizen who had been born on 13 October 2018 as a result of the
    appellant's relationship with "Ms B" who is a  British  Citizen.   That
    latter relationship, which the appellant says began in  the  first  few
    weeks he was in the UK, subsequently broke down.  At the  time  of  his
    application, the appellant was  in  the  process  of  seeking  a  child
    arrangement order.

 6. On 17 February 2020, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave as a parent under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended) and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 21 December 2020, Judge N J Osborne allowed the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 8. On 9 February 2021, the Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal
    against that decision.  Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) on 22 January  2021.   However,
    the appellant's renewed application for permission made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by UTJ Pickup on 24 March 2021.

 9. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 17 June 2021.   I  was  based  in  the  Cardiff  CJC  and  Mr
    Whitwell, who represented the Secretary of State, and Mr  Mustafa,  who
    represented the appellant, joined the  hearing  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.

The Judge's Decision

10. Before Judge Osborne, the central  issue  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and in respect of  Art  8  was  whether,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence, the appellant could establish that  he  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting relationship" with E who is a qualified child by  virtue  of
    being a British Citizen, importantly for the purposes of the appeal, on
    the ground that the appellant's removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.
     Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIA Act 2002") provides that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

11. It was common  ground  before  Judge  Osborne  that  if  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of  s.117B(6)  then  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate and a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.  It was conceded by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing that, if the appellant did indeed
    have a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with E, it  would
    not be reasonable to expect E to leave the United Kingdom.

12. In his decision, Judge Osborne concluded that the appellant did have  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  with  E.   The  judge's
    reasons are set out at paras 11-14 of his decision as follows:

         "11. At the outset of  the  appeal  hearing  Miss  Rushforth  (Home
             Office Presenting Officer) confirmed that the Appellant  meets
             the suitability requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   She
             further confirmed that the issues to be decided are:

             (i)  The Appellant's eligibility under the Immigration Rules.

             (ii) Whether  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                  relationship with his British citizen daughter,  [E].   In
                  the papers provided  it  is  patent  that  [Ms  B]  ([E's]
                  mother) accepts that immediately  after  [E's]  birth  the
                  Appellant exercised contact with [E].  [Ms B] asserts that
                  she encouraged and promoted that contact.


             (iii)    The Appellant and [Ms B] disagreed  upon  the  reason
                  contact stopped in March 2019.  The Appellant states  that
                  [Ms B] stopped the Appellant's contact  with  [E]  because
                  instalments of periodical payments made by  the  Appellant
                  to [Ms B] on behalf of [E] were persistently late.

                  [Ms B]  refutes  that  assertion.   She  states  that  the
                  Appellant simply stopped attending for  contact.   [Ms  B]
                  asserts that he is not genuinely  interested  in  contact.
                  She further asserts that his application for  contact  now
                  is a mere ploy in an attempt to prevent his  removal  from
                  the UK by the Respondent.  Briefly, [Ms  B]  asserts  that
                  even if the Appellant is denied contact by  the  court  he
                  will continue to make applications and will continue to do
                  all he can to establish some sort of private life with [E]
                  but only to prevent his removal from  the  United  Kingdom
                  not because he wishes to have a relationship with [E].

         12.  There have been fully contested proceedings before the  Family
             Court  sitting  at  Plymouth.   There  was  a  hearing  before
             District Judge Eaton-Hart on 11 June 2020.  The court  ordered
             that the Appellant should have supervised contact at a contact
             centre paid for by him on alternate weeks.  Contact  was  duly
             arranged.  The Appellant has now exercised contact on  13  and
             27 August 2020; 10 and 24 September 2020; and 8 and 22 October
             2020.  Since then the Appellant has not seen [E]  due  to  the
             COVID-19 lockdown.   Additional  contact  sessions  have  been
             arranged for 3 December and  17  December  2020  at  the  same
             contact centre.  The Appellant has so far as he has been able,
             committed to the contact sessions that have been arranged.  He
             has paid for those sessions.  The Appellant lives in  Bristol.
             He has travelled a considerable distance to  exercise  contact
             in the Plymouth area.

         13.  On the  relatively  concise  information  which  is  presently
             before this Tribunal, I find that the Appellant has  done  all
             that  can  reasonably  be  expected  of  him  to   promote   a
             relationship between himself and [E].


         14.  Although the Tribunal has not been provided  with  a  specific
             date, there will shortly be a review of the  contact  position
             before the Family Proceedings Court in Plymouth.  There is  no
             information before this Tribunal to suggest that  contact  has
             been upsetting for [E] or that there has been  any  difficulty
             at all with it.  On the evidence before the Tribunal therefore
             I find that the Appellant has and is pursuing  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a child who is under the
             age of 18 years, is in  the  UK,  and  is  a  British  citizen
             pursuant to EX.1.(a)".

13. At para 15, the judge went on to find that there was no  evidence  that
    the relationship between the appellant  and  E  was  not  in  E's  best
    interests.

14. Having dealt with the  issue  of  whether  there  was  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" under the Rules, the judge went on to
    apply s.117B(6) in para 18 of  his  decision  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant's removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Secretary of State's Grounds

15. The respondent relies upon two grounds.  First, it  is  said  that  the
    judge erred in concluding there was a "genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship" between the appellant and E because he failed to  resolve
    a material issue, namely the conflicting evidence of the appellant  and
    Ms B as to why the appellant ceased contact with E in March 2019 as set
    out in para 11(iii) of the judge's decision.  Secondly, it is said that
    there was no evidence that  the  appellant  had  "any  input  into  the
    decisions" in his daughter's life, he was not the primary or  secondary
    carer of his daughter and provided no financial support.   That  ground
    appears to assert that it was, therefore,  unreasonable  or  irrational
    (though neither of those terms is used in  the  ground)  to  find  that
    there was a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" between  the
    appellant and E.

The Submissions

16. During the oral submissions, I drew the representatives'  attention  to
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  AB  (Jamaica)  and  AO
    (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661  ("AB(Jamaica)")  in  which  the  court
    considered two issues: first, whether  it  is  necessary  in  order  to
    succeed under s.117B(6) to  establish  that  the  individual  concerned
    plays an active role in the child's  life;  and  secondly,  the  proper
    approach  to  establishing   a   "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship", particularly in the context of a  parent  who  only  has
    direct or indirect contact with the child  who  lives  with  the  other
    parent in the UK.

17. I will shortly return to this decision but,  for  the  present,  having
    drawn this  decision  to  the  attention  of  the  representatives,  Mr
    Whitwell indicated that he no longer relied upon ground 2 as the  Court
    of Appeal had concluded that it was not necessary, in order to  succeed
    under s.117B(6), to establish that the relevant parent played an active
    role in the child's upbringing.  Instead, he  relied  exclusively  upon
    ground 1.

18. In that regard, Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had erred  in  law
    in reaching his positive finding under s.117B(6) without resolving  the
    dispute in the evidence on the material fact as to whether or  not  the
    appellant had ceased contact with E in March 2019 because he  had  been
    prevented from  continuing  contact  by  Ms  B  or  because,  as  Ms  B
    contended, because he simply stopped attending for contact and was  not
    genuinely interested in pursuing a relationship with E.

19. Mr Whitwell submitted that Judge Osborne had, in effect,  treated  this
    case as one where merely establishing direct contact was sufficient  to
    satisfy the requirement in s.117B(6) that  there  was  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship".  That, Mr  Whitwell  submitted,  was
    more akin to the approach in cases where an individual relied upon  Art
    8 on the basis that they wished to pursue contact proceedings in the UK
    as set out in the Court of Appeal's decision in  Mohan  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1363.

20. Mr Whitwell also referred to the bundle of documents submitted  by  the
    appellant's representatives  for  this  hearing  under  a  rule  15(2A)
    application.  That bundle contains an updated Family Court  Proceedings
    Order following a hearing on 16 April 2021  which  varied  the  earlier
    order replacing direct contact between the appellant and E with limited
    indirect contact.  Mr Whitwell also pointed to  two  reports  from  the
    Contact Centre following supervised contact sessions on 13 August 20203
    and December 2020.  Mr Whitwell accepted  that  the  April  2021  court
    order postdated Judge Osborne's decision as, indeed,  did  the  contact
    report for 3 December 2020, at least it postdated  the  hearing  before
    Judge  Osborne  on  23  November  2020.   Mr   Whitwell   acknowledged,
    therefore, that there were some  difficulties  in  relying  upon  these
    documents at the error of law stage.  However, he  submitted  that  the
    earlier document relating to the contact session on 13 August 2020  did
    predate Judge Osborne's decision and should be admitted  under  Ladd  v
    Marshall principles.  However, Mr Whitwell  accepted  that  he  had  no
    basis for asserting that this document had been in  the  possession  of
    the appellant or his legal representatives  (if  any  at  the  relevant
    time).  But, he submitted, it might be relevant as  Judge  Osborne  had
    observed in para  15  of  his  decision  that  there  was  no  evidence
    concerning the continuing relationship not being in the best  interests
    of E.

21. On behalf of  the  appellant,  Mr  Mustafa  relied  upon  his  skeleton
    argument which he filed with the UT on  the  morning  of  the  hearing.
    First, he submitted that Judge  Osborne  had  impliedly  found  in  the
    appellant's favour on the disputed fact in para 11(iii).   He  accepted
    that Judge Osborne had not done so explicitly  but  it  was  sufficient
    that he had done so implicitly.  He accepted that the motivation of the
    appellant in ceasing contact with E in March 2018 was relevant  to  the
    judge's assessment of whether  there  was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with E.  However, Mr Mustafa submitted,  relying
    upon the matters set out in para 3(a)-(h)  of  his  skeleton  argument,
    that Judge Osborne had taken all  relevant  matters  into  account  and
    given reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  there  was  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" between  the  appellant  and  E.   He
    relied on the following which the judge had found  in  the  appellant's
    favour;

      i) the appellant had exercised contact immediately after  the  child's
         birth;

     ii) the appellant had exercised contact with E on six occasions between
         August and December 2020 under supervision at a Contact Centre;

    iii) contact only stopped thereafter as a result of COVID-19;

     iv) the appellant was committed to further additional contacts;

      v) the appellant paid for the contact sessions;

     vi) the appellant travelled considerable distances to exercise  contact
         at the Contact Centre; and

    vii) the appellant had done all that could reasonably be  expected  from
         him to promote his relationship with E.

22. As regards the appellant's bundle submitted  for  the  UT  hearing,  Mr
    Mustafa indicated that he had no instructions as to how  the  documents
    had been obtained by his instructing solicitors or whether the  earlier
    report from the Contact Centre  had  been  in  the  possession  of  the
    appellant at the time of the FtT hearing.

23. Mr Mustafa submitted that  the  judge  had,  as  a  result,  reached  a
    sustainable finding that there was a "genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" between the appellant and E and, in the light of the fact
    that the Presenting Officer had conceded that if that was the case then
    it would not be reasonable to expect E to leave the UK, the  judge  had
    been entitled to find that s.117B(6) applied and to  allow  the  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Section 117B(6) and AB(Jamaica)

24. It was common ground in this appeal that the crucial issue  under  both
    the Immigration Rules relating to leave as a partner under Appendix FM,
    in particular R-LTRPT and  s.117B(6)  was  whether  the  appellant  had
    established  that  he  had   a   "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship" with E.

25. The proper approach to that phrase was examined by the Court of  Appeal
    in AB (Jamaica).  In that case, the Court  of  Appeal  recognised  that
    under s.117B(6), it was not necessary to establish that the  individual
    played an active  part  in  the  child's  upbringing  or  was  directly
    concerned with their care.  The Court of Appeal, rejected the  contrary
    approach  which  had  been  accepted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   SR
    (Subsisting Parental Relationship  -  s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT
    00334 (IAC) where reliance had been placed upon the Court  of  Appeal's
    earlier decision in SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967.   Singh
    LJ (with whom King and Underhill LJJ agreed) concluded that  the  Court
    of Appeal in VC (Sri Lanka) was concerned with different provisions  in
    para 339 of the Rules  and that it would be wrong  to  transplant  what
    was said about that provision into  the  differently  worded  s.117B(6)
    (see [94]-[97]).  Singh LJ (at [98]) said this:

         "In my view, the words used in  the  Act  with  which  we  are  now
         concerned are words of the ordinary English language and no further
         gloss should be put upon them.  Their application will depend on an
         assessment by the relevant court or Tribunal of the  facts  of  the
         particular case before it.  The exercise is a highly fact-sensitive
         one".

26. On the facts of the AB (Jamaica) case,  Singh  LJ  concluded  that  the
    Upper Tribunal could not reasonably have reached  the  conclusion  that
    there was a "genuine and subsisting parental  relationship"  where  the
    father had only "indirect contact" (direct contact was prohibited)  and
    it was of  a  very  limited  kind,  essentially  he  was  permitted  to
    communicate with his child only by post and that any letters, postcards
    or presents had to be sent to the address of a maternal grandparent and
    not to his address (see [100]).  Singh LJ also relied on the fact  that
    it  was  clear  from  the  CAFCASS  reports  that  direct  contact  was
    prohibited because of the father's history  and  conduct,  for  example
    domestic abuse and inappropriate comments on social media, and  it  was
    clear that the very limited contact was permitted was for  the  purpose
    of "contributing to [the child's] understanding of  his  dual  heritage
    identity and not in order to maintain the relationship with his father"
    ([at [101]).

27. In her judgment, King LJ provided further guidance on the  approach  to
    establishing a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  for  the
    purposes of s.117B(6) in the context, particularly where direct contact
    or indirect contact was the linkage  between  the  individual  and  the
    child concerned.  In her judgment, inadvertently, King LJ  referred  to
    the statutory requirement as being one of a  "genuine  and  substantial
    parental relationship".  The statutory phrase is, of course, a "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship".  For the purposes of exposition,
    I have corrected the quotations from King LJ's judgment to the  correct
    statutory phrase.  Nothing in her reasoning turns upon the  inadvertent
    substitution of the word "substantial" for "subsisting".

28. First, at [106], King LJ  endorsed  Singh  LJ's  view  (at  [90])  that
    whether there was a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship"
    would depend upon the assessment of the facts in  any  particular  case
    and that "this type of evaluation is highly fact-specific".

29. Secondly, at [108] King LJ noted that:

         "The recognition of the importance to a child  of  contact  with  a
         parent with whom he is not living is also reflected in the terms of
         section 117B(6)(a)".

30. Thirdly, at [109]-[111], King LJ noted that it was  not  necessary  for
    the absent parent to have "parental responsibility"; that a court order
    permitting direct contact was not conclusive evidence of the  necessary
    parental relationship; and a court's limitation of contact to "indirect
    contact" may be relevant but that, it was by no means inevitable,  that
    a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship"  could   not   be
    established absent direct contact.  King LJ said this:
         "109. In order to demonstrate a genuine and  [subsisting]  parental
         relationship, it is common ground that it is not necessary for  the
         absent parent to have parental responsibility and, in my judgement,
         it is hard to see how it can be said otherwise than that  a  parent
         has the necessary "genuine and [subsisting] parental  relationship"
         where that parent is seeing his or her  child  in  an  unsupervised
         setting on  a  regular  basis,  whether  or  not  he  has  parental
         responsibility and whether or not  by  virtue  of  a  court  order.
         Equally, the existence of a court order permitting  direct  contact
         in favour of the absent parent is not conclusive  evidence  of  the
         necessary parental relationship. It may  be  that  a  court  would
         conclude that  there  is  no  "genuine  and  [subsisting]  parental
         relationship" where, for example, a parent has  the  benefit  of  a
         court order but does not,  or  only  unreliably  and  infrequently,
         takes up his or her contact.
         110. So far as indirect contact is concerned, it should be borne in
         mind that the Family Court typically strives  to  promote  regular,
         unsupervised, face to face contact between a child and his  or  her
         parent. If a court limits that contact to  indirect  contact  only,
         that is because the court, in a decision making  process  in  which
         the child's welfare is paramount (Children Act 1989, section 1) has
         decided  that  such  a  significant  limitation  on  the   parental
         relationship is in the best interests of the child in question  and
         the reasons for such a decision having been reached  by  the  judge
         will be highly relevant to the tribunal's consideration of  section
         117B(6)(a).
         111. Having said that, whilst perhaps more  likely,  it  is  by  no
         means inevitable that a tribunal will conclude that a parent has no
         "genuine and  [subsisting]  parental  relationship"  absent  direct
         contact. It may be that there has been a long gap  in  contact  and
         that indirect contact marks a gentle  re-introduction,  or  that  a
         parent has to show (and is showing) commitment to indirect  contact
         before direct contact can be introduced.  Where  however  a  Family
         Court has made a final order limiting contact to indirect  contact,
         particularly when there is no provision for progression  to  direct
         contact, the tribunal should look closely at the reasons which  led
         to the court making such a restrictive order."

Discussion

31. In my judgment, the Secretary of State cannot rely  upon  the  material
    not before Judge Osborne but made available to the Upper Tribunal  with
    a rule 15(2A) application at the  hearing  before  me.   The  documents
    which postdate the hearing cannot assist  to  establish  whether  Judge
    Osborne erred in law in reaching his positive finding that there was  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  between  the  appellant
    and E.  Further, I see no basis upon which  applying  Ladd  v  Marshall
    principles the August 2020  report  from  the  Contact  Centre  can  be
    admissible given that, as Mr Whitwell candidly accepted,  there  is  no
    evidence that this document was in the possession of the appellant  or,
    if he had any at the relevant time, his legal representatives.

32. Although Judge Osborne was not referred to AB (Jamaica),  the  approach
    of the court sets out, and gives  guidance  upon,  a  determination  of
    whether s.117B(6) applied  in  a  situation  where  the  appellant  has
    contact with E, the qualifying child.

33. As the Court of Appeal made plain, that is essentially a factual matter
    which is "highly fact-specific".  As Singh LJ  recognised  at  [102]  a
    court, and that includes the Upper Tribunal on appeal:

         "should not likely interfere with the conclusion of a  lower  court
         or Tribunal on what is essentially a  mixed  question  of  law  and
         fact, as it involved the application of statutory language  to  the
         facts of this case".

34. Here, Judge Osborne ultimately reached a conclusion that  there  was  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  between  the  appellant
    and E.  Mr Mustafa, correctly in my view, accepted that it was relevant
    in reaching that assessment to  resolve  the  factual  issue  that  was
    presented to Judge Osborne: whether the appellant stopped contact  with
    E in March 2019 because, in effect, as Ms B  set  out  in  her  witness
    statement in the  Family  Court  Proceedings,  the  appellant  was  not
    interested in E and contact with her other than  in  order  to  pursue,
    more successfully, an immigration claim to remain in the UK, or whether
    the true position was that Ms B prevented the appellant's contact  with
    E because he was not making the periodical payments required of him.

35. It may be that Mr Mustafa is correct that the judge, if it was clear to
    him that this was a material matter to resolve, resolved it  implicitly
    (though not explicitly) in the appellant's favour.  The  difficulty  is
    that the judge gave no reasons why he preferred  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant to that of Ms B on that point.  It could be, given  that  the
    appellant gave oral evidence and Ms B's evidence was only in  the  form
    of a written statement, that the judge was impressed by the appellant's
    truthfulness and  so  accepted  what  he  said.   That  is  necessarily
    speculation given that the judge made no  reference  to  resolving  the
    dispute on this material matter.

36. The parties, in particular the losing party, is entitled  to  know  the
    reasons why they have lost the case.  That is just as applicable in  an
    appeal where  an  appellant  is  successful  as  where  the  appeal  is
    unsuccessful.  The point was made by the Upper Tribunal  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) (Haddon-Cave J  and  UTJ
    Coker).  The judicial headnote is as follows:

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost".

37. In my judgment, Judge Osborne's  reasoning  does  not  resolve  a  "key
    conflict in the  evidence".   The  judge  has,  in  effect,  taken  the
    appellant's involvement in direct  contact  on  six  occasions  as,  in
    itself, establishing that he has a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship".  Reaching that conclusion, and in concluding at para  13
    of his decision, that the appellant has done "all that  can  reasonably
    be expected of him to promote" the relationship between himself and  E,
    the judge was required to give  reasons  why  he  did  not  accept  the
    evidence of Ms B, but  rather  that  of  the  appellant  and  that  the
    appellant was "genuinely" engaging in contact proceedings in  order  to
    establish the requirement in s.117B(6)(a).  The matters relied upon  by
    Mr Mustafa in his submissions and in para 3 of his  skeleton  argument,
    which I set out above, were relevant and had to be applied  bearing  in
    mind what was said in AB(Jamaica).  However, without  a  resolution  of
    the conflict in the  evidence  about  the  appellant's  motivation  for
    engaging in direct contact with E, the judge  gave  inadequate  reasons
    for his ultimate finding in relation to s.117B(6) and for allowing  the
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  That was a material error of  law  and
    his decision, as a result, is not sustainable.



Decision

38. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

39. It was accepted by both representatives that if that was my  conclusion
    on the error of law issue, there needed to be a new evidential  hearing
    and Mr Mustafa invited  me  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Whitwell accepted that the appeal might well have  to  be
    remitted but he was neutral on that issue.

40. In my judgment, as a result of the  error  of  law  conclusion  I  have
    reached, none of the judge's findings can be preserved and  there  must
    be a rehearing of the appeal de novo.  Having regard to para 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, and the nature and extent of the
    fact-finding required, the proper disposal of the appeal is to remit it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other
    than Judge N J Osborne.  None of the judge's findings are preserved.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                21 June 2021
