
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu031042016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 May 2017                        |On 5 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                               zulfiqar ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Sharma instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a resumed appeal following a hearing on 20 March 2017 following
    which in a decision and reasons promulgated on 31 March 2017, I found a
    material error of law and directed that it be  re-heard  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, limited to the issue of whether the Appellant is able to meet
    the requirements of the Rules and/or Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   A
    copy of that decision is appended.

 2. In his submissions Mr Sharma stated that the Appellant is  someone  who
    for technical reasons falls outside the Rules having arrived with entry
    clearance as a spouse.  His application for further leave as  a  spouse
    was refused solely on the  basis  that  he  did  not  have  an  English
    language certificate from an approved provider  and  his  passport  was
    retained by the Home Office.  He then made a fresh application but this
    was also refused because by  that  time  he  did  not  fall  under  the
    transitional provisions for an extension of leave pursuant to paragraph
    281 of the Rules.  Mr Sharma sought to rely on the  evidence  that  had
    previously been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant
    was earning in  excess  of  the  financial  requirement,  approximately
    �22,000 a year.  He had always  had  leave  and  his  family  life  and
    marriage had been developed in the context of  the  fact  that  he  was
    lawfully present and that leave was with a view to settlement.  On that
    basis, his status could be considered  less  precarious  than  somebody
    with leave without a view to settlement.  He submitted  that  were  the
    Appellant to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  this  is  an
    Appellant  that  would  succeed.   However  he   submitted   that   the
    jurisprudence indicated that the onus is upon the Respondent to justify
    his  removal.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant  has   no   adverse
    immigration history, he would not be subject to any  form  of  re-entry
    ban and thus there was  no  legitimate  justification  for  him  to  be
    required to leave the United  Kingdom  in  order  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance.  Mr Sharma also sought  to  rely  on  the  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10,  as  to  the  distinction
    between rules of  principle  and  those  of  technicality.   Mr  Sharma
    confirmed that the Appellant had for some time now been  in  possession
    of an English language certificate from an approved provider  and  that
    there was nothing that would be achieved by his removal and that  there
    were compelling  reasons  justifying  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules with reference to Article 8.

 3. In her submissions, Ms Ahmed sought to rely  on  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in Chen [2015] 1 JR  UKUT  00189  (IAC)  with
    regard to the Chikwamba principle.  Ms Ahmed submitted that,  in  order
    to ascertain whether or  not  entry  clearance  from  abroad  would  be
    granted, it was necessary to have recent evidence  of  the  ability  to
    meet the financial requirements.  Whilst the P60 dated  April  2015  at
    page  62  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  did   satisfy   the   financial
    requirements of the Rules this was not up to date.  She submitted  that
    there would be no significant interference with the Appellant's  family
    life arising from his removal given that there were no  medical  issues
    or  specific  dependency  and  no  children  which  would   make   such
    interference disproportionate.  She submitted that both  the  Appellant
    and his wife have cultural ties to  Pakistan  and  that  considered  in
    totality the Appellant was unable to succeed.

 4. In relation to the question of proportionality and  Article  8  outside
    the Rules she submitted in light of the decision in SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 that there  were  no  compelling  circumstances,  but  she
    accepted that proportionality needed to be assessed on the  basis  that
    there was family life  between  the  Appellant  and  his  spouse.   She
    submitted, however, in light of the public interest  considerations  at
    Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and the fact that the Appellant  and  his
    spouse have cultural ties  to  Pakistan  and  have  lived  there,  that
    removal would be proportionate.  She sought to rely on  [49]  and  [51]
    and [42] to [48] of the  decision  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11.   She
    submitted there were no insurmountable obstacles and  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.

 5. In his response Mr Sharma submitted that there were compelling  reasons
    albeit in light of the judgments in Singh & Khalid [2015] EWCA  Civ  74
    and Caroopen & Myrie [2016] EWCA Civ 1307 that the question was not  so
    much whether there are compelling  reasons  but  whether  there  is  an
    Article 8 claim.  He submitted that the Rules had been met in the past.
     Mr Sharma sought to rely on [51] of Agyarko  (op  cit)  and  submitted
    that the Appellant was in a very different situation as  he  is  not  a
    person who has not had status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  could  be
    distinguished on that basis.  He further submitted  that  any  lawfully
    derived income can be taken into account when assessing the ability  to
    meet the financial requirements of the Rules.  However the  Appellant's
    ability to satisfy the Rules might be jeopardised by his removal as  he
    would be unlikely to keep his job and thus then may be  in  a  position
    not to meet the Rules given  that  his  wife  is  on  a  lower  income.
    However Mr Sharma asked that I note that in the Supreme Court  decision
    in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10  their  Lordships  had  found  that  the
    guidance was unlawful and contrary to Article 8 on this  issue  and  he
    asked that the appeal be allowed.

Notice of Decision

 6. I have taken careful note of the submissions of both parties.  I accept
    that this is a case where the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully on 3 October 2012 with entry clearance as  a  spouse  for  two
    years.  His application for an extension of that leave was  refused  on
    the basis that the English language certificate provided had  not  been
    issued  by  an  institution  on  the  Respondent's  approved  list   of
    providers.  That was the sole reason  for  refusing  that  application.
    The Appellant then made a further application.  By the time  that  this
    was made and refused the transitional  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules no longer applied to him and it was accepted by both parties that
    despite  having  been  granted  leave  under  paragraph  284   of   the
    Immigration Rules he  did  not  succeed  under  the  new  more  onerous
    requirements of Appendix FM, in particular the fact  that  he  had  not
    previously been granted leave as a partner under Appendix FM.

 7. In the First tier Tribunal, Judge Burns made the following findings  in
    relation to section 117B of the NIAA 2002:

         "48(2)   It is in the public interest  that  persons  who  seek  to
               enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
               English.  I find that Mr Ahmed can speak some English as  he
               has now obtained an English language  certificate  (page  3,
               paragraph 10).

         (3)  It is in the public interest that persons who seek  to  remain
               are financially independent.  I accept Mr  Ahmed's  evidence
               that he has not been reliant on public funds and that he has
               been able to  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  which  is
               evident from his payslips in the bundle and a  copy  of  his
               bank statements.

         (4)-(5)  Mr Ahmed's relationship with Mrs Azam was formed  when  he
               was in the United Kingdom lawfully and similarly his private
               life in the United Kingdom has been built up whilst  he  was
               here lawfully.

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
               public interest."

    In light of the Judge's findings, which have not been  challenged,  the
    public interest in these particular circumstances would  indicate  that
    it would be proportionate for the Appellant to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. I further agree with Mr Sharma that in light of the  jurisprudence  the
    onus is on the Secretary of State to justify removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom in order for an entry clearance application to be made.  On the
    particular facts of this  case,  given  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    lawfully residing since October 2012,  he  is  working  and  supporting
    himself  and  his  wife  from  his  earnings,  he  speaks  English  and
    importantly he has  been  lawfully  resident  during  that  period.   I
    further take into account the fact that his  initial  English  language
    certificate was from a provider that  had  not  been  approved  by  the
    Respondent.  Were that not the case  he  would  have  been  granted  an
    extension of leave as a spouse and subsequently there is  a  reasonable
    expectation he would have been granted indefinite leave to  remain.   I
    find that the decision  in  Chen  [2015]  1  JR  UKUT  00189  (IAC)  is
    distinguishable  given  that  the  Applicant  in  that  case   was   an
    overstayer.

 9. For these reasons, I find it would not be proportionate to  expect  the
    Appellant to be obliged to return to Pakistan simply in order to make a
    new entry clearance application, given that he has previously made such
    an application which was granted, as a result of which he  entered  the
    United Kingdom.  I accept Mr Sharma's submission that there is  nothing
    to be gained from requiring him to do that and nothing to  be  achieved
    by his removal, which I find is not required in light of  the  findings
    of the First tier Tribunal as  to  the  section  117B  public  interest
    considerations.  There are no adverse factors in this case that require
    consideration and that might have led to a different outcome.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 1 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

ANNEX


                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP/DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03104/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               zulFiqar ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born  on  14  March  1986.   He
    first entered the United Kingdom on 3 October 2012 with entry clearance
    as the spouse of Mrs  Nasrat  Azam  until  24  December  2014.   On  19
    December 2014 he made an in-time application to  extend  his  leave  to
    remain.  This application was refused on 30 January  2015  pursuant  to
    paragraph 284(ix)(a) on  the  basis  that  the  English  language  test
    certificate he had provided had not been issued by  an  institution  on
    the Respondent's approved list of providers.  He appealed that decision
    and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brookfield in
    a decision promulgated on 29 April 2014  following  an  appeal  on  the
    papers.  The Appellant then made a further application which  was  also
    refused on 21 January 2016.  He appealed against this decision and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burns  for  hearing
    on 22 September 2016.  In a decision dated 12 October  2016  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  It was conceded on behalf of the Respondent that
    the Appellant has a family life with his wife in the United Kingdom but
    the judge found that the Appellant and  his  wife  were  both  born  in
    Pakistan, were from the same area and still had  family  members  there
    and had spent the majority of their lives in Pakistan.   The  judge  at
    [42] found that there would not be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  them
    returning to Pakistan and in respect  of  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules, the judge considered Section 117B of the NIAA  2002,
    noted at [48](2) that the Appellant can speak some English and has  now
    obtained an English language certificate and at  [48](3),  he  accepted
    the Appellant's evidence he has not been reliant on  public  funds  and
    has been able to maintain and accommodate  himself  which  was  evident
    from his pay slips and a copy of his bank statements and in respect  of
    Section 117B(4) and (5) his relationship with his wife was formed  when
    he was in the United Kingdom lawfully and similarly in respect  of  his
    private life.  However, at [49] the judge goes  on  to  find  that  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his application for  further  leave  to
    remain is proportionate.

 2. An application was made in time for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 21 October 2016.  The grounds in support of the application
    firstly asserted that the judge  failed  to  determine  the  appeal  in
    respect of paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the
    Appellant had been admitted pursuant to paragraph 284 of the Rules  and
    had completed two years leave as a  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  it  was  submitted   that   the
    requirements of paragraph 287 were met.  In the alternative,  ground  2
    submitted that the appeal should have been successful  under  paragraph
    284 of the Rules in light of the decision in R (on the  application  of
    Bhudia v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
    00025 (IAC). It was thirdly submitted that the judge had erred  in  his
    understanding  of  compelling  circumstances,  his  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of removal of the Appellant and that he failed to  make
    proper findings when considering the case in its entirety in respect of
    Section 117B of NIAA 2002.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted  on  11  January  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the basis that the grounds disclosed arguable
    material errors of law in a decision.

     Hearing

 4. The Respondent provided a skeleton argument and a substantial bundle of
    evidence including the previous decision of Judge  Brookfield  and  the
    Respondent's Rule 24 response.   There  was  a  substantial  bundle  of
    evidence from the Appellant of 147 pages on file and Mr  Sharma  handed
    up copies of the recent judgments in R on the application of MM Lebanon
    and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC  10
    and R on the application of Agyarko v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11.

 5. Mr Sharma on behalf of the Appellant stated  that,  on  reflection  and
    having considered the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Brookfield,
    there was no longer any substance  in  grounds  1  and  2.   Mr  Sharma
    submitted that, once it was accepted by the Tribunal that the Appellant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, the  judge  should  have
    considered Article 8 outside the Rules and he sought  to  rely  on  the
    recent judgment of their Lordships  in  R  on  the  application  of  MM
    Lebanon and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    UKSC 10 at 67 which provides:

         "Although  Miss  Giovannetti  made  some  attempt  to  defend   the
         statement,  we  remain  unconvinced  that  its  approach  could  be
         reconciled with the correct legal analysis, as now accepted by her:
         that  is,  that  the  rules  are  only  the  starting   point   for
         consideration under  the  Convention.   But  for  the  Government's
         altered stance, the rules, read with the grounds  of  compatibility
         statement would have faced a serious challenge on grounds of  error
         of law.  However, the change in the Government's stance means  that
         the error is of historical interest rather than current  relevance,
         so long as the rules are capable of  being  operated  in  a  manner
         consistent with the Convention.  Regardless of what was said in the
         statement, the rules themselves have always made  clear  that  they
         left open the possibility of separate consideration  under  article
         8".

    And at 76:

         "As Lord  Reed  explains  (Agyarko,  para  47),  this  approach  is
         consistent  with  the  margin  of  appreciation  permitted  by  the
         Strasbourg  court  on  an  'intensely  political'  issue,  such  as
         immigration control.  However, this important principle should  not
         be taken too far.  Not everything in the rules need to  be  treated
         as high policy or peculiarly within the province of  the  Secretary
         of State, nor as necessarily entitled  to  the  same  weight.   The
         tribunal is entitled to see a difference in principle  between  the
         underlying public  interest  considerations,  as  set  out  by  the
         Secretary of State with the approval of Parliament, and the working
         out of that policy through the detailed machinery of the rules  and
         its application to individual cases.  The former naturally  include
         issues such as the seriousness of levels of offending sufficient to
         require deportation in the public interest (Hesham Ali,  para  46).
         Similar  considerations  would  apply  to  rules   reflecting   the
         Secretary of State's assessment of levels  of  income  required  to
         avoid a burden on public  resources,  informed  as  it  is  by  the
         specialist expertise  of  the  Migration  Advisory  Committee.   By
         contrast rules as to the quality of evidence necessary  to  satisfy
         that test in a particular case are, as the committee  acknowledged,
         matters of practicality rather than principle; and as such  matters
         on which the tribunal ay more readily draw on  its  own  experience
         and expertise."

 6. Mr Sharma  submitted  that  there  is  no  principled  reason  why  the
    Appellant should be refused leave and that in essence  his  application
    failed because of a technicality in that he did not  have  the  correct
    English language certificate issued by an approved provider at the time
    he made the application.  However,  he  now  has  the  correct  English
    language certificate: D48.  He is also accommodated and  maintained  in
    the UK, arguably earning above the threshold  set  by  Appendix  FM-SE,
    therefore the  requirements of the current Rules were met.

 7. Mr Sharma further sought to rely on the decision of their Lordships  in
    R on the application of Agyarko v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11.  At [51] and [52] which provides as follows:



         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
             to  remain  in  the  UK   only   temporarily,   however,   the
             significance of this consideration depends on what the outcome
             of immigration control might otherwise be.  For example, if an
             applicant would  otherwise  be  automatically  deported  as  a
             foreign criminal, then the weight of the  public  interest  in
             his or her removal will generally be very  considerable.   If,
             on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
             unlawfully - was otherwise certain  to  be  granted  leave  to
             enter, at least if an application were made from  outside  the
             UK, then there might be no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
             removal.   The  point  is  illustrated  by  the  decision   in
             Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department.

          52. It is also necessary to bear in mind that the cogency  of  the
             public interest in the removal of a person living  in  the  UK
             unlawfully is liable to diminish - or, looking at  the  matter
             from the opposite perspective,  the  weight  to  be  given  to
             precarious family life is liable to increase - if there  is  a
             protracted delay in the enforcement of immigration control cf.
             EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 at (15 and 37) and the judgment  of
             the European Court in Jeunesse."

    Mr Sharma submitted that the judge should have considered these  points
    in light  of  the  evidence  before  him  and  his  failure  to  do  so
    constituted a material error of law.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Ahmad sought to rely upon the  skeleton
    argument drafted by her colleague Ms Isherwood in respect of grounds  1
    and 2.  In respect of ground 3, she submitted that Judge Burns had made
    a full assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.  He made findings  of
    fact at [38] and Appendix FM at [42] and Section 117B of NIAA  2002  at
    [46].  She  submitted  the  judge  was  correct  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant did not  come  within  the  transitional  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that the Appellant was familiar with the  culture
    of Pakistan and had the ability and skills to work  there.   The  judge
    also at [41] considered the position of the Appellant's wife.

 9. In respect of the consideration of Article 8  outside  the  Rules,  she
    submitted  there  were  no  arguments  that  the  Appellant   met   the
    requirements of Appendix FM and the judge had given  full  reasons  for
    his findings.  His consideration might  be  brief  but  the  judge  did
    consider all the points and found at  [52]  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles or insurmountable obstacles.

10. In respect of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC
    11, Ms Ahmad submitted the starting point was the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and there was no  evidence
    that it would be a disproportionate interference for the  Appellant  to
    be removed to Pakistan.

11. In response, Mr Sharma reminded me that the sponsor had become  settled
    in the United Kingdom in 2009 and had been granted British  citizenship
    in 2012 and that this was a matter considered to  be  relevant  by  the
    Supreme Court in their decision in respect of the sponsor in SS (Congo)
    as part of the cases grouped with MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department (2017) UKSC 10.   He  submitted  that  the  learned
    judge's starting point when considering  the  application  outside  the
    Rules would be the House of Lords decision in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40
    and this test was met and there was no requirement  for  the  appellant
    and the sponsor to  have  children  in  order  to  qualify  under  this
    principle.

     Decision

12. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns erred materially in law  in
    his consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  for  the
    reasons set out in the third ground of appeal.  In  particular,  whilst
    at [48] the judge considered the application of  section  117B  of  the
    NIAA 2002 and made findings favourable to the appellant  based  on  the
    fact that he has at all times resided lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom
    and has built up his family and private life whilst here  lawfully;  is
    not reliant on public funds and  speaks  English,  there  is  no  clear
    analysis as to why that does not then avail the appellant and there  is
    no or no proper or adequate reasoning for  the  judge's  conclusion  at
    [49] that:  "I find the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  Mr  Ahmed's
    application for further leave to remain in  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances."



     Rebecca Chapman

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman         30 March 2017







                           ____________________

                                  DIRECTIONS

                           ____________________

13. I adjourn the appeal to be listed before me  in  order  to  remake  the
    decision.  I make the following directions:

      a) Any further evidence upon which either party wishes to rely  to  be
         submitted five working days prior to the resumed hearing.

      b) The appeal be listed for one hour.

      c)  The  appeal  be  confined  to  submissions  only,   therefore   no
         interpreter will be booked.   If  the  appellant's  representatives
         wish to call the appellant or the  sponsor  to  give  evidence  and
         require an interpreter they should contact the  Upper  Tribunal  to
         this effect.

      d) The issues are to be confined to:

     (i)     whether the appellant is able  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and   Appendix FM-SE; and

    (ii) Article 8 of the ECHR.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:  Rebecca Chapman                     Date: 30 March 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
