
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03386/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2017                           |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Christine Kayemba
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P. Glass, Counsel instructed by Citywide
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer, promulgated on  18  August  2016,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Christine Kayemba against the  Secretary
    of State's decision to refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis  of
    her family and private life.
 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to Christine Kayemba as the  Appellant,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The respondent alleges that the judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his conclusion that the appellant's private and family life
    outweighs the public interest factors that have been  identified,  most
    significantly that the appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  The respondent also seeks  permission  because  the
    judge has failed to have proper regard to  the  other  public  interest
    considerations in s.117B of the 2002 Act.


    The grounds are arguable.  It is arguable that at [14]  and  [15]  that
    the judge has had regard to the strength of the appellant's private and
    family life as established over a 17-year period in the UK but has  not
    identified the strength of the public interest  considerations.   As  a
    result of this failure, it is also arguable that the judge  has  failed
    to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the  former  outweighs  the
    latter."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives, following which I announced that I found the  decision
    involved the making of a material error of law and  that  full  reasons
    would follow.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Duffy submitted that this was essentially a reasons challenge,  but
    the judge had also misdirected himself in law.  He had failed  to  look
    at the case through the prism of the immigration rules.  He had  failed
    to consider  properly  the  factors  set  out  in  section  117B.   The
    consideration of Article 8 outside the immigration rules was flawed and
    inadequately explained.  It was not clear  whether  family  or  private
    life had been engaged.  In [14] it appeared that the  judge  considered
    that family life had been engaged but there were no reasons given as to
    why this was.  There must be an ongoing dependency  beyond  the  normal
    emotional  ties  found  between  adult   relatives.    The   test   was
    "dependency" beyond the normal emotional  ties,  not  a  "relationship"
    beyond the normal emotional ties.  The  wrong  test  had  been  applied
    outside the rules.  The decision involved making of material errors  of
    law.


 6. Ms Glass referred me to the case of Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC), in particular paragraphs (1)(e) and (2) of the headnote.  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 was crucial.  If the judge had applied the test, it  did
    not matter how it  had  been  referred  to.   Substance  not  form  was
    important.  She referred to  [15]  where  the  judge  had  referred  to
    section 117B.  She submitted that the judge had had this in  mind  when
    he had undertaken his analysis.  The judge had also referred to the key
    authority of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in [15].  She accepted that
    the decision was fairly brief but submitted  that  the  essentials  had
    been covered.


 7. It was clear that the appeal was outside the  immigration  rules  only,
    [1], and so the judge had moved immediately to  a  consideration  under
    Razgar.  It fell to be considered under SS (Congo) as was  referred  to
    in [15].  It was clear  that  the  judge  had  considered  all  of  the
    exceptional   circumstances.    The   compelling   circumstances   were
    identified in [15].  She submitted that he had  the  circumstances  set
    out in paragraph [5] in mind.  It  was  accepted  by  the  Respondent's
    representative in the First-tier Tribunal that there had been  a  delay
    by the Respondent  in  making  the  decision  which  had  lead  to  the
    establishment of private and family life [1].  The  delay  had  allowed
    roots to be put down.  I was referred to the case of EB (Kosovo) [2008]
    UKHL 41.


 8. The Appellant had no home to go to.  The issues  had  all  been  pulled
    together in paragraph 15.  It was unduly harsh for her to return as she
    had a bleak future.  The judge was quite right to proceed to  a  Razgar
    analysis following the case of Dube.  The judge had taken into  account
    all of the points and weighed them up, had found that the  relationship
    went beyond the usual ties,  and  that  there  was  a  disproportionate
    interference in her family and private life.  He had noted  the  extent
    of the Appellant's involvement in the church and her friendships  here.
    Ms Glass submitted the  factors  set  out  in  section  117B  had  been
    considered,  but  the  Appellant's  compelling  personal  circumstances
    weighed  heavily  on  the  other  side.   It  was  disproportionate  to
    interfere with her family and private life after  the  seventeen  years
    she had spent as a  carer  and  grandmother,  given  her  age.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [14] where the judge  found  that  the  level  of
    support that the Appellant had given to her grandson was greater  owing
    to his illness.


 9. In response Mr. Duffy submitted that this was  not  a  case  where  the
    Respondent was submitting that the Appellant  could  not  succeed,  but
    rather that inadequate reasons had been given.   A  number  of  factors
    seemed to mitigate against the Appellant,  and  it  was  therefore  not
    clear why the decision had been allowed.  He submitted that on the face
    of it, it seemed like an appeal which should have been  dismissed.   In
    paragraph [14] the judge found that the  Appellant  had  a  substantial
    role,  together  with  his  mother,  in  looking  after  her  grandson.
    However, he was now going to university and was not  at  the  home  for
    most of the week.  He no longer had leukaemia so the same level of care
    was not required.


10. He accepted that family  life  had  been  accepted  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing, but the test had been mischaracterised in terms
    of dependency not a relationship.  The current and  ongoing  dependency
    had not been accepted, and there did not seem to be any.   In  relation
    to the case of Dube, this weighed in favour of the  Respondent's  case.
    Substance not form was important, and  there  was  neither  here.   The
    judge had mentioned section 117B, but had not dealt  with  the  factors
    set out within it.  The appeal had not been considered through the lens
    of the immigration rules.   There  had  been  no  balancing  act.   The
    assessment under Razgar was inadequate.



Error of Law Decision


11. The judge's findings are set out in two paragraphs, [14] and [15].  The
    evidence is set out  in  paragraphs  [2]  to  [11],  but  there  is  no
    indication in the findings that this evidence has been accepted in  its
    entirety.  The judge does  not  refer  back  to  the  evidence  in  his
    findings.


12. In paragraph [1] the judge sets out that the  appeal  is  solely  under
    Article 8 outside of the immigration rules.  This must  mean  that  the
    Appellant has conceded that she cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules  in  relation  either  to  private  or  family  life.
    Otherwise, she would have appealed against the decision  on  the  basis
    that she met the requirements of the immigration rules.   There  is  no
    consideration of this concession by the Appellant that she cannot  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules.  There is  no  consideration
    of the weight that has to be given to this under section 117B(1).


13. An acceptance that the Appellant does not meet paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    means that the Appellant has conceded that  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration into  Uganda.   Yet  it  was
    submitted by Ms Glass that she would have a bleak future in Uganda, and
    it would be unduly harsh to ask her to return there, although this  was
    not found by the judge.  The judge states that  the  Appellant  has  no
    family in Uganda, no home to go to and is  no  longer  in  good  health
    [15].  However, given that the Appellant has accepted that  she  cannot
    meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules,  the  Appellant  must
    consider that these factors would not prevent  her  from  returning  to
    Uganda.  This is a relevant consideration for  the  balancing  exercise
    outside the immigration rules, especially given section 117B.


14. I find  that  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration  rules  through  the  prism  of  the   immigration   rules.
    Therefore even if an appeal is solely  under  Article  outside  of  the
    immigration rules, there must be some acknowledgment of the  fact  that
    this is a concession on the part of an appellant that she  cannot  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules.


15. I find that  the  judge  has  not  considered  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules through the  prism  of  the  immigration  rules.   SS
    (Congo) necessitates  looking  at  the  immigration  rules  because  it
    requires a judge to consider whether there are compelling circumstances
    above and beyond those covered by the immigration rules.  Paragraph  15
    contains the entirety of his assessment of the  various  factors.   The
    "compelling circumstances", such as can be identified, appear to be the
    fact  that  the  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    substantial period, the fact that she has built up a very close  family
    unit with her daughter and grandson, and  the  fact  that  she  has  no
    family in Uganda, no home to go to and is no  longer  in  good  health.
    There is no reference to the fact that the substantial period was  when
    she was in the UK illegally having entered on  a  false  passport.   In
    relation to the circumstances in Uganda, by accepting that  she  cannot
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules, she has  accepted  that
    these are not significant obstacles to her reintegration, and there are
    no reasons given for why therefore these are compelling circumstances.
16. In relation to section 117B, while this is mentioned in paragraph [15],
    the factors set out in that section are not  given  any  consideration.
    There is no consideration given to  the  weight  to  be  given  to  any
    private or family life established  when  a  person's  leave  has  been
    precarious or illegal as required by sections 117B(4) and  (5).   There
    is no reference to financial independence (section 117B(3)).


17. Although the Respondent had accepted that the Appellant  had  a  family
    life in the United Kingdom, there is an inadequate consideration of the
    relationship between the Appellant  and  her  grandson.   There  is  no
    reference to the fact that her grandson's dependency on  the  Appellant
    has now reduced.


18. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    in  the  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that   the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8 were  breached.   I  find  that  the
    judge has erred in failing properly to  consider  the  public  interest
    considerations in section 117B.


19. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of decision


20. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    and I set the decision.  No findings are preserved.


21. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

