
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/03079/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 October 2017                         | On 7 December 2017              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     oo
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Nnadi, Saviours Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1982.   A  decision  was
    made on 9 July 2015 to refuse leave to remain on human rights  grounds,
    with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  The basis of the  application
    for leave to remain was mainly in terms of the appellant's relationship
    with his son, born on 3 January 2008.

 2. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Keefe ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 13 December 2016.  The appeal
    was dismissed.

 3. The grounds of appeal in relation to the  FtJ's  decision  are  to  the
    effect that the FtJ failed to undertake  a  lawful  assessment  of  the
    Immigration Rules in terms of paragraph EX.1., and  the  reasonableness
    of the appellant's son leaving the UK to go to  Nigeria.   The  grounds
    also make a generalised complaint, with reference to  authority,  about
    the FtJ's assessment of the child's best interests.

    Submissions

 4. In submissions, Mr Nnadi relied on the grounds.  It was submitted  that
    the FtJ was wrong to conclude that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's son to leave the UK.  The child had been in the  UK  for  a
    period of seven years.  Although it was initially said that he had  not
    been in the UK for seven years preceding the application, it  was  then
    submitted, and agreed on behalf of the respondent, that he had.

 5. Mr Nnadi referred to the appellant's son having  sickle  cell  disease,
    and the fact that he attends hospital on a regular  basis.   He  needed
    constant monitoring.

 6. It was submitted that the  respondent's  'rule  24'  response  did  not
    adequately deal with the grounds.

 7. In submissions, Ms Aboni relied  on  the  rule  24  response.   It  was
    submitted  that  the  FtJ  had  adequately   considered   the   child's
    circumstances.  She had concluded that the appellant did have a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his son and that it was in the child's
    best interest to remain in the UK.  However, she rightly concluded that
    the child's best interests were not determinative of the appeal.

 8. She concluded  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  not  credible  or
    consistent in terms of where he and his son were living.  He  had  also
    downplayed his existing ties to Nigeria.

 9. The FtJ was clearly aware of  the  medical  issues  involved,  but  was
    entitled to conclude that there was treatment available for the child's
    condition in Nigeria.

10. In reply, Mr Nnadi reiterated the fact that  the  appellant's  son  has
    sickle cell disease, and has been in the UK for seven  years  or  more.
    If the appellant and his  son  were  to  be  removed  to  Nigeria,  the
    appellant would have to look for work whilst caring for his son.

11. In response to the suggestion that the grounds are nothing more than  a
    disagreement with the FtJ's decision, it was submitted that the FtJ had
    not properly applied the law or considered that the best interests of a
    child should be "paramount".

    Conclusions

12. I announced at the hearing that I was not satisfied that there was  any
    error of law in the decision of  the  FtJ.   The  FtJ  found  that  the
    appellant's son was born in the UK on 3 January 2008 and had  lived  in
    the UK continuously since then.  She accepted that although  he  was  a
    Nigerian national, he had not visited Nigeria.  She  then  referred  to
    s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the  need
    to consider the child's best interests as a primary consideration.

13.  She  correctly  identified  that  paragraph  EX.1.  was  relevant,  in
    particular that the issue was whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the child to leave the UK.  She made a number of findings.   She  found
    that the appellant's son has no connections  with  Nigeria  other  than
    through his nationality and heritage.   She  referred  to  evidence  in
    relation to his schooling, and the stage at  which  his  education  had
    reached.

14. She accepted that he suffered from sickle cell anaemia,  takes  regular
    medication and is under the supervision  of  paediatric  experts.   She
    found that the medical evidence provided demonstrated that it is  often
    the  appellant  who  takes  his  son  for  medical  appointments.   She
    concluded that the appellant had demonstrated that he has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his son.

15. At [37] she very properly said that she needed to  assess  the  child's
    best interests without  considering  the  immigration  history  of  his
    parents.

16. She found that this was not a case where the child was at a crucial  or
    transitional stage of his education, explaining her reasons for  coming
    to that view but she noted that he was making good progress at  school.
    In relation to his health, she concluded that  the  evidence  was  that
    there was treatment available in Nigeria, although it was likely to  be
    more expensive than in the UK.  Taking into account the length of  time
    that he has been in the UK, and his health for which  he  is  receiving
    treatment, she concluded that it was in his best interests to remain in
    the UK.  However, she concluded that what the  child's  best  interests
    were not determinative of the appeal.  The FtJ was entirely correct  in
    that regard, whereas the submission put to me to the  effect  that  the
    child's best interests should be "paramount", was incorrect.

17.  At  [39]  the  FtJ  concluded  that  the  appellant's   evidence   was
    "characterised by a lack of candour about his personal  circumstances".
    She referred to evidence in relation to what schools he attended,  with
    there apparently having been inconsistency as to what school he was at.
     The FtJ rejected the  appellant's  evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    changed schools for a temporary  period,  namely  two  weeks  while  he
    attended a tournament.  The other  evidence  was  plainly  inconsistent
    with the appellant's in that respect.  The FtJ said at  [41]  that  the
    appellant's explanation that his son had been at that particular school
    for a tournament or some sort of exchange was "simply fanciful".

18. At [43] she said that  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  current
    circumstances was inconsistent in terms of the evidence that he and his
    son were living with the appellant's parents.  She  gave  full  reasons
    for coming to that view.

19. She also referred  to  an  entry  clearance  application  made  by  the
    appellant as a student in March 2005,  and  the  determination  of  his
    appeal against the refusal of entry clearance.  The information  before
    the Immigration Judge at that appeal in 2006 was to the effect that the
    appellant's family was and remained in Nigeria.

20. At [46] the FtJ concluded that she had not been presented with  a  full
    and accurate picture of the appellant's current circumstances or  those
    of his son.  She found that the appellant had not demonstrated that  he
    and his son are currently living with the appellant's parents, and  the
    appellant had downplayed his existing ties in Nigeria.

21. She referred to the decisions in EV Philippines v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  and  MA  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, whereby
    in the  latter  case  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the  test  of
    'reasonableness'  with  reference  to  s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

22. The FtJ reiterated that the appellant's son was not at a crucial  stage
    of his education, nor was he approaching any critical milestones in his
    personal life.  Treatment  would  be  available  for  his  sickle  cell
    anaemia in Nigeria, and although the treatment may not be of  the  same
    standard as that in the UK, she said that there was no evidence  before
    her to support an assertion that his condition would deteriorate if  he
    moved to Nigeria.

23. She then referred to the public interest issue.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant had only ever had limited leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    student, and  that  leave  expired  on  19  July  2007.   Although  the
    appellant had made further applications, none was granted.   Yet  again
    she reiterated that the appellant had downplayed  his  family  ties  in
    Nigeria.

24. Given that his parents said that they had supported the  appellant  and
    his son in the UK, she found that there was no reason  why  they  could
    not continue that support in Nigeria.  She noted that the appellant had
    lived in Nigeria until 2006 and would  be  familiar  with  life  there.
    There would be some disruption to his son's  life,  but  she  concluded
    that the appellant had not demonstrated that it would not be reasonable
    to expect his son to leave the UK with the appellant.

25. She further concluded that there  were  no  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances  meriting  consideration  outside  the  confines  of  the
    Article 8 Rules.  In this, she referred to the decision of the Court of
    Appeal in Agyarko and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440, in which it was  said
    that the gap between paragraph EX.1. and the requirements of Article  8
    was likely to be small.   The  FtJ's  conclusion  in  this  respect  is
    unaffected by the decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC
    11.

26. Finally, she concluded that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that
    there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
    Nigeria.

27. I cannot see in the FtJ's decision any failure to consider  a  relevant
    issue.  She was fully  aware  of  the  relevant  legal  framework,  and
    applicable authorities.  She made a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
    child's best interests.  She properly concluded that the  child's  best
    interests were not determinative of the appeal.  She took into account,
    as she was bound to do, the public  interest  issue  in  assessing  the
    reasonableness of  the  appellant's  son  going  to  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant.

28. Both the grounds of appeal and submissions before me amount to  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the FtJ's  assessment  of  the  issue  of
    reasonableness.  However,  neither  the  grounds  nor  the  submissions
    identify any error of law in the FtJ's decision.  The FtJ's decision is
    comprehensive and entirely legally sustainable.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 6/12/17

