
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03666/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Listed at Glasgow      Decision Promulgated
On 4th October 2018    On 10th October 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MR AMIRMOHAMMAD ZABOLI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Caskie, Counsel, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


      1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge RG Handley who dismissed the appellant's
         appeal in a decision promulgated on 14 March 2018.


      2. The appeal was against the decision of the entry clearance officer
         to refuse the application for settlement under paragraph 352D made
         on 19 December 2016. The appellant was born on 24 April 1988 and is
         a national of Iran. He applied to join his father, hereinafter
         referred to as his sponsor, who had been granted refugee status.
         His application was refused because he was not under 18 at the time
         of application as required by the rules. Rather, he was 28 years
         old.


      3. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable that the judge
         failed to make findings as to whether family life existed and did
         not properly apply the decision of Kugathas -v- SSHD EWCA 31.

At hearing.


      4. Mr Caskie indicated that he had been speaking with the presenting
         officer, Mr Matthews in advance of the hearing and the presenting
         officer acknowledged that there were 2 material errors of law in
         the decision. The 1st was that there was no finding as to the
         extent to family life between the appellant and his parents. The
         2nd was there was no finding on proportionality. Mr Matthews
         confirmed this was the respondent's position.


      5. The court file contains the respondent's instructions in relation
         to adult dependent relative. There is a statement from the
         appellant's sponsor, his father. It states that he came to the
         United Kingdom in December 2015 and successfully claimed asylum. He
         states that apart from the appellant they have 3 daughters, born
         respectively in 1980, 1972 and 1976. All of his daughters are
         married with young children and live in different parts of Iran. He
         also has 2 children from a previous relationship but they have
         little contact. He states that his wife left Iran to join him in
         March 2017 with the intention that the appellant would follow. He
         indicates that the appellant has visual problems and describes him
         as being almost blind. He indicates that the appellant is presently
         residing in a Care Home. There is also a statement from the
         appellant's sister stating that her brother has no ability to live
         on his own.


      6. At paragraph 25 of the decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley
         stated he had to determine when an adult jail ceased to enjoy
         family life with his parents. The judge did not feel the medical
         evidence indicated the appellant was lined and could not manage his
         own care needs. There was a letter from a lawyer stating the
         appellant needed help with day-to-day activities although the judge
         commented it was not clear the nature and extent of the assistance
         required. The judge questioned why the appellant's mother would
         come to the United Kingdom when his own situation was undecided.
         The judge referred to the care contract which refers to 24-hour
         care as indicative of significant care needs. However, the judge
         felt this was not consistent with the statements. The judge then
         refers to the appellant's sisters and suggests they could assist.


      7. For the hearing I have been provided with the decision of the Upper
         Tribunal in Pun and others -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2106. This case
         considers the meaning of family life between adults. Within the
         instructions on adult dependent relatives there is reference to the
         Court of Appeal decision in Britcits -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA 368.


      8. I agree with the representatives that the decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Handley does not adequately address the question of
         whether there is family life between the appellant and his parents
         at this stage. The judge refers to the claimed physical dependency
         but points out the appellant's mother came here. The judge
         acknowledged the appellant had vision issues but believed he was
         self-caring. However there is no proper analysis of the level of
         family life he enjoyed in Iran with his parents and the contact
         thereafter. There is no reference to any emotional needs. There is
         no real assessment of finding in relation to family life. Following
         from this there is no examination of the proportionality of the
         decision if family life existed. Consequently, I agree with the
         representatives that the decision materially errs in law and cannot
         stand.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley materially errs in law
and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
de novo hearing.


   Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal

Directions.

      1. Relisting in the First-tier Tribunal in Glasgow before any judge
         save for First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley.


      2. Mr Caskie has indicated there is no need for an interpreter.


      3. The appellant's representatives should prepare new bundles for
         hearing including any up-to-date medical evidence in relation to
         the appellant as well as documentation supporting his claimed level
         of care needs in Iran. Evidence showing the position within the
         family before they separated in the context since would undoubtedly
         assist. The decision in Britcits -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA 368 provides
         a useful reference to assessing emotional needs in a care situation
         and this could be considered.


      4. It is anticipated that the hearing should last no more than 2 hours

    Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal


