
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03624/2018
     HU/03626/2018
     HU/03617/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 10th January 2019          |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                 Gladys [C]
                                  Ramil [C]
                                    [J C]
                         (ANONYMITY orders NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants are citizens of the Philippines and are a nuclear family.
Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas in a
decision promulgated on 22nd August 2018.  The judge noted that the third
Appellant, [JC], was a qualifying child because he had lived here for seven
years continuously (paragraph 13).  The judge found that on the totality of
the evidence it was in his best interests to remain in the care of both his
parents (paragraph 14).  The judge found that it was reasonable to expect
the child to leave the UK with his parents (paragraph 18).  The judge found
that the countervailing features in the case did not amount to compelling
or exceptional circumstances to outweigh the public interest in maintaining
effective immigration control.  She therefore went on to dismiss the
appeal.

Grounds of application were lodged.  The first ground was that the judge
had erred in law by failing to properly assess the reasonableness of the
child returning to the Philippines.  The judge had failed to properly
consider and apply the authority of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.
Significant weight had to be given to the fact that the child had been here
for seven years.  There had to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave.  In
these cases, there must be a very strong expectation that the child's best
interests would be to remain here, in particular with reference to
paragraph 49.  The fact that the child had been in the UK for seven years
would need to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise
for two related reasons: firstly, because of its relevance to determining
the nature and strength of the child's best interests and secondly, because
it establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted unless
there are powerful reasons to the contrary.  Further grounds are set out
with reference to relevant case law.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith in a
decision dated 18th October 2018.  It was said that there was an arguable
error of law in that the judge had arguably failed to identify the required
"powerful reasons" held by the Court of Appeal to be required to displace
the "starting point" that leave should be granted in a 7-year-old child
case.  Before me, Mr Slatter, Counsel, appeared for the Appellants and
relied on the grounds of application.  Given that the judge had failed to
follow MA (Pakistan), the judge had fallen into a material error in law.
There were no proper factual findings regarding the best interest of the
child in relation to his presence in this country and as such I was asked
to find an error in law, set the decision aside and remit it to the First-
tier Tribunal.

For the Home Office, Mr Walker said he could not resist the arguments put
forward by Counsel.

I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

In my view, the grounds of application are made out.  The judge mentioned
MA (Pakistan) but did not apply its terms and no more need be said about
that, given the proper concession of the Home Office that the decision is
not safe and it therefore must be set aside.  As Counsel indicated, further
fact-finding appears to be necessary in this case and the matter will have
to be heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside in its
entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.  Under
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 the
nature or extent of the judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to
be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      JG Macdonald                               Date     4th  January
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

