
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03583/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 WASEEM [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O' Ceallaigh, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Waseem [F], was born on 16 August 1980  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He has applied for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his  family  life  with  his  partner.   He  is
    married to a Mrs [S] and they have three  children  together  who  were
    born in 2015, 2017 and  2017  respectively.   Mrs  [S]  and  all  three
    children are British citizens.  The appellant had submitted in  support
    of his application to remain in the United Kingdom a TOEIC  certificate
    from ETS.  Following checks made on the appellant's test  by  ETS,  the
    respondent considered that the test had been  undertaken  by  a  proxy.
    The respondent was consequently satisfied that, as a consequence of his
    conduct, the  appellant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good (see paragraph S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix  FM).
    The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Brien)
    which, in a decision  promulgated  on  16  April  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At [51], Judge O'Brien wrote:

         "I remind myself that the burden of proof in this  case  ultimately
         lies on the respondent and the standard of proof is the balance  of
         probabilities.  Unquestionably, the respondent has  discharged  her
         initial evidential burden;  not  only  has  generic  evidence  been
         provided abroad  at  Universal  Training  College  but  also  case-
         specific evidence that the appellant's own  test  was  taken  by  a
         proxy.  The appellant has, as noted above,  had  provided  evidence
         about the centre and the test and of his  own  circumstances  which
         might otherwise satisfy the relatively  low  evidential  burden  of
         setting out an innocent explanation.  However,  it  is  now  common
         cause that the voice recordings provided by ETS in respect  of  the
         appellant are not of his voice.  He has not given any  satisfactory
         explanation for that, and I am not persuaded that it is the  result
         of a mix-up.  On balance I am satisfied there  is  cogent  evidence
         the appellant, presumably for expediency (although  his  motive  is
         irrelevant), used a proxy test taker to pass the ETS test."

 3. The grounds challenge the judge's findings.  The appellant relies on  R
    (Saha and Another) v SSHD (Secretary of State's duty of candour) [2017]
    UKUT 17 (IAC).  That case drew attention to problems existing with  the
    ETS record keeping system; the processes by which  a  candidate's  name
    was linked to a particular test was unclear.  The Upper Tribunal  found
    that it was not always possible for ETS to match  candidates  with  the
    tests. The grounds [11] assert that the  judge  appears  to  have  been
    under the impression that the only possible explanation  for  the  fact
    that an appellant's voice was not on a recording was that the appellant
    had acted fraudulently. The appellant submits that the judge failed  to
    consider (following Saha) that the  ETS's  system  for  matching  voice
    files cases was unreliable.   Further, even  if  the  test  centre  had
    employed fraud, it was not clear that the appellant had been a party to
    fraud.

 4. The judge was aware of  the  extensive  jurisprudence  arising  in  ETS
    cases,  including  the  decision  in  Saha.   The  difficulty  for  the
    appellant, as the judge noted, is that he has accepted that "the  voice
    recordings provided by ETS in respect of the appellant are not  of  his
    voice".  Earlier in the decision at [48], the judge recorded  that  the
    appellant was unable "... to explain why it is that the test recordings
    held for him by ETS are not his voice".  At [15], the judge states that
    the Presenting Officer  had  submitted  "now  that  the  appellant  has
    conceded the voice on his ETS recordings was not his, the  respondent's
    case of fraud is irresistible" The difficulty for the appellant is that
    the judge has recorded more than once in the decision  that  the  voice
    files held by ETS do not contain his voice.  The judge was not bound to
    accept the appellant's explanation that there had been a "mix-up".  The
    evidence before the Tribunal in Saha was not  that  every  single  file
    attributed to every test taker was wrongly attributed or "mixed-up;" it
    follows that at least some of the voice files  attributed  on  the  ETS
    system to particular individuals had been correctly  attributed.   That
    is what the judge, having considered all the evidence  and  having  had
    the benefit of hearing oral evidence, has concluded in  this  instance.
    Indeed, the appellant himself conceded as much before  the  judge.   As
    regards the incorrect attribution of the burden of proof in the appeal,
    I agree with the Secretary of State who has pointed out, in the Rule 24
    statement, that the burden of proof rested on the  Secretary  of  State
    and that, in light of the concession made by the appellant, that burden
    had been discharged.  I do not accept that the judge has  imposed  upon
    the appellant an impossible  burden  of  proving  something  which  was
    beyond his  competence  to  prove.   The  appellant  has  suggested  an
    explanation for the evidence produced by ETS and the judge, as she  was
    entitled to do, has rejected it.  I find that the judge's  findings  in
    respect of the appellant's use of a proxy are sound.

 5. Having concluded that the appellant had used fraud in his ETS test, the
    judge went on to consider the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The  second
    ground of appeal draws attention to the fact that the appellant appears
    to have overlooked the correct immigration status  of  the  appellant's
    wife; she is a British citizen and not merely a person  in  the  United
    Kingdom with indefinite leave to remain as the judge  stated  at  [52].
    This, the grounds of appeal assert, amounts to an obvious error of law.

 6. It is not clear from the decision what evidence of  the  wife's  status
    was provided to the judge.  Assuming that the grounds are  correct  and
    that she is a British citizen, the question is  whether  the  error  is
    material.  The judge concluded that "[the appellant and his  wife]  are
    both citizens of Pakistan so doubtless [the children] are entitled also
    to Pakistan citizenship and all the rights and privileges that entail."
     The grounds of appeal do not challenge that statement.  The fact  that
    Mrs [S] may be a British citizen does not mean that she is no longer  a
    Pakistani citizen as is, of course, the  appellant.   The  judge  found
    that, as a result of the entire family moving to Pakistan,  they  would
    have improved access with their extended family living there.  Further,
    at [55] the judge observed that Mrs [S] has a right to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, as do the children.  The  judge  also  correctly  noted
    that the children were "qualifying children" as defined by Section 117D
    of the 2002 Act (as amended).  She rightly identified the correct  test
    as being whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the United Kingdom.  She concluded [60] that there were "strong reasons
    to conclude that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
    children to leave the United Kingdom notwithstanding they  are  British
    citizens".  By leaving together, the family unit would  be  maintained.
    The children are very young, they are entitled to  the  citizenship  of
    Pakistan and would have  contact  with  their  extended  family  living
    there.  These were all factors in the analysis which remain  materially
    unaltered even if the judge had proceeded on the basis that Mrs [S]  is
    a British citizen.  In essence, the judge has found  that  the  British
    citizenship of the children was not an impediment to their returning to
    Pakistan with the appellant; there was no reason to  suppose  that  her
    analysis would have been any different had it  been  conducted  on  the
    basis that Mrs [S] is also a British citizen.  I can identify no  error
    of law in the judge's consideration of Article 8 ECHR or section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  which  requires  the
    decision to be set aside.

 7. In conclusion, I find that the judge has not erred in her assessment of
    the ETS/proxy test taker issue in this case.  Further,  the  judge  has
    reached a decision on the Article 8 ECHR appeal which was available  to
    her  on  the  evidence  and  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
