
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On May 18, 2017                       |On May 26, 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD MANSOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Sood, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  national  of  Pakistan.   He  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse. The respondent refused his application  on  July
    24, 2017.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on August 20, 2015  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. His  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Warren
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on August 25, 2016  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on August 30, 2016, the Judge dismissed his  appeal.   That
    decision was appealed on September 22, 2016 and Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Martins granted permission to appeal on December 7,  2016  and
    the matter came before me on  the  above  date  for  an  error  of  law
    hearing.

 4. I do not make an anonymity order in this case.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. Mrs Sood submitted skeleton argument in which she wished  to  raise  an
    additional ground of "procedural unfairness" and  in  oral  submissions
    she also sought to raise the adequacy of former counsel.

 6. I indicated to Mrs Sood that neither of these issues had been raised in
    the grounds of appeal and where there was a criticism of counsel  there
    was a duty on the new advocate to take this issue up with the  previous
    representative. This had not been done and whilst I noted she could not
    locate the previous counsel's/representatives details that  was  not  a
    matter for me today. The appellant had been represented at the original
    hearing  and  had  not  sought  an  adjournment  even  though  one  was
    available, if  required.  The  other  ground  she  therefore  raised  I
    indicated was not something that I was prepared to deal with.

 7. I invited Mrs Sood to address me on the key issue  namely  whether  the
    Judge approached the issue of paragraph 320(11) HC 395 unfairly.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mrs Sood adopted her skeleton argument and submitted that the Judge had
    not approached paragraph 320(11) HC 305  correctly.  The  court  in  PS
    (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC)
    laid down the  correct  approach.  She  submitted  the  Judge  made  no
    reference to the case law and the judge  had  failed  to  identify  any
    aggravating features over ad above the appellant being  an  immigration
    offender. The  Judge  merely  found  the  appellant  had  contrived  to
    frustrate the intentions of the Rules.  The Judge utilised the previous
    decision which was something that had not been served on the  appellant
    until late in these proceedings. She invited me to  find  an  error  in
    law.

 9. Mr Bates opposed the application  and  submitted  the  appellant  found
    himself in the situation he did because when  he  was  supposed  to  be
    studying here he in fact was either working or accessing  Facebook.  He
    had been stopped in 2012 and refused entry. He  could  have  challenged
    that decision but chose not to. The starting point for  the  Judge  was
    therefore that  the  appellant  had  been  refused  entry  due  to  his
    immigration history. There was no requirement for a fresh  decision  as
    this was simply an entry clearance application. The appellant  knew  he
    was not attending lectures or studying and did nothing. The  judge  had
    regard to this and the fact he was working in  circumstances  where  he
    was not allowed to because he was not studying. The finding was open to
    the Judge.

10. Mrs Sood submitted that it was too big a jump to say  why  he  had  not
    appealed the earlier decision at the time but the Judge knew why he had
    not from the evidence presented. She repeated her key submissions.

    FINDINGS

11. The appellant applied for entry clearance. The respondent  refused  the
    appeal under paragraph 320(11) HC 395 which allows  the  respondent  to
    refuse to refuse an application where the appellant has "contrived in a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules".

12. There is no dispute the appellant was earlier refused  entry  clearance
    on November 24, 2012 when he returned to this  country.  Mrs  Sood  has
    sought to challenge that evidence today but as Mr Bates quite  properly
    submitted that decision was not the matter up for appeal. The appellant
    was stopped by immigration control and refused entry with  a  right  of
    appeal. He did not appeal that decision and Mrs Sood's submission  that
    we should not speculate why he did not appeal does not address the  key
    issue in this case. Firstly, when the Judge considered the evidence  it
    included handwritten  notes  from  the  interview  and  a  contract  of
    employment. These were documents served at the  hearing  but  documents
    served  in  advance.  Counsel,  who  represented  the  appellant,   had
    obviously not seen the  documents  and  was  given  an  opportunity  to
    consider them and take instructions. He did not seek an  adjournment-if
    he had the Judge made clear she would have allowed it. In fact, counsel
    relied on parts of the interview to support the appellant's appeal.

13. The Judge was entitled to make the findings on the  documents  that  he
    did.

14. The issue in this appeal is whether the Judge erred in his approach  to
    the appellant's previous behaviour and in finding that  the  respondent
    was entitled to refuse the application under paragraph 320(11) HC 395.

15. The Tribunal in PS set out how such cases should be  considered.  There
    is no error in failing to refer to this case as long as the  principles
    are applied.

16. In PS the Tribunal held that, in exercising discretion under  paragraph
    320(11) of HC 395, as amended,  to  refuse  an  application  for  entry
    clearance in a case where the automatic prohibition  on  the  grant  of
    entry  clearance  in  paragraph  320(7B)  is  disapplied  by  paragraph
    320(7C), the decision maker must exercise great care in  assessing  the
    aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and must have  regard
    to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their status by an  application
    for entry clearance.

17. Mr Bates made the point that the appellant had actually not been in the
    United Kingdom but had been trying to re-enter  unlawfully  because  he
    had not complied with the terms of his visa. Whichever  way  the  judge
    looked at it he had to be satisfied there  were  aggravating  features.
    The respondent's own guidance provides an non-exhaustive list. Included
    within that list is "previous working in breach on  visitor  conditions
    within short time of arrive in the UK". The guidance goes on  to  state
    that all cases must be considered on their merits.

18. The Judge considered the history at paragraphs  [12]  to  [18]  of  his
    decision. The Judge concluded the appellant did not study and  did  not
    comply with the terms of his visa. Bearing in mind this was  the  basis
    he was originally granted entry into the country  He  could  only  work
    specified hours if he was studying. The fact is he was not studying and
    he admitted as much. The Judge's findings at paragraph [17] are clearly
    findings open to the Judge who based on those findings was dealing with
    an appellant who had been here in contravention of  the  terms  of  his
    visa. It is suggested it isn't his fault he  college  stopped  lectures
    but it was his fault he did not tell the respondent.  He  attempted  to
    return  without  having  told  the  Home  office  about   his   changed
    circumstances.

19. Although no case law was quoted I am satisfied the  Judge  applied  the
    spirit and principles of PS. There is no error in law.

20. The other issues raised on fairness and adequacy  of  counsel  have  no
    merit for the reasons given earlier.


    NOTICE OF DECISION

21. There was no error in law and I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     April 12, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I dismiss the appeal.

Signed                              Date     April 12, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

