
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03636/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2019                 |On 4th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN


                                   Between

                         Christiana Ekwutosi OHAKANU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Sasthi Jaisri, counsel instructed by Irving & Co
For the respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal by a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  in  1977  against  a
    decision by Judge Moore sitting at Taylor House on 22 August 2018.  She
    was here in November 2013 on a visit visa and met the sponsor, who is a
    British citizen.  In February 2014 she returned to Nigeria, and in  May
    that year she and the sponsor had a  traditional  marriage  there.   In
    July she returned to this country, and from  then  on  lived  with  the
    sponsor.  In October they went through a civil marriage, and  she  then
    applied for a wife visa on 7 January.  On 6 March that was refused with
    a right of appeal, and on 18 September that appeal  came  before  Judge
    Manuell.  The respondent was not represented for some reason;  but  the
    appeal went ahead, and Judge Manuell found that the appellant  and  the
    sponsor had a genuine and subsisting relationship.

2.   Judge Manuell dismissed the appeal; but for reasons  unrelated  to  the
    appellant and the sponsor's relationship.  During the  course  of  2015
    the appellant had had some NHS treatment in  this  country,  and  there
    were outstanding charges for that.  The appellant returned to  Nigeria,
    and made a second application for a wife visa.  On 13 January 2016 that
    application was refused on the basis of the outstanding charges, and on
    an assessment of the appellant's Article 8 rights.  On 23  August  that
    decision was confirmed by the entry clearance  manager,  and  a  second
    appeal came before Judge Hussain on 15 June 2017.  At that hearing  the
    presenting officer conceded the point on the NHS charges, on the  basis
    that there were arrangements in hand for them to be paid, in accordance
    with the terms of the relevant policy. However the  presenting  officer
    argued that there  was  not  the  necessary  family  life  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  This time the judge was  not  satisfied  of
    the relationship between them, and dismissed the appeal on that  basis.



3.   On 28 November the appeal came before this Tribunal in front  of  Judge
    Warr.  Judge Warr found that Judge Hussain had taken a  wrong  approach
    to Judge Manuell's findings and directed a fresh hearing.  On 22 August
    2018 that came before Judge Moore.  Judge Moore decided that  he  could
    depart from Judge Manuell's findings, on the basis that Judge Warr  had
    found them vague and unconvincing.  However, unfortunately Judge  Moore
    overlooked the fact that the passage he was relying  on  "having  heard
    the oral  evidence  of  the  sponsor  I  found  him  to  be  vague  and
    unconvincing" appeared in a long passage from Judge Hussain's  decision
    which was cited word for word by Judge Warr at paragraph 4 of his  own;
    but without the quotation marks being immediately  apparent  round  the
    passage cited.

4.   It is clear that those were not findings upheld by Judge Warr  when  he
    found there had been an error of law on the part of Judge Hussain.   It
    follows that Judge Moore approached the case  on  a  wrong  basis,  and
    there will have to be a fresh hearing before another first-tier  judge.



Appeal :: decision under appeal set aside

Fresh hearing at Taylor House (not before Judges Manuell, Hussain or Moore)
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)



