
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03786/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th September 2017                         |On 5th October 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                              mrs Safia Zulifar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal, Haris Ali Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  dated  15th
    July 2015 to refuse her application for entry  clearance  to  join  her
    spouse, a British citizen, in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge A J  M
    Baldwin dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 7 April 2017.
     The Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 11th July 2017.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on only one ground.
     The ECO was not satisfied that the Appellant's relationship  with  the
    Sponsor is genuine and subsisting or that they intend to live  together
    permanently in the UK in  accordance  with  paragraph  EC-P.1.1.(d)  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The ECO noted  that  it  was  an
    arranged marriage and that the Appellant and  Sponsor  are  related  as
    paternal first cousins.  However the ECO noted that it  was  reasonable
    to expect that there would be regular contact and communication between
    a couple.  Although there were photographs of  the  marriage  ceremony,
    there was no evidence submitted as to the time  the  couple  had  spent
    together as a couple  rather  than  as  relatives.   The  communication
    between them  was  insufficient  to  demonstrate  contact  between  the
    parties as a couple, rather than just as relatives, from either  before
    or since the marriage.

 3. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the judge heard oral evidence
    from the Sponsor and his mother and  considered  further  documentation
    submitted in  support  of  the  appeal.   In  his  findings  the  judge
    identified that the first and primary issue to be  determined  was  the
    genuineness of the marriage.  The judge made findings  in  relation  to
    discrepancies as regards the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  marriage
    ceremony. The judge considered the Sponsor's evidence about the lack of
    documentary evidence of  contact  before  the  decision  including  his
    evidence  that  he  had  lost  his  phone.   The  judge  rejected   the
    explanation put  forward  for  the  lack  of  documentary  evidence  in
    relation to contact before  the  refusal.   The  judge  considered  the
    evidence of contact after the refusal and noted  discrepancies  between
    the evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor in relation to  the  duration
    of contact between the parties.  The judge noted further  discrepancies
    in relation to the potential for the Sponsor to visit the Appellant  in
    Pakistan [24].  The judge concluded that the Appellant had  not  proved
    that her marriage is probably genuine and subsisting and that  both  of
    them intend to live together permanently as  spouses  in  the  UK.  The
    judge did not doubt that they are close blood relatives  who  are  very
    close to each other, having grown up from birth in the same  household,
    but did not accept that the relationship was as claimed[25]. The  judge
    went on to put on record concerns in relation to the financial evidence
    which had become apparent during the hearing [26].

 4. In the renewed Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    complains that the judge made an  error  of  law  in  relation  to  his
    assessment about the genuineness of the marriage in that he gave weight
    to immaterial matters around the evidence about their wedding.   It  is
    submitted that the judge erred in his approach to  the  evidence  about
    the Sponsor's phone.  The second ground contends that the  judge  erred
    in making findings in relation to the financial situation when that was
    not in issue at the hearing.

 5. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  suggested
    that it was  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  an
    incorrect approach to the evidence concerning the  genuineness  in  the
    marriage, for example the potentially  corroborative  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor's mother and the financial evidence.

 6. At the hearing  before  me  Ms  Vidal  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's Judge's overall approach to the evidence was flawed.  It  is
    suggested that the judge's approach at paragraph  22  to  the  evidence
    about the wedding affected  the  way  the  rest  of  the  evidence  was
    assessed.  It is suggested that the judge's conclusion at paragraph  23
    that the Sponsor would not have been able to provide records  of  calls
    and communications he had with the  Appellant  during  his  three  year
    engagement before he lost his phone was speculative as it is not  clear
    whether the Sponsor, or indeed anyone experienced in this type of  area
    would be able to provide evidence as  to  whether  such  records  would
    still exist.  In her submission the judge's conclusion at paragraph  24
    that the fact that there had only been one visit since the marriage was
    not satisfactory was a subjective analysis and failed to  take  account
    of the fact the  Sponsor  had  tried  to  expedite  the  hearing.   She
    submitted that it was clear that the judge was  against  the  Appellant
    from the outset.  In her submission the judge's findings were permeated
    by irrationality.  She argued that the judge's conclusions at paragraph
    25  that  the  evidence  of  post-refusal  contact  could  be   equally
    consistent with a determined attempt on the part of  the  Appellant  to
    get herself into the UK for other reasons assisted by the  Sponsor  and
    his mother failed to take into account the evidence  which  could  have
    led to a conclusion that there was a genuine marriage.   She  submitted
    that the judge erred in failing  to  take  into  account  any  positive
    factors from the evidence placed before the court.  She submitted  that
    there was inadequate notice for the Sponsor to deal  with  the  judge's
    concerns in relation to the financial issue. She said that, although at
    the  hearing  attempts  were  made  to  obtain  further  evidence,  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were at  a  serious  disadvantage  as  the  judge
    seemed to have taken against them early on.

 7. In response Mr Duffy submitted that the  grounds  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant are simply a disagreement with the  findings.   He  submitted
    that even the issue about the consideration of the  financial  evidence
    only arises if the Appellant has established that there is an error  of
    law in relation to the findings as to the genuineness of the  marriage.
    In any event, in his submission, had the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  felt
    that they were disadvantaged by the issues being raised at the  hearing
    they should have sought an adjournment in order to obtain  evidence  to
    deal with financial issues.

 8. In response  Ms  Vidal  submitted  that  this  was  more  than  just  a
    disagreement with the findings, it is also about the  approach  of  the
    judge to the evidence overall.

Discussion and conclusions

 9. Ms Vidal did not point to any relevant evidence which the judge  failed
    to take into account or to any irrelevant evidence which the judge gave
    weight to in reaching his conclusions.  The judge  undertook  a  proper
    assessment within Article 8 through the prism of the Immigration Rules.



10. In my view it is clear that the judge reached findings at paragraph  22
    that were open to him. Contrary to the assertion in  the  grounds,  the
    judge was not making comment as to the validity of the marriage itself,
    but pointing to inconsistencies in relation to  the  marriage  ceremony
    which are capable of going to the credibility of the parties.

11. At paragraph 23 the judge observed that there was  little  evidence  of
    pre-refusal contact and rejected the  explanation  that  the  Appellant
    lost his phone and did not replace it at that  time.   The  judge  also
    pointed to an inconsistency between the evidence of the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor, that they speak to each other for hours each  day  whereas
    the call records show that many of the calls  are  very  brief  or  the
    subject of no contact. These conclusions were open to the judge on  the
    evidence before him

12. The  judge  made  observations  at  paragraph  24  in  relation  to  an
    inconsistency between the evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor  as  to
    who  paid  for  any  visits  to  Pakistan.   Whilst  acknowledging  the
    difficulties of getting leave to travel to Pakistan with two jobs,  the
    judge noted that the Sponsor had given up his second job in March  2015
    and noted that there was no evidence of a visit  since  then.   It  was
    open to the judge to make observations about  the  lack  of  visits  in
    terms of his assessment of the genuineness of the relationship.

13. The judge did acknowledge that the Appellant had sought to expedite the
    hearing but, for the reasons given at  paragraph  24,  did  not  attach
    significant weight to that factor in terms of  his  assessment  of  the
    genuineness of the relationship.  This finding was open to him  on  the
    evidence.

14. At paragraph 25 the  judge  made  observations  in  relation  to  other
    motives for post-refusal contact and those observations and conclusions
    were open to the judge.

15. I therefore conclude that the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    genuineness of the marriage were open  to  him  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him. Those conclusions were not irrational or perverse.
     The grounds have not been made out in this regard.

16. At paragraph 26 the judge records a number of concerns in  relation  to
    the financial evidence before him.  It  was  open  to  the  Appellant's
    representative to seek an adjournment of  the  hearing  had  they  been
    unable to deal with the concerns raised at the hearing, as set  out  at
    paragraph 9 of the decision, but they did not do so.  It  was  open  to
    the judge to make those observations  in  the  circumstances.   In  any
    event, given my findings in  relation  to  the  conclusions  about  the
    genuineness of the marriage, I am satisfied that these matters  do  not
    undermine the decision in relation to the principal matters and have no
    material effect on the overall decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

