

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU 03057 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                       |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|on    20.11.2017                         |On 23 November 2017               |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                  Sima PUN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Samuel Shepherd  (counsel instructed by NC Brothers,
Reading)
For the respondent: Mr Tom Wilding

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Christine Graham), sitting at Birmingham on 14 November
    2016, to  Gurkha dependant appeal by a citizen of Nepal, born in  1988.
    The appellant's father had served with the Brigade of Gurkhas from 1967
    - 71, of course long before there had been any thought  of  that  being
    rewarded with indefinite leave to  remain  in  this  country.  However,
    after this had come about, he and his wife had settled  here  in  2011,
    leaving the appellant and a married elder brother behind them.

 2. The appellant had applied for leave to join them not  long  after,  but
    her appeal against refusal of that application had  been  dismissed  in
    2012: neither side was able to provide me with a copy of that decision.
    She had applied again on 16 June 2015, but was once more refused on  20
    July that year.



 3. The judge set out in her paragraph 2  the  terms  of  the  Home  Office
    Gurkha dependant policy, to be found in  annex  K  of  the  Immigration
    Directorates' Instructions [IDIs], providing for the settlement in some
    circumstances of  adult  children  of  former  Gurkhas.  The  appellant
    unarguably satisfied the conditions for the policy to apply,  with  the
    exception of two important ones, which required (5) that the  applicant
    be financially and emotionally dependent on the former Gurkha, and that
    (9)

       The applicant has not been living apart from the  former  Gurkha  for
       more than two years on the date of application, and has  never  lived
       apart from the sponsor for more than two years at a time, unless this
       was by reason of education or something similar (such that the family
       unit was maintained, albeit the applicant lived away).

 4. This appellant clearly had been living apart from her father  for  over
    two years when she made this application, which had not  been  for  the
    purpose of study or anything similar, but because her  parents  decided
    to move here without her in 2011. She would not have fallen within  the
    terms of the Gurkha dependant policy as it then stood, though of course
    that was the background against which they decided to do so.

 5.  The  judge  reviewed  the  evidence,  and  the  relevant  authorities,
    including Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  Nepal  [2012]
    UKUT 160 (IAC) (approved in Gurung & others [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8),  and
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31. She concluded as follows at paragraph 18:

       ... I am  satisfied  that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
       Appellant and  her  parents.  I  have  found  it  relevant  that  the
       Appellant was left as a minor to live alone in Nepal, at the time the
       parents left she had not landline and therefore  she  was  unable  to
       speak to her parents for a 'few years'. There is no evidence that the
       sponsor was financially supporting his daughter from the time he left
       her in Nepal. The Appellant's representative has  accepted  that  the
       Appellant was, at least for a period of time, employed by  a  gym  in
       Nepal and in the absence of evidence  of  money  transferred  to  the
       Appellant until (one transfer in 2015) 2016, I am left to  find  that
       she supported herself in Nepal. Therefore I find that Article  8  (1)
       is not engaged in this appeal.

 6. The appellant was given permission to appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  on
    various grounds, including a reference to Jitendra Rai [2017] EWCA  Civ
    320. At paragraph 39 Lindblom LJ, giving the leading judgment, put  the
    question at issue in this way:

       ... whether, as a matter of fact, the appellant had demonstrated that
       he had a family life with his parents, which had existed at the  time
       of their departure to settle in the United Kingdom  and  had  endured
       beyond it, notwithstanding their having left Nepal when they did

 7. The issue is exactly the same in  the  present  case,  and  Mr  Wilding
    conceded that, if the judge had been wrong to make the finding she  did
    on family life, then the appeal must be allowed. The result in Rai  was
    that, since the deputy Upper Tribunal judge had  not  properly  applied
    the principles in the  authorities  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant enjoyed a family life with his parents (see paragraphs  36  -
    37), and had allowed  himself  to  become  distracted  from  that  main
    question by repeated reference to the parents' decision  to  leave  him
    and come here (38 - 39), a re-hearing was ordered.



 8. I can now turn to the argument before me. Mr Shepherd put his case with
    commendable economy and realism. Dealing first with the judge's mistake
    about the appellant having been a minor when her parents came here (see
    passage cited at 5), he suggested that, if her parents had nevertheless
    decided to leave her behind at that age, the  separation  between  them
    would have been all the more significant. However I put it to him  that
    the first sentence of this passage, read as a whole, looked  very  much
    more as if the judge was not making  that  point  at  all,  but  making
    allowances, in view of what he  thought  had  been  her  age,  for  the
    appellant's  failure  to  communicate  with  her   parents   for   some
    considerable time. Mr Shepherd conceded that this was a  tenable  view,
    and I see no reason not to adopt it.

 9. Mr Shepherd went on to refer to  the  change  in  the  policy  for  the
    admission of adult Gurkha dependants, introduced by annex  K  in  2015:
    the appellant had unquestionably lived together with her parents  as  a
    family until they left Nepal in 2011, and, if she had been able to make
    her application by 2013, then she would not have been apart  from  them
    for as much as two years. I shall come back to this point after dealing
    with the arguments on both sides.

10. Mr Shepherd's last point was to suggest that the judge  had  not  given
    the appellant credit for satisfying the remaining requirements of annex
    K. However, it was  abundantly  clear  to  all  concerned  that,  going
    through those requirements in order, her father  was  a  former  Gurkha
    settled here; she was his daughter, outside the UK, and between 18  and
    30. There had never been any suggestion  by  the  respondent  that  her
    father would not have applied for settlement before 2009 if he had been
    able to do so. It follows that  the  judge  cannot  be  criticized  for
    concentrating on the real points  in  issue,  which  were  whether  the
    appellant was financially and emotionally dependent on her father,  and
    what the reasons were for her living apart from him for over two years.

11. The first of these questions is at the heart of the point on which  the
    judge dismissed the appeal, which was to conclude  that  there  was  no
    family life between the appellant and her parents  as  defined  in  the
    authorities, for the purposes of article 8 (1) of  the  European  Human
    Rights Convention, so that she did  not  need  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether or not the appellant's exclusion would be proportionate to  the
    legitimate purpose of , in terms of article 8 (2).

12. As Mr Wilding pointed out, Mr Shepherd's argument at 8 had to  do,  not
    with the question of whether family life between the appellant and  her
    parents existed or not, but with whether, if family life were found  to
    exist, the  history  of  their  separation  would  make  her  exclusion
    disproportionate.

CONCLUSIONS

13. I agree with Mr Wilding's argument. The question  on  which  the  judge
    decided the appeal  was  the  existence  of  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her parents: she referred to the leading authorities, and
    made findings of fact at paragraph 18, which Mr Shepherd  realistically
    accepted could not be challenged on the evidence before her.

14. While the lack of any provision for settlement of former Gurkhas before
    1997 is described in the authorities as a 'historical injustice', I  am
    not aware of any which apply that term to the effect of the  policy  in
    force from 2009 to 2015. It has become more favourable since then; but,
    although the appellant's parents cannot be blamed for taking  up  their
    rights in 2011, the judge had to decide the case on  the  facts  before
    her in November 2016. She  provided  a  fully-reasoned  basis  for  her
    conclusions, and in my view they cannot be challenged.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                               Dated 22 November 2017
