
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
HU/03565/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |           Decision and Reasons       |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 26th June 2019                   |           On 04th July 2019          |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     FM
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, Solicitor-Advocate from Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1972. She  arrived  in
       the UK in March 2016 with a visit visa. Her leave to remain  expired
       in September 2016, but prior to the expiry of her leave,  in  August
       2016, she applied for leave to remain on human rights  grounds.  Her
       application was refused in a decision of the respondent  dated  16th
       January 2018. Her appeal against the decision was dismissed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Wolfson in a determination  promulgated  on  the
       13th December 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford
       on 24th January 2019 and for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
       appended as Annex A to this decision I  found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in  law  and  set  aside  the  decision  with  no
       findings preserved.

    3. The matter came back before me to remake the appeal.  The  witnesses
       all gave oral evidence in support of their  written  statements,  in
       the appellant's case this was through a Yoruba interpreter.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    4. The appellant's evidence, in summary, is that she should be  allowed
       to remain as Z, her 15 year old daughter, has had a  difficult  time
       with a lot of changes in her life including: her parents breaking up
       and her new partner not getting on with Z and her  brother,  I,  and
       mistreating them which led to them coming to the  UK  to  live  with
       their father in 2015; with Z's father, IM,  having  previously  left
       the home in Nigeria in 2006 and remarrying in the UK  in  2009,  and
       then that relationship breaking down and her father mistreating her;
       and finally with her parents  coming  back  together  again  in  the
       Spring of 2016. Z's father, IM, had found it difficult to  parent  Z
       when he was with her in the UK without the appellant  in  2015,  and
       Social Services became involved when he hit her. They had called her
       in Nigeria  about  the  incident,  and  she  was  troubled  by  IM's
       behaviour. Social Services no  longer  have  a  role  assisting  the
       family as she, the appellant, has been present  in  the  home  since
       March 2016. She does not allow Z to be alone  with  IM  even  though
       they now all live together as a family again, and she also tries  to
       guide Z to make better choices in her behaviour. IM has never  tried
       to hit Z since she has been in the UK, she is confident that  things
       are fine now that they are back together as a  family.  She  resumed
       her relationship with IM as her partner about two months  after  she
       came to the UK, and thus in May 2019. At present she does not  work,
       but if she is allowed to remain she will try to get a job which fits
       into the hours when Z is at school. She previously worked in Nigeria
       as a trader. IM works in security and provides financially  for  the
       family.  Z and her older brother I, who is 19 years old,  are  happy
       in the UK and have a right to remain here, and do not wish to leave.
       Z is doing her GCSE examinations next year and  will  continue  with
       education thereafter. It is her view that it  is  not  in  Z's  best
       interests to leave the UK, or to be separated from her.

    5. Z herself gives evidence that she wishes to remain in the UK because
       of her schooling and her friends in  this  country,  and  wants  the
       appellant to remain as  she  needs  her  guidance  and  because  the
       appellant's presence has improved the relationship she has with  her
       father and has created a close bond between all family members.  She
       has only had one incident where her father was violent to her, which
       was the one where the police and  Social  Services  became  involved
       with the family in 2015. She feels that her  relationship  with  him
       has not fully recovered but that they are getting there, and she  is
       now comfortable with her father, but does  not  do  things  such  as
       shopping or going to the cinema just with him. She hopes  to  go  to
       college to study fashion  design  after  finishing  her  GCSEs,  and
       believes that she will keep her  same  friendship  circle  when  she
       makes this transition. She has no friendship with people in  Nigeria
       and would not wish to visit her mother in Nigeria if she were forced
       to live there. Z  believes  that  her  own  best  interests  are  to
       continue at her current school to  complete  her  GCSEs  next  year.
       (This is supported by a letter from the head of  Imperial  House  at
       Harris Girls Academy.)

    6. I, the appellant's  19  year  old  son,  describes  the  appellant's
       presence as indispensable as he  really  loves  her  and  there  are
       things that he can only discuss with her. He is settled  in  the  UK
       with friends, and plans to continue living at home with  his  family
       in the future. He has finished his education and  is  working  as  a
       warehouse operative doing full-time  nightshifts.  He  is  concerned
       that the relationship between Z and  his  father  could  deteriorate
       again if the appellant is not allowed to  remain  and  stresses  how
       important the appellant is for Z's welfare and happiness. He has not
       had to intervene on behalf of Z with their father since the incident
       in 2015, and  now  his  mother  is  here  she  stops  such  problems
       developing immediately. He would of course try to protect Z  if  the
       appellant were not in the UK if this was needed but feels he  cannot
       do what the appellant does for Z. He went on a trip  to  Lagos  last
       year and visited an uncle there, but could not  imagine  his  mother
       not living with him in the UK which is his home. Z has  not  visited
       Nigeria since their arrival in 2015.

    7. IM is the appellant's current partner and father of her children. He
       is a British citizen. He was previously married to Ms Shenese Braams
       in the UK, after his first relationship  with  the  appellant  broke
       down. The appellant also had a new relationship in Nigeria  at  that
       time, and when her partner mistreating his children they applied for
       them to come to the UK to join him. The appellant had some telephone
       contact with the children during the year when they were living with
       him in the UK. He found Z's school, which he believed to be one with
       good grades, and does things such as attend parents' evenings as the
       appellant's level of English is not so good as his so she might  not
       understand everything in such a context.  He said that he  has  only
       hit Z on one occasion in 2015, which was the incident which  led  to
       Social Services being called. H realises that this was a big mistake
       on his part. Now he has learned to listen and talk and  be  patient,
       and things have changed since the appellant returned to the  family.
       They would all be devastated if she left as she is their pillar.  He
       and the  appellant  want  to  get  married  again,  but  are  unable
       currently to book a ceremony as their passports are  with  the  Home
       Office. He feels happy and settled, and the appellant is  playing  a
       very significant role in bringing up the children.  She  also  helps
       him understand the children, and they  make  joint  decisions  about
       their things such as whether Z should be  allowed  to  go  out  with
       friends. He has only been out  once  with  Z  without  other  family
       members since the incident in 2015. He currently works as a security
       officer three days a week and supports the family from this work. He
       pays for their three bedroom flat without receiving any benefits. He
       is also doing a three day a week level 5  course  in  management  in
       health and social care so that he can move on with his career,  with
       the fees for this course being paid via a student finance  loan.  He
       will return to working full time once his college course is finished
       in a few months' time. The appellant has given him the  strength  to
       improve his situation through education.

    8. Southwark Social Services state in their letter  of  3rd  June  2019
       that they have no involvement with the family as there have been  no
       safeguarding concerns since their return to Southwark in April 2016.
       Lambeth Social Services set out in their written agreement signed on
       14th March 2016 by the appellant and her partner that Z must not  be
       subject to physical chastisement; that the appellant must be present
       at all times when Z and her father are together; Z must not be  left
       unsupervised by her father at any time; that the  appellant  and  IM
       should work with the police and children's services to ensure  Z  is
       safe; and that IM had  to  comply  with  his  then  applicable  bail
       conditions.  It  is  clear  from  letters  from   Morrison   Spowart
       Solicitors that the appellant's partner's criminal charges  relating
       to child protection were discontinued by  the  police  in  September
       2016.

    9. Ms Cunha submits that  she  relies  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter. In this letter, in summary, the respondent sets out that  he
       does not consider that the applicant can meet  the  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules  and  finds  that  there  are  no  exceptional
       matters which require a grant of leave to remain on Article  8  ECHR
       ground outside of the Immigration Rules. The best interests  of  the
       children are served by Z and  I  remaining  in  the  UK  with  their
       father, as they can remain in touch with the  appellant  via  modern
       methods of communication and visits to Nigeria.

   10. Ms Cunha also submits that the appellant was not present in  the  UK
       when the incident with Z  took  place  and  the  police  and  Social
       Services managed to protect Z with the help of her brother I,  which
       shows Z's best interests can be served without the  appellant  being
       present as these measures could all be put in place again  if  there
       was a worsening of the relationship between Z and  her  father,  and
       therefore it is not disproportionate to remove the appellant  as  it
       is in the interests of immigration control that she  be  removed  as
       she cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
       entered as a visitor and so is expected to leave at the end  of  her
       visit.

   11. Mr Sesay accepted on behalf of the appellant that she was unable  to
       meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He  argued  however
       that it was not in the best interests of Z for the appellant  to  be
       removed. She wants her mother to remain and has given evidence about
       how central she has been to the improvement in Z's relationship with
       her father and  in  the  family  bonds  becoming  close  again.  Her
       separation from her mother impacted on her badly and the presence of
       the appellant has been key to Social Services no longer  needing  to
       assist this family and protect Z. It is also in Z's  best  interests
       to continue her education in the UK, and Z  has  strong  integrative
       links with friends in this country and does not want to leave as she
       has made her home here. It would not be sufficient for the appellant
       to maintain contact with Z through  modern  means  of  communication
       given her central role for Z and the family. Whilst it is clear from
       the case law that Z's best interests can be outweighed in an Article
       8 ECHR proportionality exercise this is not the case on the facts of
       this  case.  The  appellant  is  not  an  overstayer   but   entered
       legitimately and honestly as a visitor.




   Conclusions - Remaking

   12. It is accepted that the appellant cannot show compliance with any of
       the Article 8 ECHR Immigration Rules. It is therefore in the  public
       interest that she is removed,  as  the  maintenance  of  immigration
       control is in the public interest. I find  that  the  appellant  can
       speak some basic English is a neutral matter, as is  the  fact  that
       the appellant is financially self-sufficient as she is supported  by
       her partner, IM, by his work in security.

   13. I  accept  that  the  witnesses  are  all  credible.  There  was  no
       submission to the contrary by Ms Cunha, and the evidence  they  gave
       was consistent with their written statements and  with  each  other.
       All witnesses answered the questions put to  them  fully,  and  they
       were all frank about the difficult incident which had led to police/
       Social Services involvement with the family and  answered  extensive
       cross-examination on this issue openly.

   14. As already stated appellant  cannot  show  that  she  can  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to  the  children,
       equally she cannot show she is entitled to succeed in this appeal by
       application of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002 as Z is not a qualifying child as she has not been  in  the
       UK for 7 years and  is  not  a  British  citizen,  although  she  is
       lawfully present with an EEA residence card. I must however consider
       the best interests of Z as a child.

   15. Z is a 15 years old girl who has been in the UK for four years,  and
       I find that she is lawfully present as she has an  unchallenged  EEA
       right to remain in the UK reflected in a  residence  card  which  is
       valid until July 2021. Her brother, I,  has  the  same  status.  Her
       father is habitually resident and a British citizen, and she came to
       the UK to join him in 2015 as she was unable to live with her mother
       and her then partner in Nigeria.

   16. In the UK, shortly after her arrival in 2015, her relationship  with
       her father deteriorated and the police and  Social  Services  became
       involved with the family as he beat her  during  an  argument  as  a
       result of his becoming angry at her misbehaving at school.  Criminal
       proceedings were eventually discontinued, but in March  2016  Social
       Services made the family agree that Z should not be alone  with  her
       father at home and that the appellant should always  be  there  with
       her, the appellant having arrived in  March  2016,  and  the  family
       having taken on its original configuration. Social Services have not
       been involved with the family since the appellant's  arrival  as  no
       further issues have arisen between Z and her  father.  I  find  that
       this is because the  appellant  has  proactively  diffused  conflict
       between the two and overwhelming kept to the agreement with  Lambeth
       Social Services that Z and her father not be together without  other
       family members, and because the appellant's presence has led to  the
       family reconstituting itself as a happy functioning  unit  with  all
       family members having fulfilling relationships with her, and finding
       her presence supportive to the improvement of  relations  between  Z
       and her father, IM.

   17. Z has just finished the first year of her two year GCSE courses, she
       and her school find that it is in her best interests to be  able  to
       finish her examination courses at her current school. She  is  happy
       in the UK, and wants to live with the appellant and her  father  and
       brother, and with her friendship circle.

   18. I find that it is undoubtedly in Z's best interests to remain in the
       UK, and for the appellant to remain with  her  and  her  father  and
       brother, I. Z has had a very disrupted childhood  during  which  she
       had to leave her country or origin as she was unable to continue  to
       live with her mother (who had been her sole parent for the  majority
       of her childhood) due to the appellant's  then  partner  mistreating
       her and her brother, I, her father having already  left  her  mother
       when she was very young to marry someone  in  the  UK.  Z  was  then
       seriously assaulted by her father shortly after coming to the UK  to
       join him when she was 12 years old, and  had  to  cope  with  Social
       Services and police  involvement  in  the  family.  The  appellant's
       arrival resolved the issues with her father, made police and  Social
       Services involvement with the family  unnecessary  and  led  to  her
       returning to her mother being a constant in her life  again,  as  it
       had been until she was 11 years old and came to the UK.  I find that
       it is in Z's best interests to maintain  her  current  happy  family
       arrangement with the appellant in the UK against  this  backdrop  of
       instability and distress, and  given  the  appellant  was  her  sole
       parent for many years prior to her entry to the UK which I  find  is
       reflective of the current strong bond between Z and  the  appellant.
       The family has come back together in the UK since March 2016 and the
       evidence of all parties is the appellant is key to the family  being
       reconciled and operating successfully to support Z  in  her  growing
       up. I do not find that it would be possible for this integration and
       the constant daily maternal support to Z to be  provided  by  Skype,
       email, text and telephone calls.  Z is also now at a  key  stage  in
       her education in the UK and has her own private  life  ties  with  a
       strong friendship circle in this country,  has  an  uncontested  EEA
       right to remain in the UK  and  I  find  that  it  is  in  her  best
       interests to maintain her life in the UK for that reason.

   19. Only little weight  can  be  given  to  the  private  life  ties  of
       appellant with the UK as all of these have been  formed  whilst  she
       has been precariously present, with leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor
       extended by  an  in-time  application  to  remain  on  human  rights
       grounds, since her  arrival  in  2016,  applying  s.117B(5)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  I  find  that  the
       appellant has a genuine relationship with her current  partner,  IM,
       who is the father of Z and I, and has lived with him since May 2016,
       and thus for a period of three years,  in  a  relationship  akin  to
       marriage. I can give some weight to this relationship as it has  not
       been formed  whilst  the  appellant  has  been  unlawfully  present,
       however there is no evidence  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
       obstacles to their family life taking place in Nigeria. Clearly  the
       appellant and her partner, IM, have historically lived  together  in
       Nigeria and I find that the fact that he is now a dual  British  and
       Nigerian citizen does not affect that  conclusion.  The  appellant's
       son, I, is not a child anymore. He is working full  time  and  is  a
       young adult who is 19 years old. I find however that he remains part
       of the family unit, and still is dependent on  the  support  of  the
       appellant as his mother in a way which does  not  differ  materially
       from that of a 17 year old. I find that a family  life  relationship
       continues between the appellant and I, who now  has  strong  private
       life ties with the UK having completed his education here and  being
       in full time employment, and that weight should  be  given  to  that
       relationship when considering the proportionality of the appellant's
       removal given that he also is lawfully present with an  unchallenged
       EEA right to remain.

   20. The ultimate question is whether the fact that it would be  strongly
       in the best interests of Z for the appellant to  remain  in  the  UK
       with her for all of the reasons set out above;  and given  that  the
       appellant's presence also is important for her son, I, with whom she
       continues also to  have  a  family  life  relationship  and  who  is
       lawfully present in the UK; and given that she  also  has  a  family
       life relationship with her partner, IM, who  is  a  British  citizen
       these factors are sufficient to make  her  removal  disproportionate
       when significant weight must be given  on  the  other  side  of  the
       balance to the public interest in  maintaining  immigration  control
       and removing her as a person who cannot met the requirements of  the
       Immigration  Rules.  This  is  a  finely  balanced   decision,   but
       ultimately on the particular facts of this case and giving weigh  to
       the best interests of Z as a primary consideration I  conclude  that
       the appellant's removal is a disproportionate interference with  her
       family life ties to the UK.

              Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. I remake the appeal allowing it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid the disclosure
    of the identity of Z who is a minor with whom Social Services  has  had
    contact on child protection grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   2nd July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


    Annex A: Error of Law Decision



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



     1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1972. She arrived  in
        the UK in March 2016 with a visit visa. Her leave to remain expired
        in September 2016, and prior to this  expiry  in  August  2016  she
        applied for leave on human  rights  grounds.  Her  application  was
        refused in a decision of the respondent dated  16th  January  2018.
        Her  appeal  against  the  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Wolfson in a determination promulgated on  the  13th
        December 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford
       on 24th January 2019 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in the consideration of  the  best
       interests of the child and whether it was reasonable to  expect  her
       to  leave  given  that  the  child  holds  an  EEA  residence  card,
       particularly as there was  no  reference  to  the  decision  of  the
       Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal argue that the decision errs in law as it  was
       contrary to the EU Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  to  punish  the
       appellant's daughter due to her mother's lack of immigration status.
       It was in her daughter's best interests to be with  her  mother  and
       thus to allow her mother to remain, and this had not  been  properly
       determined by the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. Mr Clarke initially submitted that there had been no evidence from Z
       or regarding her best interests, but I was able to provide him  with
       the appellant's bundle from the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  he  then
       accepted that although limited it was  unfortunate  that  there  was
       some evidence that had not been considered as part of the  decision.



Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. The appellant has two children, the oldest, I, was born in September
       1999 and the youngest, Z, in October 2003 and so  is  now  15  years
       old.

    7. The two children  were  both  born  in  Nigeria  and  have  Nigerian
       citizenship, but are present in the UK with EEA residence  cards  as
       family members, those cards being valid until July 2021.  They  have
       lived in the UK with  their  father  since  September  2015,  having
       applied for entry clearance in 2013. Their father was divorced  from
       their mother in 2006 and married an  EEA  national  in  2009.  Their
       father then divorced from his EEA wife in May 2015. He  was  granted
       permanent residence on the basis of his  EEA  marriage  in  December
       2015, and British citizenship in March 2017. It was found that there
       was an incident raising child protection concerns between Z and  her
       father in which the father was subject to police action in June 2016
       but that this was discontinued in  September  2016.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the father and his two children live as a family
       unit, and that the appellant is now back in a relationship with  the
       father so lives with them too.

    8. I find that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the  best
       interests of Z as a separate matter as should have happened applying
       ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
       UKSC 4. The consideration of the best interests of  Z  is  mixed  up
       with a consideration of what is  reasonable  to  expect  Z  and  the
       appellant to do. There needed to be a proper separate  consideration
       of her best interests as a matter of  primary  importance  prior  to
       embarking on a consideration of  whether  it  was  proportionate  to
       remove the appellant.

    9. The best interests'  consideration  ought  to  have  considered  Z's
       private life ties with the UK, her schooling, health,  future  plans
       and other matters relevant to her such as her relationship with  her
       older sibling and his future plans. I also find that the conclusions
       of the First-tier Tribunal regarding the letter from Lambeth  Social
       Services regarding the written agreement between the  appellant  and
       her husband with respect to Z were irrational. It is not clear  what
       was meant by finding the letter to be "flawed" due to the  agreement
       being signed after the  date  of  the  letter  or  why  it  was  not
       "plausible" because it had not been followed up by  Social  Services
       in the way that the First-tier Tribunal Judge felt  it  should  have
       been. Given the gravity of the  position  taken  by  Lambeth  Social
       Services in that letter it was not rational to have given the letter
       "little weight" as is done at paragraph 49 of the decision, although
       of course it might have been rational to  have  concluded  that  the
       concerns no longer applied but this needed to be  on  the  basis  of
       clear evidence.  The issue of this serious breakdown in 2015/2016 in
       the relationship between Z  and  her  father  is  one  which  should
       feature in  a  consideration  of  her  best  interests.  These  best
       interests  should  then  have  been  a  primary  consideration  when
       assessing the proportionality of the removal of  the  appellant  her
       mother.

   10. The proportionality issue  should  also  properly  have  included  a
       reasoned consideration of whether it was reasonable to expect  Z  to
       go to  Nigeria;  reasoned  conclusions  as  to  whether  there  were
       insurmountable obstacles to family life in Nigeria; and  if  it  was
       not reasonable to expect Z to leave the UK whether it was reasonable
       to expect Z to have family life with her mother  by  way  of  remote
       modern communications as happened between September 2015  and  March
       2016.

   11. When considering the proportionality of the appellant's removal  the
       First-tier Tribunal properly considered that the appellant could not
       show compliance with the Immigration  Rules  or  take  advantage  of
       s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  It was rightly accepted  that  the  fact
       that the appellant speaks English and is  supported  financially  by
       her husband in the UK were neutral factors.  However,  there  was  a
       failure to balance the  best  interests  of  Z,  as  these  are  not
       properly defined as set out above; there was a failure  to  consider
       whether there was an interference with any EEA right to reside Z may
       have (the EU nexus of her father's EEA wife has gone and  possession
       of a residence card is only declaratory, and so is not evidence of Z
       having such an EEA right, but one might perhaps arise due to Z being
       in continued education in accordance with the principles set out  in
       the ECJ case of Baumbast C-413/99 or  through  a  different  route);
       there was a failure when considering whether it would be  reasonable
       to expect the appellant to return to Nigeria to have family life  in
       that country to provide reasons  as  to  why  Z  could  be  properly
       expected to either to  have  her  family  life  with  the  appellant
       remotely by modern means of communication or by returning to Nigeria
       with her father and the appellant.

   12. In these circumstances I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal with no findings preserved, although I have indicated above
       where I have found the  approach  taken  to  have  been  correct.  I
       adjourn the remaking  hearing  so  that  amongst  other  things  the
       appellant, Z and any  other  witnesses  can  place  proper  detailed
       witness statement evidence about the best interests of Z before  the
       Upper Tribunal and an updated  letter  from  Social  Services  about
       whether the agreement of 14th March 2016  continues  to  apply,  and
       possibly a letter from Z's school about whether in their view it  is
       in her best interests to remain in the UK to continue her education;
       and also so the appellant can define and document any  EU  right  to
       reside that it is claimed that Z possesses.

   13. In addition, Mr Clarke raised the possibility  that  the  respondent
       might take the view that the EU right was a new matter,  and  so  an
       adjournment will enable the respondent to consider this issue and to
       indicate if it is seen as a new matter whether consent to  raise  it
       is given. My preliminary view is that  this  is  not  a  new  matter
       because it is not  a  new  factual  matrix  not  considered  by  the
       respondent in the decision, as the decision  under  challenge  makes
       reference to the children (Z and I) having residence in  the  UK  as
       EEA family members.

              Decision:

   4. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   5. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   6. I adjourn the remaking hearing to the 23rd April 2019.

   Directions

   1.  The appellant will provide an updating statement setting out the best
      interests of Z from her perspective and any difficulties she  contends
      that there would be for the whole family to relocate to Nigeria or her
      having  her  parental  relationship  with  Z  by   modern   means   of
      communication.
   2.  The appellant will provide a witness statement from Z herself in  her
      own words setting out what Z  believes  to  be  firstly  in  her  best
      interests with respect to remaining in the UK or returning to  Nigeria
      with reasons for these opinions; and then secondly explaining  whether
      she believes it would be reasonable  for  her  to  remain  in  the  UK
      without her mother or to return to Nigeria with her mother.
   3. The appellant will provide a letter from Lambeth  Social  Services  to
      confirm whether or not they believe it is in Z's  best  interests  for
      the appellant to live with Z and her father or whether they would have
      no concerns if Z continued to live with her father without her  mother
      being in the UK, and giving details of any current  contact  with  the
      family.
   4. The appellant will provide any other witness statements or documentary
      evidence given, that they decide is  necessary,  such  as  perhaps  an
      opinion from Z's school as to whether it is in her best  interests  to
      remain in that institution for her  education  with  reasons  for  any
      opinion.
   5. If it is argued that Z continues to have an EU right to reside then  a
      brief skeleton argument setting out how this is argued should be filed
      and served by the appellant's solicitors.
   6. The updating evidence and skeleton argument will  be  filed  with  the
      Upper Tribunal and served on the respondent by the 12th April 2019.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid the disclosure
    of the identity of Z who is a minor with whom Social Services  has  had
    contact on child protection grounds.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   19th March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







