
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/03264/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 September 2018                    | On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr Mohammad Suleman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Els, Counsel, instructed by Mamoon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 22 May 2018 Judge Brookfield  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereafter the  claimant)
    on Article 8 grounds, stating at paragraph 8(x) that:

         "8(x)    The respondent has a duty to control immigration into  the
                UK for the legitimate  purpose  of  the  protection  of  the
                economic well being  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  for  the
                protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of  others  through
                operation of the Immigration Rules.   Derogation  from  that
                duty would affect all citizens living in the UK.  I  am  not
                aware that Article 8 is a mechanism to be used to circumvent
                the Immigration Rules.  The  respondent's  published  policy
                indicates that where the child is a British citizen, it will
                not be reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  with  the
                applicant parent or primary carer facing removal.   In  this
                case the appellant's son will not be required to  leave  the
                UK with the appellant, but would be able to remain in the UK
                with his mother, who is his primary  carer.   I  accept  the
                appellant would be able to resume  the  contact  and  family
                life he enjoyed with his son in the past on  his  return  to
                Pakistan and his son would  be  able  to  visit  his  father
                there.  I noted that this family elected  to  live  separate
                from each other until the appellant came  to  the  UK  as  a
                visitor in 2013.  However, given that  the  appellant's  son
                will not reach his majority until January of  next  year,  I
                find it would be unreasonable to remove the appellant whilst
                his son remains a minor.  I conclude that the removal of the
                appellant from the UK before his son  attains  his  majority
                would constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  his
                rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   I  allow  the  human
                rights appeal."

2.   The appellant's (hereafter the Secretary of State's or SSHD's)  grounds
    contend that this conclusion was contrary to the judge's  own  findings
    of fact which included that: the relationship between the claimant  and
    his wife had ended; there was no  protected  family  life  between  the
    claimant and his  adult  children;  the  claimant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules on the basis of his  relationship
    with his youngest child;  the youngest child would not be  required  to
    leave the UK as a result of the SSHD's decision; the decision does  not
    interfere with the current care arrangements of the youngest child;  it
    is in the best interests of the child to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
    mother and the SSHD's  decision  does  not  interfere  with  that;  the
    decision does not breach s.55; the appellant would be  able  to  resume
    contact with his son by way of  the  son  visiting  Pakistan;  and  the
    family had elected  to  live  separately  from  each  other  until  the
    claimant came to the UK as a visitor in 2013.

3.   I have no hesitation in finding that the judge's decision  is  vitiated
    by legal error.  The only  effective  reason  given  for  allowing  the
    appeal in paragraph 8(x) was that the claimant had contact with his son
    who was still a minor.  Furthermore, on the basis of the judge's  other
    findings (in particular that the claimant did not live with his son  or
    have any contact rights  in  relation  to  him,  that  the  son's  best
    interests were served by him remaining in the UK with his  mother),  it
    was clearly doubtful whether the nature of the claimant's contact  with
    his son was sufficiently strong or  significant  enough  to  warrant  a
    grant of stay.  The fact that on the judge's own  findings  the  family
    life existing between the claimant and the son could  be  continued  in
    the form of visits (see 8(vii)) only compounded  the  irrationality  of
    the decision to find the decision disproportionate solely on the  basis
    of the fact that there was regular contact between the claimant and his
    son.  Put another way, even if the judge accepted that there was family
    life between the claimant and his youngest son and that there was  some
    degree of parental relationship, he clearly did not consider that  this
    tie had a strong factual content. On the judge's own  findings  it  was
    not a relationship in which they lived together or in which the child's
    best interests required the presence of the claimant  in  the  UK.   At
    paragraph 8(vii) the judge held:

         "8(vii)  In this case, the respondent's decision does not interfere
                with  the  current  arrangements  for  the   care   of   the
                appellant's son who would remain living in the UK  with  his
                mother, who  is  his  primary  carer.   There  would  be  no
                interruption of his education and he would  continue  to  be
                able to  enjoy  the  stability  and  continuity  of  social,
                educational and healthcare provisions  and  the  benefit  of
                growing up in the UK that he has enjoyed in  the  past.   He
                would be able to enjoy contact with his father in  Pakistan,
                as he did up until five years ago.   He  would  be  able  to
                visit his father in Pakistan and his father would be able to
                apply to visit his son in the UK, as he has in the past.   I
                find the best interests of the appellant's son are served by
                his remaining in  the  UK  with  his  mother  and  that  the
                respondent's decision does not interfere with this.  I  find
                the respondent's decision does not violate Section 55 of the
                Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."

4.   I raised with the parties whether, even if I find the judge's  decision
    legally flawed, it would be because of material legal error.  I had  in
    mind that although the judge clearly did not in paragraph 8(x) identify
    the respondent's policy as a basis for allowing the appeal, it might be
    argued that that policy benefits the claimant since he is the parent of
    a British citizen.  The fatal difficulty with this argument (as Mr  Els
    himself conceded when contrasting it with the respondent's pre-February
    2018 version of this policy) is that it clearly does not consider  that
    the mere fact of parenthood qualifies the parent of a  British  citizen
    child for leave to remain.  The policy the judge had to apply was  that
    revised on 22 February 2018.  At pages  72-73  of  that  policy  it  is
    stated:

         "Is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for  a
         continuous period of at least seven years?

         The decision maker should establish from the application  or  claim
         the age and nationality of each child  affected  by  the  decision.
         Where the child is a foreign national, the  decision  maker  should
         establish their immigration history in the UK (for example how long
         have they lived in the UK and where they lived before).


         In establishing whether a non-British citizen child  has  lived  in
         the UK continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  the  decision  maker  should
         include time spent in the UK with and without valid leave.


         Short periods outside the UK - for example for holidays  or  family
         visits - would not count as a break in the continuous period of  at
         least seven years required.  However, where a child has spent  more
         than six months out of the UK at any one time, this  will  normally
         count as a break in continuous  residence  unless  any  exceptional
         factors apply.


         Will the consequence of refusal of  the  application  be  that  the
         child is required to leave the UK?


         The decision maker must consider whether the effect of  refusal  of
         the application would be, or would be likely to be, that the  child
         would have to leave the UK.  This will not be the  case  where,  in
         practice, the child will, or is likely to, continue to live in  the
         UK with another parent or primary carer.  This will be likely to be
         the case where for example:


            . the child does not live with the applicant
            . the child's parents are not living together  on  a  permanent
              basis  because  the  applicant  parent  has  work  or   other
              commitments which require  them  to  live  apart  from  their
              partner and child
            . the child's other parent lives in the UK  and  the  applicant
              parent has been here as a visitor and therefore undertook  to
              leave the UK at the end of their  visit  as  a  condition  of
              their visit visa or leave to enter


         If the departure of the non-EEA national parent or carer would  not
         result in the child being required to leave  the  UK,  because  the
         child will (or is likely to) remain living here with another parent
         or primary carer, then the question of whether it is reasonable  to
         expect the child  to  leave  the  UK  will  not  arise.   In  these
         circumstances, paragraph EX.1.(a) does not apply.


         However,  where  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship between the applicant and the child,  the  removal  of
         the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that child.
          For that reason, the decision maker will still  need  to  consider
         whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is  appropriate  in
         light of all the circumstances of the case, taking into account the
         best interests of the child as  a  primary  consideration  and  the
         impact on the child of the applicant's departure from the  UK.   If
         it is considered that refusal would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for the applicant, the child or  their  family,  leave
         will fall to be granted on the basis of exceptional  circumstances.




         If the decision  maker  is  minded  to  refuse  an  application  in
         circumstances in which the applicant would then be separated from a
         child in the UK, this decision should normally be discussed with  a
         senior caseworker."

5.   This policy clearly regards the quality of the relationship  between  a
    parent and a child as a highly material matter  to  the  case  worker's
    assessment.  Accordingly,  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law.

6.   I turn to consider whether I am in a position to re-make  the  decision
    without further ado.  I have concluded that I am.  There is no  dispute
    as  to  the  judge's  primary  findings  of  fact;  only  as  to  their
    evaluation.  No further evidence has  been  adduced  by  the  claimant.
    There is no dispute in this case that there is an existing family  life
    between the claimant and his youngest son.  Whilst it is  not  entirely
    clear why the judge accepted that there was regular contact between the
    claimant and his son (the mother's statement said there was not), I  am
    prepared to decide the  case  on  the  basis  that  there  was  regular
    contact. I must also take into account the correspondence  evidence  in
    which, inter alia, the youngest son expresses the importance to him  of
    his relationship with his father.

7.   However, the judge's findings of fact as set out earlier  are  entirely
    consistent with this correspondence evidence and on the basis of  those
    findings, particularly those set out at  paragraph  8(vii),  it  simply
    cannot reasonably be said  that  the  SSHD's  decision  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect  for  private
    life.  The claimant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  The
    best interests of the British citizen child lay in remaining in the  UK
    (as he was entitled to do in any event).  He was living with his mother
    who was  his  court-recognised  primary  carer.   On  the  judge's  own
    findings of  fact,  the  relationship  between  the  claimant  and  his
    youngest son could be adequately sustained in the form of visits by the
    son to the claimant in Pakistan.   The  claimant's  removal  would  not
    therefore significantly disrupt their relationship.  The  claimant  did
    not and does not stand to benefit from the Home Office policy precisely
    because he was not and is not the primary carer and does not live  with
    the youngest son and his removal will not significantly  disrupt  their
    relationship.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2018
                [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

