
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/03031/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 November 2017                        |On 3 January 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                           mr CHINEDU JOACHIM MADU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                      THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge C Ferguson promulgated on 10 May 2017 dismissing the appellant's
      appeal for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse
      of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.


   2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by first-tier Tribunal Judge
      PJM Hollingworth on 21 June 2017 and  subsequently  granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Eshun on 15 September 2017 stating  that  "the  grounds
      disclose an arguable error of law in the  judge's  decision  that  the
      appellant and his wife are not in a subsisting marriage".

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made the  following  findings  in
      his decision which in summary are the following.  The appellant  is  a
      citizen of Nigeria born on 2  August  1989  and  claims  to  be  in  a
      subsisting relationship  with  Ms  Page  born  on  16  December  1992.
      Paragraph 284 and Appendix FM of the immigration rules  provides  that
      it is a  requirement  that  "each  of  the  parties  intends  to  live
      permanently with the other as his or her spouse or civil  partner  and
      the marriage or civil partner is subsisting".


   4. The Judge  stated  that  the  respondent's  reliance  on  the  alleged
      inconsistencies  in  the  marriage   interview   were   difficult   to
      understand. The answers were almost entirely consistent and there were
      no striking inconsistencies. The interviews show  that  the  appellant
      and MsPage know each other well despite not having lived together  and
      it is accepted that they have seen each other  regularly  since  their
      marriage.


   5. Having said that the Judge stated that he does not consider  that  the
      appellant has provided a sufficient explanation for the fact  that  he
      and Ms Page have  never  lived  together.  There  is  also  no  proper
      explanation for the fact that Ms Page has never been to the city where
      the appellant has been living and working for the  past  three  years.
      Further, it was noted in the decision that even  after  the  appellant
      knew that he would be working in London, he still did  not  intend  to
      live with Ms Page until September of this year.


   6. The Judge stated that this was not a  case  where  there  are  obvious
      concerns about credibility. The Judge was satisfied that the appellant
      and Ms Page have some kind of relationship and they may intend to live
      together at some point in the future, but the Judge was not  satisfied
      that they currently have a marital relationship. The Judge found  that
      their does not appear  to  be  any  current  barrier  to  them  living
      together. The Judge found that Ms Page's  behaviour,  is  inconsistent
      with a marital relationship. The Judge also noted that  they  have  no
      joint financial obligations of interests. The  Judge  found  that  the
      marriage is not subsisting, and their relationship does not engage the
      protection of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and
      dismissed the appeal.


   7. The appellant submits in his grounds of appeal, the following which  I
      summarise. The appellant's appeal was decided on the papers because he
      was not represented and did not attend the hearing due  to  his  shift
      requirement network and because he was in the process of  moving  from
      Derby to London.  The  judge  has  made  an  irrational  and  perverse
      conclusion. He has failed to  take  relevant  evidence  properly  into
      account and his conclusion is based on  irrelevant  consideration  and
      has misdirected himself in law.


   8. The Judge in dismissing the appeal stated at paragraph 22 and 24  that
      there were no  inconsistencies  in  the  marriage  interview  and  the
      interview shows that the appellant and Ms Page know  each  other  well
      despite not having lived together and accepted  that  they  have  seen
      each other regularly since their marriage.  The  Judge  further  found
      that this is not a case there are obvious concerns  about  credibility
      and that he is satisfied that the appellant and MsPage have some  kind
      of relationship and they may intend to live together at some point  in
      the future. Having said that, he dismissed the appeal on the basis the
      appellant had not provided  sufficient  explanation  for  why  he  and
      MsPage had never lived together. The Judge further concluded that  the
      Judge failed to take into account the explanation provided for why  Ms
      Page had never been to Derby  to  visit  the  appellant.  The  Judge's
      conclusion is therefore irrational, perverse and  unsustainable  given
      the findings of fact made by the Judge.


   9. The Judge did not take into account the appellant's evidence  that  he
      and Ms Page communicate religiously via text  messages  and  sometimes
      WhatsApp. The Judge  did  not  state  in  his  decision  whether  this
      evidence was accepted, rejected or did not support the claim that  the
      relationship was subsisting.


  10. The second ground is that the  Judge  failed  to  properly  take  into
      account  relevant  evidence.  He  did  not  take  into   account   the
      appellant's letter of 15 February 2017  where  he  explained  that  he
      works at a 24-hour depot and his working patterns are  based  on  days
      and night shifts. He visits Ms Page in Kent  after  every  third  week
      when he is given a few days off. The Judge did not take  into  account
      Ms Page's evidence that she wants to stay  close  to  her  family  and
      Kent. Therefore, the evidence of the appellant and Ms Page  adequately
      explains why the appellant and his wife have never lived together  and
      why Ms Page had never  travelled  to  Derby.  Therefore,  the  Judge's
      conclusion  that  now  proper  explanation  had   been   provided   is
      unsustainable.


  11. The judge also found at paragraph 24 that the appellant and  his  wife
      have no joint financial obligations but failed to have regard  to  the
      Nationwide evidence for account number *****referred to at,  paragraph
      14 which demonstrates that the appellant and his wife  have  a  shared
      bank account.


  12. The third ground was that the appellant's appeal  cannot  be  lawfully
      undermined by the fact that Ms Page had never travelled to Derby.  The
      relevant issue as to whether a marriage is subsisting is not where the
      direct contact takes place but whether direct contact takes place. The
      Judge accepted at paragraph 22 that the appellant  and  Ms  Page  have
      seen each other regularly since their marriage. Therefore, it was  not
      lawfully open to the Judge to dismiss the appeal of  the  ground  that
      the MsPage did not travel to Derby. This  has  been  explained  by  Ms
      Page's evidence that she wanted to stay close to her family in Kent.


  13. The Judge further misdirected himself in concluding  at  paragraph  23
      and 24 of the decision  that  the  marriage  was  not  subsisting  for
      reasons that the appellant and his wife would not be residing together
      until September 2017. This demonstrates that  the  appellant  and  his
      wife did intend to commence cohabitation in September 2017 so the fact
      that they would  not  do  so  before  that  date  but  will  still  be
      maintaining their relationship.


  14. The Judge has  also  misdirected  himself  in  his  conclusions  under
      Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.  He  has  found
      that the appellant and Ms Page have regularly seen  each  other  since
      their marriage. He also found that the  appellant  and  his  wife  may
      intend to  live  together  at  some  point  in  the  future  and  have
      maintained communication. Therefore, the Judge's conclusion  that  the
      relationship was not subsisting was not an open one to him in law  and
      on the evidence.
  15. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  as  to  whether
      there is an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Mr Swain relied on his grounds of appeal  dated  16  August  2017.  He
      submitted that the Judge found that this was not a case about lack  of
      credibility. He also found that they intend to live  together  in  the
      future.


  16. Miss Fijiwala in her submissions stated that  all  the  findings  were
      open to the Judge and his conclusion that  the  relationship  was  not
      subsisting, is sustainable on the evidence. The fact  that  the  Judge
      found that the appellant and Ms Page obviously knew each  other  well,
      can equally point to a relationship  in  the  past.  The  question  is
      whether it continues to exist. The appellant's evidence for the reason
      why Ms Page has never travelled to Derby for three years  due  to  his
      shift work is not believable. She said that the appeal  was  heard  on
      the papers and that the Judge did not  have  the  benefit  of  hearing
      evidence from both parties. There was  also  a  very  slim  bundle  of
      documents before the court and there was no witness statement from  Ms
      Page. She said that the appellant and Ms Page may  have  had  a  joint
      account but that it was operational and there  walls  no  evidence  of
      payments to anyone from that account.


  17. Mr Swain in reply said that the appellant has now moved from Derby  to
      London. There were clear reasons given for why Ms Page did  not  visit
      the appellant in Derby which was due to his shift patterns.


  18. Miss Fijiwala added that MsPage's desire and  preference  to  live  in
      Kent does not mean  that  she  could  not  make  a  simple  visit  the
      appellant in Derby which is some three hours away. She added that even
      though the appellant has moved to London they  are  still  not  living
      together.

         Decision as to whether there is an error of law

  19. The position of the appellant is that the Judge  has  made  irrational
      and perverse findings that the appellant's marriage to Ms Page is  not
      subsisting on the evidence before him. The difficulty with this appeal
      was that the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  was  made  on  the
      papers and the appellant was not represented and did  not  attend  the
      hearing. The Judge cannot be criticised for making a decision  on  the
      evidence before him as he did not have the benefit  of  oral  evidence
      which is very important in  a  case  where  the  issue  is  whether  a
      particular relationship is subsisting.


  20. The Judge clearly grappled with the evidence and found that it was not
      consistent with a subsisting marriage especially that  Ms  Page  never
      visited the appellant in Derby for  three  years  when  he  lived  and
      worked there. At paragraph 14 the  Judge  considered  the  appellant's
      application where his answer to the question whether they  had  shared
      any financial responsibilities, he said that they  had  not.  He  said
      that they share a nationwide bank account and said,  "but  we  haven't
      used it for a while because the bankcard  can  only  be  used  in  ATM
      machines".


  21. He also considered the evidence of Ms Page's answers at  the  marriage
      interview that only two guests attended their wedding who are  friends
      of the appellant from university. The Judge said that Ms Page did  not
      know their names and had only seen anyone of them before. Ms Page  did
      not know the names of any of the appellant's  friends.  The  appellant
      drives down usually when he has a meeting  in  London.  The  appellant
      said that it was "every three weeks give or take". MsPage said, "not a
      lot" and only came down once in the  last  two  months.  Finally,  the
      evidence that they intend to move together when the appellant  gets  a
      contract in London. The Judge considered the explanation given  by  Ms
      Page that she wants to stay close to her family and the appellant said
      that it would be "next year realistically".


  22. The Judge took into account the respondent's view that it  was  always
      the appellant who travelled to see Ms Page in Kent which  takes  three
      hours every three weeks. It was stated that it would be expected  that
      a couple in a genuine relationship and not living together  and  given
      the relatively short travel distance of three hours, it would also  be
      expected that the appellant and Ms Page would see each other  more  in
      person.


  23. The Judge did consider all the evidence because it is set out  in  his
      decision. It is not a fair criticism to say that he did not take  into
      account all the evidence which was before him. However, the appeal was
      heard on the papers and no oral evidence was provided at  the  hearing
      Given that the appellant's  marital  arrangements  with  Ms  Page  are
      unusual but that is not to say they are indicative  of  a  non-genuine
      marriage because married people live in different ways.


  24. Be that as it may, given that some of the findings made by the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge that "the appellant and Ms Page have "some kind of
      relationship" and that they "may intend to live together at some point
      in the future", I am satisfied that this relationship requires further
      scrutiny. I find that this can only be done at a hearing  de  novo  at
      the First-tier Tribunal where  the  appellant  and  Ms  Page  will  be
      required to give oral evidence which can be examined, and findings  of
      fact made.


  25. I find that there is a material error of law in the decision and I set
      it aside and remit the appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      hearing by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge C Ferguson.


Notice of Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Mrs S Chana                           Dated the 18th day of  December
    2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
