
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03338/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 September 2020                        |On 21 September 2020           |
|At a remote hearing via Skype               |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                ASIM HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has appealed against a  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated on  9  September  2019,
      dismissing his appeal on Article 8 grounds, against a decision dated 4
      February 2019 in which the respondent refused his human  rights  claim
      for reasons including an allegation that he fraudulently  submitted  a
      TOEIC certificate in a previous application.

Procedural history


   2. In a decision dated 10 February  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')  Judge
      Stephen Smith granted permission to appeal. He considered it  arguable
      that the FTT considered the reasonableness as opposed to the  fairness
      of refusing to adjourn the hearing, in the light of  the  findings  it
      was required to make in relation to  the  respondent's  allegation  of
      dishonesty.  He also observed that the  materiality  of  the  arguable
      error would have to be explored at the UT  hearing,  in  view  of  the
      matters raised by the FTT about the appellant's earlier non-compliance
      with directions.


   3. In a note and directions sent on 30 April 2020, UTJ Mandalia indicated
      a provisional view that the  matter  could  be  determined  without  a
      hearing,  subject  to  submissions  from  the  parties.   In   further
      directions sent on 17 July 2020, UTJ Mandalia noted that the appellant
      placed reliance upon submissions dated 22 May 2020 but the  respondent
      failed to provide any response to directions.  UTJ Mandalia was of the
      view that the UT would  be  assisted  by  oral  submissions  from  the
      parties as to the materiality of  any  material  error  of  law.   The
      matter now comes before me.

Hearing

   4. Mr Ahmed relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He agreed  with  me  that
      there were two grounds of appeal.  I address each of  those,  together
      with Mr Ahmed's submissions below.  Mr Tan invited me to find that the
      FTT's decision did not contain any material error of law.


   5. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision, which
      I now provide with reasons.


Discussion

Ground 1 - adjournment

   6. It is uncontroversial that the appropriate test is whether  a  refusal
      to  grant  an  adjournment  will  cause  unfairness  -   see   Nwaigwe
      (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) wherein at [8] the  UT
      said, "...sensations of frustration and inconvenience, no  matter  how
      legitimate, must  always  yield  to  the  parties'  right  to  a  fair
      hearing...".  In SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284  the
      Court of Appeal sets out the straightforward unfairness test in  these
      terms at [13], "The test was not whether  his  decision  was  properly
      open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse. The  test  and
      sole test was whether it was unfair."


   7. I must therefore consider not whether the FTT's decision to refuse the
      adjournment application was open to it, but whether it was fair.  What
      did fairness demand of the FTT?  In my judgment, on no legitimate view
      of the relevant evidence and  circumstances  could  it  be  said  that
      fairness required adjournment.  The appellant and / or his  solicitors
      bore primary responsibility  for  the  position  the  appellant  found
      himself in, and on the evidence available, it is difficult to see what
      an adjournment would  have  achieved  beyond  further  delay.   In  so
      finding I bear in mind the following circumstances.


   i) The notice of hearing (20 August 2019) was sent to the appellant,  his
      solicitors and the respondent  on  1  May  2019.   This  required  the
      respondent to provide all evidence relied upon before 29 May 2019, and
      for the appellant to provide his evidence in response in a  bundle  as
      soon as possible after that.  The respondent's bundle is dated  8  May
      2019.  In breach of directions, the appellant submitted no evidence in
      response to this.  It would have been clear to the appellant from  the
      decision under challenge dated 4 February 2019, in relation  to  which
      he lodged an appeal on 19 February 2019, that the  respondent  alleged
      dishonesty regarding his use of a TOEIC test and this demanded (at the
      least) a careful explanation in a witness statement.


  ii) The only material communication on behalf  of  the  appellant  to  the
      Tribunal came in a fax from his solicitors, sent at 15.56 on 19 August
      2019 ('the fax'), the day  before  the  hearing.   This  requested  an
      adjournment of the hearing for the following reasons:


                            "We have been informed that our client has been
                            unwell for the past week or so.   He  has  been
                            unable to  give  any  instructions  or  have  a
                            conference  in  readiness  for  appeal.   As  a
                            result, we have been unable to prepare a bundle
                            in support of the appeal, to which we apologise
                            for.  Our client is  located  in  east  London,
                            making travel to our office difficult.


                            Unfortunately, we  are  unable  to  attend  the
                            hearing tomorrow as  our  instructions  are  to
                            seek an adjournment on paper."


 iii) Mr Ahmed submitted that the fax provided two  important  explanations:
      (i) the appellant was unable to attend the hearing because he was  too
      unwell, and; (ii) the solicitors  were  unable  to  prepare  a  bundle
      because the appellant had been unwell  for  a  week.   Both  of  these
      explanations were at best vague and unparticularised.  The  solicitors
      provided very little information in support of an adjournment.  I deal
      with the two matters relied upon by Mr Ahmed in more detail below.


  iv) Given  the  lateness  of  the  adjournment  application,  it  was  not
      considered on the papers but placed before FTT Judge Abebrese  at  the
      hearing itself.  The respondent was represented  at  the  hearing  and
      opposed the adjournment.  There was no appearance by the appellant  or
      his solicitors, and no explanation  for  this  beyond  the  fax.   The
      solicitors offered no explanation as to why they were  not  instructed
      to make an application for an adjournment at the hearing itself.

   v) Contrary to Mr Ahmed's submission, the fax  simply  asserts  that  the
      appellant "has been unwell".  There is no attempt to contend that  the
      appellant remained unwell or that he remained so unwell that he  could
      not  attend  the  hearing.   In  addition,  the  application  for   an
      adjournment did not set out the nature or extent of  the  illness  and
      was not accompanied  by  any  evidence.   There  remains  no  evidence
      whatsoever in support of the claim that the appellant  was  unwell  at
      the time.


  vi) The FTT was provided with no evidence from the appellant  in  response
      to the respondent's decision and  contention  of  dishonesty.    There
      remains no such evidence.  This constituted a  breach  of  directions.
      Mr Ahmed submitted that the solicitors  sought  to  explain  the  non-
      compliance with directions by asserting that the appellant was  unable
      to give instructions or attend a conference.  However, the  solicitors
      did not explain why that could not be done before the appellant became
      unwell, or when  it  could  be  done.   The  directions  required  the
      appellant to provide his evidence and documents as  soon  as  possible
      after 29 May 2019.  After all fairness required a consideration of the
      appellant's evidence by the respondent, prior  to  the  hearing.   Yet
      there is no explanation as to why a conference and  instructions  were
      only being sought in the week preceding the hearing.


   8. Fairness is of course a concept which applies from the  standpoint  of
      both parties to litigation, and fairness in the procedure also demands
      that legally represented parties must bring forward  the  entirety  of
      their case on the occasion upon which it is incumbent to do so,  which
      in this context is in compliance with the FTT directions.


   9. I find it quite impossible to characterise  as  unfair  the  procedure
      which was adopted by the FTT, having regard  to  the  history  of  the
      matter.  Mr Ahmed placed emphasis on three matters, which he submitted
      meant that fairness demanded an adjournment.  He first submitted  that
      the fax provided important explanations.  For the reasons I  have  set
      out above, I do not agree.  The fax was vague and provided very little
      information.  He secondly drew attention  to  the  importance  of  the
      appellant's past compliance with Tribunal procedures: he had  attended
      two Tribunal hearings and had never sought an  adjournment.   If  this
      was of such importance, one  would  have  expected  it  to  have  been
      highlighted within the fax.  The question of fairness focuses upon the
      fairness  of  that  particular  hearing  going  ahead  and  any   past
      compliance on the part of the appellant in unrelated proceedings seems
      to me to be of rather distant relevance.  Mr Ahmed  also  relied  upon
      the importance of evidence of the appellant's innocent explanation  to
      the appeal.  Clearly this was significant and likely to  be  critical.
      This makes it  all  the  more  surprising  that  a  witness  statement
      containing that explanation could not be submitted in  good  time  for
      the hearing.  The appellant had been legally represented by  the  same
      solicitors at all material  times  (up  until  recently  when  No.  12
      Chambers began acting on behalf of the appeal instead of his  previous
      solicitors), yet there has been no meaningful attempt to  explain  why
      directions were not sought to be  complied  with  prior  to  the  week
      before  the  FTT  hearing.   After  all,  the   appellant   knew   the
      respondent's case as early as February 2019.   The  appellant  had  an
      extended period of time prior to any unwell period the week before the
      hearing to set out his case but failed to do so.


  10. In addition, the contention in the  grounds  that  the  appellant  was
      effectively deprived of an opportunity to give evidence and provide an
      explanation wholly fails to acknowledge that  proceedings  before  the
      FTT require an appellant who is legally  represented  to  place  their
      evidence in a witness statement, which acts as examination  in  chief.
      The appellant had every opportunity to provide a witness statement and
      there has been no explanation for his  failure  to  do  so  before  he
      became unwell, or why he was too unwell to do so.  There has similarly
      been no cogent explanation or evidence to support the failure  on  the
      part of the appellant or his solicitors to attend the hearing in order
      to explain the position.


  11. Furthermore, the broad assertion that the appellant has been unwell is
      wholly unsatisfactory.  No attempt has been made to explain the nature
      or extent of the illness or to attach any medical evidence  either  at
      the time  of  the  application  or  since.   The  application  for  an
      adjournment was made very late the day before the hearing.


  12. The FTT was fully entitled to observe  that  the  application  for  an
      adjournment was not particularised or supported  by  medical  evidence
      and  there  was  a  failure,  without  explanation,  to  comply   with
      directions or indeed provide any  form  of  evidence  of  an  innocent
      explanation.  Notwithstanding this, the  FTT  should  have  explicitly
      considered whether fairness demanded an adjournment  of  the  hearing.
      The FTT erred in law in failing to directly address  whether  fairness
      required an adjournment.  However, this failure is not  material.   On
      any legitimate view of the circumstances, fairness did not require  an
      adjournment for the reasons I have explained above.  The appellant and
      his solicitors simply failed to comply with the  requisite  procedural
      requirements without any cogent explanation.  In addition,  there  was
      no hint in the letter of 19 August 2019 that this could be remedied or
      when that might be.  Despite the failure  to  consider  fairness,  the
      instant case  is  one  of  those  rare  cases  in  which  it  made  no
      difference.  When all the relevant circumstances are considered, there
      has been no unfairness in the FTT proceeding with the hearing.

Ground 2 - approach to respondent's evidence

  13. Mr Ahmed submitted that the  FTT  failed  to  carefully  consider  the
      evidence relied upon by the respondent in order to  determine  whether
      she displaced the initial legal burden upon her.   The respondent  was
      informed by ETS that after using voice recognition software, there was
      significant evidence to conclude that this appellant's certificate was
      fraudulently obtained.  The respondent also relied upon  the  "Revised
      Look up Tool" for the appellant's test centre, Westlink College.  This
      demonstrated that none of the tests taken on the day the appellant sat
      his test (15 November 2011) were legitimately obtained.  The  evidence
      relied upon by the respondent in this case (generic evidence  together
      with the look up tool) was similar to  the  evidence  accepted  to  be
      adequate to displace the initial burden on the respondent  -  see  the
      review of the authorities in Ahsan and others v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
      2009.  I entirely appreciate that these authorities  have  highlighted
      the 'frailties' of the respondent's evidence - see for example SM  and
      Qadir v  SSHD  [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC)  in  which  the  evidence  was
      criticised by the UT "as displaying "multiple frailties",  which  left
      open the possibility that false positive results  might  have  arisen.
      Nevertheless it was held to  be  (just)  sufficient  to  transfer  the
      evidential burden  to  the  appellants  to  show  that  they  had  not
      cheated."  I note the generic evidence has become fuller over time and
      SM and Qadir should not be  regarded  as  the  last  word.   Mr  Ahmed
      however did not take me to  any  authority  that  concluded  that  the
      respondent's evidence was insufficient to displace her initial burden.
       The authorities rather emphasise that where  the  initial  burden  is
      displaced and even in cases where the impugned test was  taken  at  an
      'established fraud factory' it was nonetheless important to  carefully
      consider the appellant's explanation, and every ToEIC case  was  fact-
      sensitive.  I note that there have been instances where the voice-file
      recording has been challenged.  Mr Ahmed did not take me  to  anything
      to suggest that this happened in the appellant's case.


  14. I therefore asked Mr Ahmed to particularise in what way  the  evidence
      relied upon by the respondent was insufficient to displace the initial
      burden upon her.  He was unable to address this directly.   He  simply
      submitted that the FTT relied upon  what  was  said  in  the  decision
      letter and did not consider whether that evidence was  sufficient.   I
      again asked why the evidence was  insufficient  by  reference  to  the
      authorities.  Mr Ahmed did not take me to  any  authority  and  simply
      repeated that the FTT failed to carefully scrutinise the  respondent's
      evidence.


  15. Mr Ahmed was unable to  demonstrate  why  the  FTT's  summary  of  the
      respondent's evidence gave rise to a material error of law.   Although
      the FTT summarised the respondent's position  in  the  decision,  this
      must be seen in the context of this case.  The  appellant  offered  no
      particularised reasons why the respondent's  initial  burden  had  not
      been met (and this remains the case).   I  entirely  accept  that  the
      burden was on  the  respondent.   The  authorities  suggest  that  the
      respondent prima facie displaced that burden.   Mr  Ahmed  offered  no
      clear reasons as to why that was  not  the  case  here.   Instead,  he
      submitted that the FTT  was  wrong  to  confuse  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Harrison and Professor French.  I invited Mr Ahmed to explain how  any
      such error was material.  He was unable to do so save to  repeat  that
      the FTT did not carefully consider the evidence  relied  upon  by  the
      respondent.


  16. Mr Ahmed was therefore unable to identify why any failure to carefully
      consider the respondent's evidence was a material error of law in  the
      circumstances of this case wherein (i) there was  no  attempt  on  the
      part of the appellant or  his  legal  representatives  to  explain  or
      reason why the generic evidence and look up tool were  inadequate  and
      (ii) there was no  innocent  explanation  provided  at  all.   In  the
      circumstances, ground 2 does not demonstrate a material error of law.

Decision

  17. The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an error of  law
      and I do not set it aside.




Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 17 September 2020

