
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03787/2016
                                                               HU/03791/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 April 2019                     |On 13 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                           Mrs ANITA TAMANG THEENG
                               Mr KUBER TAMANG
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Wilcox, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of Nepal, appealed against  the  Respondent's
    decisions to refuse applications made on 5 October 2015 for  settlement
    in  the  United  Kingdom  outside   the   Immigration   Rules.    Those
    applications were refused by the Respondent on 29  January  2016.   The
    Appellants, dates of birth respectively 28 November 1988  and  9  March
    1987, had their appeals heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Khawar
    (the hearing judge) who on 19 February 2018 dismissed their appeals  on
    all grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge N Finch  on  5
    November 2018.  The substantive point being pursued in the  application
    was that there was procedural unfairness amounting to an error  of  law
    because the Judge had refused an adjournment pressed on grounds of  the
    first Appellant's medical health.  When the  appeals  came  before  the
    Judge, the Respondent was not  represented,  nor  were  the  Appellants
    represented, and neither of the Appellants attended the hearing.

3.   An earlier hearing of their appeal had been  adjourned  because  cogent
    evidence had been  provided  to  show  that  the  first  Appellant  had
    undergone recent colorectal surgery and was still recuperating.   Prior
    to the hearing on 6 September 2018 an application was made to the First-
    tier Tribunal which was  considered  by  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    Shaerf who refused the application.

4.   The reasons given by Judge Shaerf was that the Appellant had failed  to
    provide medical evidence which explained why she was unable to attend a
    hearing.  The medical evidence provided dated 24 November 2017  and  15
    November 2017 did not provide any explanation as to why she  could  not
    attend the hearing of the  appeal  in  2018.  There  was  therefore  no
    unfairness  in  Judge  Shaerf's  decision  to  refuse  the  adjournment
    request. The evidence did not at that stage support any conclusion that
    there was a need for an adjournment.

5.   Before us some evidence was served which suggested  that  some  limited
    information was put before the hearing judge. On a fair reading of that
    material it seemed to us that a medical certificate which  simply  said
    that the first Appellant was not fit to work, bearing in mind the first
    Appellant did not have a job, was simply a GP's sick note; but does not
    address either of the  first  Appellant's  current  health  conditions,
    showing that she could  not  comfortably  attend  a  hearing,  or  give
    evidence.

6.   An additional document provided  indicated  that  the  first  Appellant
    would be undertaking a hospital appointment for an  examination  on  16
    January 2018 did not show  that  there  was  any  basis  for  her  non-
    attendance at the hearing.

7.   In those circumstances the reference in the sick note to the  Appellant
    fainting  and/or  vomiting  was  unexplained  in  terms  of  when  that
    particular ailment had  started,  whether  it  was  being  treated  and
    whether or not it rendered her circumstances such that  she  could  not
    attend and could not comfortably give evidence of her claim.

8.   Mr Wilcox was unable to tell  us  why  the  second  Appellant  did  not
    attend the hearing of his appeal, nor why the representatives  did  not
    attend.  He had no instructions; but it  was  unclear  whether  or  not
    those questions had even been asked of them. Mr Wilcox took us  to  the
    correspondence relating to this matter and that did not shed any  light
    on the first Appellant's ability to give evidence.

9.   In the circumstances therefore, the hearing  judge  may  have  made  an
    error, if he thought that there had been 'no evidence put  forward'  in
    correspondence seeking an adjournment of the hearing; but the error was
    not material. The fact was that the evidence fell  far  short  of  that
    which could reasonably be expected to be put forward on an  application
    for an adjournment on health grounds.  In reaching  that  view  we  are
    certain that Judge Shaerf made no errors whatsoever in dealing with the
    application for an adjournment.

10.    On the evidence that was provided, even if it was  not  seen  by  the
    hearing judge, leading to the remarks he made, it seemed to us that any
    other Tribunal reasonably aware of  the  history  and  process  of  the
    applications that had been made  before  the  hearing  would  not  have
    reached any other view than that which the hearing judge arrived at  in
    relation to the absence of sufficient material to  conclude  the  first
    Appellant was unable to attend the hearing.
11.     The hearing judge also went on to consider the merits  and  evidence
    in the case and for our own part, considering the grounds, it  did  not
    seem to us that there was any substance in the points being taken about
    the matter or the hearing judge's decision. There is also the important
    point that there was no reason at all why the second Appellant  or  the
    representatives,  should  not  have  come  to  the  hearing,   and   no
    explanation, then or  now,  why  he  should  not  have  given  evidence
    effectively on behalf of both of them.

12.  Given the centrality of the  issue  taken  about  the  failure  of  the
    hearing judge to consider the adjournment of this matter,  we  did  not
    conclude there was any merit whatsoever in the grounds. Whilst  it  was
    reasonable to grant permission, so they could be further  investigated,
    having done so we find the decision under appeal involved  no  material
    error of law.

13.  This case is a good example of where an adjournment is sought based  on
    a sick note which simply addressed fitness to work and where  there  is
    nothing to indicate what, if anything, was being done with  any  malady
    that was being suffered at the material time, or how it impinged on  an
    ability to have a fair opportunity to present the case.   The  lack  of
    any explanation for the absence of the representatives  or  the  second
    Appellant is also very significant.

NOTICE OF DECISION

14.  The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER
No anonymity order was required.

Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
