
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03791/2018
     HU/03794/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                           [T R] (first Appellant)
                          [B R] (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Karnik, counsel instructed by Imaan solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Kenya born respectively on 13 June 2013
    and 10 March 2000.  They made applications for entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom on 6 October 2017. They were sponsored by their paternal
    aunt, Mrs [O], who on 8 September 2017, had obtained a court order from
    the Nairobi Children's Court appointing  her  as  their  guardian.  The
    background to the application is that their  father  had  died  in  May
    2015, their mother was no longer in contact with them and the  children
    had been living with their elderly and unwell grandparents.

 2. The applications for entry clearance were refused in decisions dated  5
    January 2018 on the basis that the requirements of paragraph  297(i)(a)
    to (e) were not met, as the ECO held that it was a requirement that the
    Appellants be joining a parent and that they were not  related  to  the
    Sponsor as claimed and further that the  guardianship  order  from  the
    Nairobi Children's Court  was  not  recognised  by  the  UK  under  the
    Adoption  Recognition  of  Overseas  Adoptions  Order  2013.   It   was
    accepted, however, that their aunt's offer of sponsorship  was  genuine
    and well intentioned and that  the  requirements  for  maintenance  and
    accommodation were met.

 3. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  was  upheld  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager and the Appellants appealed against the decisions  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeals came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davies for hearing on 11 October 2018.  The Appellants  were  not
    represented at that hearing, although  their  aunt  attended  and  gave
    evidence.  There was a Presenting Officer from the Home Office.

 4.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 22 October  2018,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies dismissed the appeals primarily  on  the  basis
    that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(a) to (f) of the  Rules  were
    not met, that the adoption was not recognised under UK  law  and  there
    was an absence of evidence to show that there was family life  or  that
    the continued exclusion of the Appellants would be disproportionate.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought, in time, on  the
    basis that the judge erred in law: firstly in  failing  to  follow  the
    Immigration Rules in that  it  is  clear  from  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules that the Sponsor is eligible as a relative, the  Rule
    not being confined to parents; secondly the judge erred in  failing  to
    consider the decision in TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT 49, the decision  in  MK
    (best interests of the child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC) and Mundeba
    [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC); thirdly, that the judge had made a material error
    of fact in stating at [12] that the Appellants live with their parents,
    whereas in fact they live with their  grandparents.   It  was  asserted
    that the guardianship of the Sponsor is recognised and that she  had  a
    guardianship order and not an adoption order.  It was lastly  submitted
    that the judge erred in failing to consider whether there were serious,
    compassionate and compelling grounds that  should  justify  the  appeal
    being allowed in light of the fact that the grandparents are very  old,
    have signs of dementia and are unable to care  for  themselves  or  the
    Appellants adequately, particularly given the very  young  age  of  the
    first Appellant.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Tribunal Judge Swaney in a decision
    dated 29 November 2018 on a number of bases and that all grounds  could
    be argued.

    Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr McVeety on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State  accepted  that  the  judge  and  indeed  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer  and  Entry  Clearance  Manager  and  the  Presenting
    Officer had materially erred in failing to apprehend that paragraph 297
    of the Immigration Rules clearly envisages  that  the  sponsorship  can
    emanate from a relative and not just a parent. This is clearly correct.
    The parties agreed that the decision  could  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 8. Mr Karnik sought to adopt  the  statement  of  the  Sponsor,  dated  24
    January 2019, where she sets out details of her family  background,  in
    particular, that her father was born on 1 January 1928 and  is  91  and
    that his mother is 86, that her brother, the children's father had died
    on 16 May 2015 in Kenya and the mother had  abandoned  them  after  the
    death of their  father.   She  asserted  she  exercises  sole  parental
    responsibility for the Appellants, making all the  major  decisions  in
    their lives and that this has arisen because her parents, due to  their
    ages and poor health, gave their consent for her to have that care  and
    control over the Appellants, as a result of which she applied  for  and
    was appointed as their guardian in a  court  order  dated  8  September
    2017.  The Sponsor states at [8]:

         "I regularly communicate with the Appellants by phone. I also  send
         them money for their upkeep through  money  transfers.   Since  the
         death of my brother I visited both the Appellants  in  Kenya  every
         year to see them and attend to their needs.  I find  this  way  of
         caring for them is not suitable and I need more than just an annual
         visit and long-distance telephone calls.  I want to  be  with  them
         every day so I can raise them  properly.  I  am  needed  for  their
         proper care and upbringing".

 9. The Sponsor also gave details of her income, which is in excess of  the
    minimum income requirement and that she has one son who is a university
    student and only lives with them during the holidays, whereas the house
    has capacity to accommodate five people.  Mr Karnik also sought to rely
    on the judgment of the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Pini  and
    Bertani and Others v Romania [2005] 40 EHRR  13  at  [144]  and  [146],
    where the Court had found that Article 8 was engaged in  a  case  where
    there were adopted children.

10. Mr McVeety helpfully accepted in light of the original decision of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer that the only issue in contention  was  whether
    the requirements of  paragraph  297(i)  of  the  Rules  were  met.   He
    accepted that there was family life between the  Sponsor  and  the  two
    Appellants and consequently it was open to the Upper Tribunal to  allow
    the appeal.

    Findings and Decision

11.  Paragraph 297 of the Rules provides inter alia as follows:

         "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances
             ...

             (f)  one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
             United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
             settlement and there are serious and compelling family or
             other considerations which make exclusion of the child
             undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the
             child's care ..."

12.  It is clear that the Appellants' Sponsor, who is also  their  aunt  and
    legal guardian does qualify as a  relative  eligible  to  sponsor  them
    within the meaning of the Rules. Mr  McVeety  expressly  accepted  that
    paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration Rules was met in full but, for  the
    avoidance of doubt,  I  find  that  exclusion  of  both  Appellants  is
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for their care  in
    the United Kingdom. This is because they are currently being cared  for
    by their elderly and unwell grandparents and the Kenyan Court has  seen
    fit to grant the Sponsor a guardianship order, in  recognition  of  her
    ability and willingness to take over responsibility for their care. The
    ECO  expressly  accepted  that  the   maintenance   and   accommodation
    requirements of the Rules were met and I find that the Sponsor has made
    suitable arrangements for their care in the United Kingdom.

13.  Mr McVeety also accepted that there was extant family life between  the
    Sponsor and the Appellants.  Applying the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in TZ Pakistan [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, I find that, given that the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the Rules  are  met,  that  it  should
    follow that the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

    Decision

14.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

No anonymity order is made. Any fee paid should be refunded in light  of  my
decision to allow the appeal.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 25 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

