




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/03368/2015

                                              HU/03371/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |               Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 2 October 2017                |               On: 19 October 2017       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                     entry clearance officer: New delhi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              Miss Kaushila Rai
                              Miss Sumitra Rai
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Nnamani, counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the ECO" and to the respondents  as
      "the claimants".

   2. The ECO appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Veloso promulgated on 18 January 2017.

   3. In her  decision  with  regard  to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, Judge Veloso stated that the claimants failed to establish
      family life with their sponsor and their mother. She  also  found  the
      respondent's decision to be proportionate.  There  was  no  suggestion
      that either  claimant  had  any  physical  or  mental  health  related
      problems or are in  any  way  unable  to  manage  on  their  own  with
      continued financial support from the sponsor and their brother.

   4. Considering all the evidence in the round, she found  that  there  are
      factors in the claimants' case which  outweigh  the  consideration  of
      historical injustice.

   5. The claimants' appeals consequently failed  under  s.6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998, with regard to Article 8 ECHR [41].

   6. Notwithstanding those clear findings she stated under  the  notice  of
      decision at the end of her decision that "the appeal under  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998 is allowed." She also stated that as she  has  allowed
      the appeal she decided not to make a fee award as there were documents
      put before the Entry Clearance Officer at the time  of  the  decision.
      That was also clearly inconsistent with her prior finding  that  their
      appeals failed with regard to Article 8.

   7. On 26 July 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes granted  the  ECO
      permission to appeal. In paragraph 1 of the  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal, Judge Boyes  incorrectly stated  at  paragraph  1  that  Judge
      Veloso dismissed the appeal against the  secretary  of  state's  (sic)
      decision.

   8. However, the Judge had regard to the grounds which asserted that Judge
      Veloso had erred by mistakenly indicating that the appeal  is  allowed
      whereas in the body of her judgment had made it clear that the  appeal
      was not in fact allowed.

   9. Ms Isherwood on behalf of the ECO submitted that the conclusion in the
      notice of decision that the appeal was allowed is contrary to all  the
      previous findings made by the Tribunal and in particular at paragraphs
      40 and 41, which found explicitly that the appeal fails. The  decision
      thus contradicted all the previous findings. The ECO does not  dispute
      the earlier findings.

  10. It was contended that the problem could have been  resolved  under  an
      application under  the  "slip  rule"  but  this  power  is  no  longer
      available.  In the alternative, the conclusion reached  is  irrational
      as it is quite clearly the opposite of all  the  substantive  findings
      until then.

  11. Ms Nnamani submitted that the sponsor and his wife  had  been  sending
      the claimants some money. They also received money from their brother.
      They had shown something  more  than  normal  emotional  ties  between
      parents and adult children.

  12. The Article 8 decision is not sustainable. She submits that the appeal
      should be remitted and re-made.




      Assessment

  13. Judge Veloso clearly intended to dismiss the claimants' appeals  under
      Article 8. She had expressly stated that  in  her  assessment  of  the
      Article 8 claims. She found that the  claimants  failed  to  establish
      family life with the sponsor and their mother [36].

  14. She found that the entry clearance officer's decision was  accordingly
      proportionate [38].

  15. The  claimants  had  never  sought  to  cross  appeal  Judge  Veloso's
      findings. No application was ever made  to  file  an  application  for
      permission to appeal either out of time, or at all.

  16. Judge Veloso has given sustainable reasons for her findings under  the
      relevant policy  which  she  had  considered.  She  properly  directed
      herself in accordance with the authorities in respect of the weight to
      be given to the historical injustice [37]. In the event I am satisfied
      that she has given sustainable reasons for her findings under  Article
      8.

  17. Nonetheless, the making of the decision by Judge Veloso  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law, in that the notice  of  decision
      incorrectly records that the claimants'  appeals  were  allowed.  That
      needs to be altered to reflect her true decision.

  18. I accordingly set aside the decision and re-make  it,  dismissing  the
      claimants' appeals.


      Notice of Decision


      The appeal of the ECO is allowed.


      The claimants' appeals are dismissed.


      No anonymity directions are made.






      Signed


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer                            Date
      16 October 2017

