

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03922/2019


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2020                        |On 6 March 2020                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                BASHIR AHMAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Ahmed instructed by KM Solicitors LTD
For the Respondent: Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on the 8 July 1974.
     2. On 15 November 2019 the Upper Tribunal set aside a decision of  the
        First-tier Tribunal which allowed Mr Ahmed's appeal on human rights
        grounds on the basis that judge had failed to properly examine  all
        relevant aspects of the applicable  legal  provisions.  The  matter
        comes back before the Upper Tribunal today for it to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.
     3. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the respondent had  not
        proved Mr Ahmed had use deception in his English language test is a
        preserved finding.



Background


     4. The chronology relevant to this decision is as follows:

           i. Mr Ahmed entered the UK on a student visa  valid  between  27
              January 2004 and 30 January 2005.


          ii. Mr Ahmed granted leave to remain as a student to  31  October
              2005.


         iii. Mr Ahmed granted leave to remain on a work permit valid to 27
              September 2010.


          iv. Application made on the 23 April 2007  for  leave  to  remain
              outside the Immigration Rules was rejected.


           v. Mr Ahmed granted further leave to remain  on  a  work  permit
              valid to 7 June 2012.


          vi. Mr Ahmed granted leave to remain as a Tier 2  skilled  worker
              on valid  to  27  September  2012  although  such  leave  was
              curtailed on 18 August 2010 to 17 October 2010.


         vii. Mr Ahmed granted leave to remain as a Tier 2  skilled  worker
              valid to 1 November 2013.


        viii. Further application  for  leave  as  Tier  2  skilled  worker
              refused.


          ix.   Mr Ahmed granted leave to remain as  student  valid  to  11
              June 2015.


           x. Application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom granted on 9 June 2014.


          xi. Application for naturalisation refused on 19 January 2016.


         xii. 12 October 2015 indefinite leave to  remain  revoked  and  Mr
              Ahmed served with  a  RED.0001  as  a  person  who  had  used
              deception in order to obtain leave.


        xiii. Application for leave to remain on the basis  of  family  and
              private life refused and certified on 2 November 2017.


         xiv. PAP submitted on 20 February 2018 challenge the  decision  by
              way of judicial review resulting in  reconsideration  of  the
              application with a statutory right of appeal.

     5. The reasons for the decision refusing the application for leave  to
        remain on the basis of  family  and  private  life  relate  to  the
        alleged use of a proxy in an English language test.  This  resulted
        in the decision-maker concluding that Mr Ahmed's  presence  in  the
        United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good; leading  to  a
        refusal under paragraph S -LTR.1.6 of the Immigration Rules.
     6. The First-Tier Tribunal  having  found  the  alleged  deception  in
        taking the English language test had not been made out allowed  the
        appeal under the Rules.
     7. Having considered the evidence provided it is not accepted that  Mr
        Ahmed has established an ability to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
        Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or paragraph 276 ADE as he has
        not been in the United Kingdom for the requisite period of time and
        has  not  established  credible  significant   obstacles   to   his
        reintegration into Pakistan, or any other reason justifying a grant
        of leave on this basis.
     8. The claim medical practitioners in the public  sector  in  Pakistan
        are subject to an upper age limit of 35 is  accepted,  in  relevant
        circumstances, but Mr Ahmed is an  internationally  trained  nurse,
        having qualified  in  the  United  Kingdom,  with  there  being  no
        evidence of any effort made by him to ascertain whether he will  be
        able  to  obtain  employment  in  either  the  public  or   private
        healthcare sectors in Pakistan.
     9. Mr Ahmed's wife and children still remain in  Pakistan.   According
        to Mr Ahmed and his witnesses they converse in Pushtu. In  addition
        the witness Mr Hussain stated the  Mr  Ahmed  speaks  a  number  of
        dialects/languages.
    10. The issue in this appeal is whether Mr Ahmed  is  able  to  succeed
        pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
    11. I have applied the  5  stage  Razgar  test  which  requires  me  to
        consider the following questions:

             Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


             If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


             If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


             If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

    12. The answer to the first question is that although Mr Ahmed has  not
        established family life recognised by article 8 in the  UK  he  has
        established a private life sufficient to engage article 8.
    13. That private life is composed of Mr Ahmed's employment as a  nurse,
        friendship  groups,  work  undertaken  assisting  members  of   the
        community, for example at the Jinnah Day Care Centre in  accordance
        with Mr Hussein's evidence, his home in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
        outdoor activities such as cricket.
    14. The answer to the second question is that Mr Ahmed's  removal  from
        the United Kingdom will  interfere  with  his  protected  right  to
        private life which will have consequences of  such  gravity  as  to
        potentially engage the operation of article 8. The quality  of  the
        private life enjoyed is strong as confirmed by the evidence which I
        find it to be credible, combined with the period  over  which  such
        private life has been enjoyed in the United Kingdom.  Although some
        aspects of the private life can no doubt be duplicated on return to
        Pakistan those specifically relevant to associations  with  friends
        and caring/work-related  elements  are  particular  to  the  United
        Kingdom.
    15. There is no dispute that the interference is in accordance with the
        law. In this respect comment made by Mr Ahmed that  he  believed  a
        judicial review issued on 8 June 2016,  case  number  JR/6343/2016,
        challenging the legality of the decision  to  revoke  his  ILR  was
        still pending has no arguable merit.  The  material  clearly  shows
        that permission to bring judicial review was refused on the  papers
        by HHJ Goose QC sitting as a judge of the High Court on  23  August
        2016 on the  basis  the  application  was  out  of  time,  with  no
        satisfactory explanation for the delay. The permission  application
        was renewed and came before Mr Justice Blake on  18  November  2016
        who refused an application to adjourn  and  refused  to  renew  the
        permission application as it is said the challenge  was  unarguable
        for the reasons given by HHJ Goose  to  which  there  had  been  no
        response. Although a subsequent letter was received from GLD by the
        Upper Tribunal indicating that it appeared HHJ Goose had  erred  in
        several matters in the refusal of permission, it does not appear it
        was considered relevant to relist the permission hearing  in  light
        of the fact the permission application had been  refused  primarily
        because it was substantially out of time.
    16. The issue in this appeal is the proportionality of the respondent's
        decision. The burden of proving a decision is  proportionate  falls
        upon the Secretary of State. Mrs Pettersen relied  on  the  refusal
        with the exception of the  ETS  point,  the  lack  of  evidence  of
        problems with Mr Ahmed settling  Pakistan,  and  his  inability  to
        satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  respondent
        in the refusal deals  with  the  proportionality  issue  under  the
        heading 'Exceptional Circumstances' where it is written:

             We have considered whether there are exceptional circumstances
             in your case which would render refusal a breach of Article  8
             of the ECHR because it would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences for you,  a  relevant  child  or  another  family
             member.  In so doing we  have  taken  into  account  the  best
             interests of any relevant child as the primary consideration.


             Based on the information you have  provided  we  have  decided
             that there are no such exceptional circumstances in your  case
             that would warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.


             You have told us  you  have  a  settled  life  in  the  United
             Kingdom. You state that you have resided  in  the  UK  for  14
             years and have spent your formative years in the UK and  spent
             most of your working and studying life in the United  Kingdom.
             You also claim to be a cornerstone of society. It  is  further
             noted you deny that your TOEIC obtained.


             We have reached this decision because you have no  significant
             ties to the UK. As previously stated, it is not accepted  that
             there would be very significant obstacles to your  integration
             into Pakistan if you were required to leave the UK because you
             resided in Pakistan up to the age of 29, which  includes  your
             childhood, formative years and  a  significant  proportion  of
             your adult life. It is  accepted  that  you'll  have  retained
             knowledge of the life, language and  culture,  and  would  not
             face significant  obstacles  to  reintegrating  into  life  in
             Pakistan once more.


             It is noted that you dispute that your TOEIC was  fraudulently
             obtained. However, it is considered that you  have  failed  to
             provide sufficient to demonstrate this. ETS has  a  record  of
             your speaking test. Using voice verification software, ETS  is
             able to detect when a single person  is  undertaking  multiple
             tests. ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to the
             SSHD that there was significant evidence to conclude that your
             certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
             test taker. It is also noted that the TOEIC  in  question  was
             taken on 17 September 2013. This was 31  days  prior  to  your
             Tier 4 application submitted on 18 October 2013.  It  is  also
             noted your leave to remain was due to  expire  on  1  November
             2013. On the basis of the information provided to her by  ETS,
             the SSHD's satisfied that your  certificate  was  fraudulently
             obtained and that you use deception in your application of  29
             May 2012.

    17. It is not clear how a test taken on 17 September  2013  could  have
        been used to support an application of 29 May 2012 as at that date,
        according to the respondents chronology, Mr Ahmed had not even  sat
        the test in question. The immigration history makes no  mention  of
        an application on 29 May 2012 although there  is  reference  to  an
        application of 18 October 2013 in  the  refusal  letter  under  the
        heading 'Suitability' in which it is stated a TOEIC certificate was
        provided.
    18. It is a preserved finding that the respondent had  not  established
        use of deception leaving very little available to the respondent in
        the refusal letter.
    19. Balanced against the respondent's case is the fact  the  chronology
        shows the majority of Mr Ahmed's time in  the  United  Kingdom  has
        been lawful, from 9 June  2014  with  indefinite  leave  to  remain
        (ILR). There is merit in the submission made on Mr  Ahmed's  behalf
        that at  this  time  his  connection  to  Pakistan,  including  the
        presence of his wife and children there, was  as  outlined  in  the
        refusal letter but it was still accepted it  was  proportionate  to
        grant him indefinite leave to remain.
    20. The sole reason the respondent revoked Mr  Ahmed's  ILR  was  as  a
        result of the concerns regarding the use deception in  the  English
        language test. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  satisfied  the
        respondent had discharged the  initial  evidential  burden  on  the
        basis of the material that had been provided but  no  more.  Having
        applied the 3-stage test for such  cases  the  accusation  did  not
        stand up to establish the use of deception.
    21. Mr Ahmed is a nurse who works both within the NHS where there is  a
        chronic shortage of qualified nurses and assists  outside  the  NHS
        within the community. There is nothing to show that he is a  person
        whose presence in the United Kingdom is not conducive to the public
        good. He is a person who is making a positive contribution.
    22. When balancing the competing interests I find they fall  in  favour
        of Mr Ahmed.  Had the ETS matter not arisen his ILR would not  have
        been cancelled. Mr Ahmed is not seeking to rely upon a private life
        developed when his immigration  status  was  precarious.  It  is  a
        neutral factor that Mr  Ahmed  speaks  very  good  English  and  is
        economically independent, but these are factors that do not warrant
        adverse findings being made against him either.
    23. Considering section 117 of the 2002 Act and competing  submissions,
        I find the respondent has not discharged the burden of  proof  upon
        her to the required standard to  establish  that  the  decision  is
        proportionate. Having undertaken the required balancing exercise  I
        find the scales fall in Mr Ahmed's favour.
    24. Although the appeal has been allowed on human rights grounds it  is
        for the respondent to decide the appropriate relief to be  granted.
        Ordinarily 30 months leave would be  granted  following  an  appeal
        being allowed on human rights grounds, but it may be on  the  facts
        of this case that it  is  more  appropriate,  and  fairer,  for  Mr
        Ahmed's ILR to be reinstated.



Decision

    25. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is  allowed  pursuant
        to Article 8 ECHR


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 February 2020












