
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03300/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2020                           |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                  Amie [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Da Silva, Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone, born in 1964.  She came to
    the United Kingdom in February 2007, with leave granted  as  a  visitor
    until May 2007.   She applied for an extension of that leave which  was
    granted until 30 September 2007.  Since then she has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom without leave;  a  period  now  of  over  twelve  years.
    Sometime in 2010 she applied for asylum.   That  was  refused  and  her
    appeal  rights  were  exhausted  in  2011.   She   made   the   present
    application, I am told by Mr Da Silva who appeared on her behalf, on  5
    April 2018.

 2. The present application for leave to remain on human rights grounds  is
    based on the appellant's relationship with her daughter.  Her  daughter
    is now 25 years old.  She is profoundly deaf and has been  from  birth.
    There is  no  doubt  about  the  biological  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her daughter.  Her daughter came to the United Kingdom in
    2010 and after the appellant's claim for  asylum  failed  the  daughter
    made her own claim for asylum.  Judging by the date at which that claim
    was granted I suspect that it was not made very promptly after 2011 but
    there is nothing clearly before me in relation to that.  In  any  event
    the daughter's claim was granted, and her documents were issued in  May
    2017.  The daughter thus has now leave to remain as a refugee.

 3. Eleven months later the appellant made  the  present  claim.   That  is
    based on her relationship with her daughter.  It was refused,  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal was heard by
    Judge Boyes on 5 July 2019.  In his determination the  judge  dismissed
    her appeal, and she now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 4. The grounds of appeal drafted by Mr Da  Silva  are  in  rather  general
    terms and in particular  appear  to  fail  to  take  into  account  any
    developments of the law following the implementation of the Immigration
    Act 2014.  But the grounds, if I may summarise  them  under  the  heads
    under which Mr Da Silva summarised them, are as follows.  Firstly, that
    the judge failed to make clear findings.  It  is  not  precisely  clear
    what findings are said to be unclear but at paragraph 5 of the  grounds
    the assertion is made that in the light of the judge's factual findings
    any conclusion that article 8 was not engaged was  perverse  and/or  in
    ignorance of binding authority.  Secondly, the grounds claim  that  the
    judge should have appreciated that he had not properly applied the test
    of proportionality in  determining  the  appeal.   Finally,  the  third
    ground is a general recital of the authorities on  Article  8  as  they
    were under the pre-2014 law and asserts that the judge failed  properly
    to deal with the matter outside the Rules as well as within them.

 5. I will deal with  those  grounds  in  summary  before  passing  to  the
    particular difficulties the  appellant  has  in  this  appeal.   In  my
    judgement the grounds as pleaded wholly lack merit.  It is not open  to
    a firm of solicitors or its members to cite grounds which so lamentably
    fail to deal either with the terms of the determination  against  which
    an appeal is brought or with the current law.  The truth of the  matter
    is that so far as concerns the structure and the process of the judge's
    determination it lacks nothing.  The judge clearly  appreciated  first,
    that this was an appeal on human rights grounds only; secondly, that an
    issue to be considered  in  a  human  rights  appeal  was  whether  the
    appellant was entitled to any relief under the  Rules  themselves;  and
    thirdly, if the answer to that point was "no" whether nevertheless this
    was one of the unusual cases where leave should be granted to a  person
    despite not meeting the requirements of the Rules.

 6. The judge considered the facts in some detail.  He concluded  that  the
    appellant was not, or would not have been, entitled  under  the  Rules:
    that is a conclusion against which there has  been  no  challenge.   He
    then went on specifically at paragraph 26 to look  to  the  appellant's
    case outside the Rules.  In doing  so  he  again  specifically  applied
    Section 117B and its principles, a  provision  on  which  Mr  Da  Silva
    rather vaguely told me that the position was that the appellant met the
    requirements of Section 117B.  I have no idea what that was supposed to
    mean.

 7. So far as the grounds challenged the judge's process of looking at  the
    matter in the way he should have done (looking at  the  matter  outside
    the Rules) and assessing proportionality in accordance with the current
    law, as I say, it seems to me there is nothing at all in these grounds.



 8. The grant of permission is one which looks as it might well do  in  the
    context of grounds of this nature, a little bit further into the  case.
    In granting permission Judge Grant said this:

         "It is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  erred  in  law  by  giving
         inadequate reasons for his findings, and it is  arguable  that  the
         judge has erred in law by making a mistake of fact in finding  that
         there are no ties over and above normal emotional ties between  the
         appellant and her disabled child in the light of the evidence  from
         Anthony Jaffray, the Rev Richard Mckay and Andrew McCarthy."

 9. Mr Da Silva began his submissions  before  me  this  morning  with  the
    matters arising from that grant, rather than with any reference to  his
    grounds.  As a result I have looked in  some  detail  at  the  evidence
    which is said to support the appellant's case in that way.  As  I  have
    said the appellant's  daughter  who  is  recognised  as  a  refugee  is
    profoundly deaf.  That  is  something  which  naturally  affects  every
    aspect of her life and no doubt of her mother's life as well.  However,
    it is quite wrong to say that the judge did not take it  into  account.
    I think it is fair to say that he made no  specific  reference  to  the
    supporting evidence, and it is possible that is partly a consequence of
    the fact that the supporting evidence was sent into the Tribunal,  both
    very late and under cover of a letter from Mr Da Silva which instead of
    saying that it was supporting evidence  said  simply  that  it  was  an
    index.  But the evidence to which reference is made in any  event  does
    not support the case that Mr Da Silva attempts to make.   The  material
    in question shows that despite her disabilities the daughter is a fully
    functioning member of  society.   That  is  precisely  what  one  would
    expect.  She has the advantage  of  technological  assistance  in  this
    country which of course cannot remove her disability but it can  enable
    her to function.

10. The letter from Andrew McCarthy says that she is working in the Bristol
    Refugee Rights Centre.  I will recite the relevant passage:-

         "Aimee's daughter Lucy is  also  a  volunteer  at  Bristol  Refugee
         Rights.  Despite the fact [that] she can't hear and almost none  of
         the other volunteers and staff here can sign she is always  one  of
         the most  hard-working  and  helpful  members  of  the  team.   Her
         excellent character, strength  and  resilience  in  such  difficult
         circumstances as she has faced is a testament to Aimee as a mother.
          Having known the two for 5 years I can say  with  confidence  that
         their bond is one of deep love and strength and  is  vital  to  the
         well-being of each of them."

    The letter goes on to say  that  the  author  regards  Bristol  as  the
    appellant's home.

11. The letter from  Anthony  Jaffray  says  that  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter lived together and it is  said  that  the  appellant  provides
    vital support to Lucy "given Lucy's condition".  The  letter  from  the
    Rev Richard McKay points out that he too knows  the  two  of  them  and
    knows their love and affection.  Interestingly, it is noted there  also
    that Lucy, the daughter, is a Lay Minister  of  the  Eucharist  in  the
    parish church.

12. The appellant's case is  essentially  that  her  daughter's  disability
    means that she needs her to do everything for her.  That is clearly not
    the case.  The position is that there is of course the  close  bond  of
    affection between mother and daughter that one would expect between two
    closely related people who live together and have lived together for  a
    long time.  But there is no doubt at all that those  who  see  Lucy  at
    work and at church generally see her as a person who is able, competent
    and  hardworking.   This  is  not  the  picture  of  a   person   whose
    disabilities are such that she has a high  dependency  on  her  mother;
    besides which there is no evidence from any professional indicating any
    medical or social needs of  the  daughter,  whether  fulfilled  by  her
    mother or  not.   There  is  no  documentary  evidence  supporting  the
    mother's claim of having to do everything for her daughter,  and  there
    is as well some evidence in the appellant's  own  history  which  casts
    considerable doubt upon what is said about the  appellant's  daughter's
    needs.  I have already set that history out.  It is to be noted from it
    that the appellant decided to come here as a visitor, not as an  asylum
    seeker, in 2007.  She left her  daughter,  then  in  her  early  teens,
    behind.  Her daughter had to function without her mother for four years
    between the ages of about 11 and 15 before the  daughter  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.

13. As Mr Da Silva accepted during the course of argument if  the  daughter
    could live without her mother in Sierra Leone for  four  years  in  her
    early teens with her mother providing assistance from abroad  there  is
    simply no reason why the same situation should now not apply in reverse
    with her daughter in the United Kingdom, lawfully  here  with  all  the
    benefits of health and social care available  here,  while  her  mother
    provides assistance from abroad as she did all those years ago.

14. The relationship between the mother and daughter  as  adults  has  been
    formed  entirely  while  the  appellant  is  in  the   United   Kingdom
    unlawfully.  It therefore has to be given little weight.   The  primary
    question, as the judge appreciated, was  to  determine  the  extent  to
    which Article 8 was engaged in this case.  The relationship is  clearly
    that between mother and  daughter,  but  they  are  both  adults.   The
    relationship is one which is no doubt close, but despite Mr Da  Silva's
    earnest submissions it does not seem to me that, even given the  length
    of time that they  have  been  living  together,  and  even  given  the
    daughter's disability, there is anything  more  in  it  than  might  be
    expected in the circumstances, that is to say, the relationship between
    a loving mother and a loving daughter.  If that is right, Article 8  is
    not engaged.  But even if Article 8 was engaged, I entirely agree  with
    the judge's assessment of proportionality.   Little  weight  is  to  be
    given to the relationship because it was developed whilst the appellant
    was in the UK unlawfully and indeed for a considerable period  of  time
    while the daughter's status was precarious.

15. The relationship is not shown to be one of real dependency  either  now
    on the basis of evidence or in the past when one can  assume  the  need
    would have been greater.  It is now accepted  on  behalf  of  appellant
    that the relationship could continue in the future if the two  of  them
    were split by distance as it did between 2007 and 2011 when  they  were
    split by distance.

16. Looking at the matter as a whole there is no basis at  all  for  saying
    that the judge erred in his assessment of the material before him or in
    the process that he brought to that assessment.  I therefore find  that
    his decision did not involve an error of law and I dismiss  the  appeal
    to this Tribunal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 10 March 2020

