

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/03058/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|on 3 July 2017                        |on 12 July 2017                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     JDO
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Asumwe of Pillai & Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms K Pal Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Keith promulgated on  10  November  2016  following  a  hearing  at
        Harmondsworth in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
        on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1976  who  entered  the
        United Kingdom on 4 October  2004  via  Greece  and  Belgium  on  a
        Schengen Visa. The appellant gave birth to two  children,  J  on  4
        September 2005 and K on 29 October 2012. J is a British citizen,  a
        fact recorded by the Judge.
     3. Following the rejection of an  earlier  application  for  leave  to
        remain under the 10-year route of the Immigration Rules, on  8  May
        2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain on  the  ground  her
        human  rights  will  be  infringed  if  removed,  specifically  her
        relationship with her two children and her private life.
     4. Having considered the evidence the Judge sets out findings of  fact
        at [29  -  36]  of  the  decision  under  challenge  which  may  be
        summarised in the following terms:


           a. The appellant is not regarded as a witness  of  candour.  The
              Judge was entitled to make adverse  findings  of  credibility
              where there is readily available evidence, which inexplicably
              is not produced [29].
           b. The appellant contends that if she were removed the  children
              would be forced to leave with her. Virtually no  evidence  of
              family arrangements was provided. Until  the  appellant  gave
              oral evidence she had provided no substantive evidence  about
              the person she claimed to live with, described  as  "Auntie".
              The appellant confirmed she and the children have lived  with
              "Auntie" at the same address  which  also  appears  on  their
              birth certificates, however the GP notes for  J  refer  to  a
              different arrangement [30].
           c. The implication from the medical reports shows that  "Auntie"
              lives at  the  address  specified  on  the  children's  birth
              certificates whilst the appellant and Mr  J  live  elsewhere,
              and for four days each week,  J  is  sent  to  "Auntie".  The
              consequence of this is that the appellant  cannot  have  been
              telling the truth about where she lived, and with  whom,  and
              had not established where she is living  and  with  whom.  It
              appears the appellant was living with  Mr  J  at  an  address
              other than where J lived for the majority  of  his  time,  at
              least in 2007, and that "Auntie" played a role as  a  primary
              carer of J. No  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  appellant's
              assertion that "Auntie" was not a blood relative as there was
              no  evidence  of  this  person's   nationality   or   current
              immigration status [31].
           d. It was not found that if the appellant were removed from  the
              United Kingdom it would follow that J or his sister would  be
              expected to return to Ghana with her [32].
           e. The nature the appellant's private life is unclear and  there
              is no reason to conclude the appellant could not continue her
              worship or develop a caring career in Ghana [33].


     5. At [34 - 36] the Judge writes as follows:


         "34.  Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular,
             Section R-LTRPT (Requirements for limited leave to remain as a
             parent) deal entirely with the  Appellant's  case.  They  deal
             with a qualifying child (paragraph .2.2);  and  sole  parental
             responsibility (paragraph.2.3 and  2.4,  which  the  Appellant
             specifically alleges). While I do not propose to repeat  their
             provisions in this determination it cannot be said that  there
             is any reason whatsoever  to  consider  the  Appellant's  case
             outside the Immigration Rules. To do so would be  little  more
             than  effectively  granting  a  right  of  appeal  under   the
             Immigration Rules, something which I do not have  jurisdiction
             to grant.


         35.  I conclude that as the Appellant's case fell  squarely  within
             Appendix FM and she did not have a right of appeal  under  the
             Immigration Rules, the Appellant's claim in outside the  Rules
             in respect of her human rights must fail, as a consequence  of
             the decision in SSHD v Congo. I reach this  conclusion  noting
             the best interests of the Appellant's children, in the context
             where the nature of her day-to-day family relations with  them
             was entirely unclear.


         36.  In the circumstances, I conclude that it was not necessary  to
             consider the Appellant's family life outside  the  Immigration
             Rules is  a  separate  Article  8  claim  under  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").  Had I needed to  do  so,
             the Appellant's assertion that her children  would  have  been
             forced to leave with her would have  been  undermined  by  the
             lack of clarity over her domestic arrangements."


     6.  Following  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  the  appellant  sought
        permission to appeal which was initially refused by  another  judge
        of the First-tier Tribunal but granted by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal. The operative parts of the grant being in  the  following
        terms:


        "2.  Even though the appellant appears to  be  legally  represented
             the grounds of appeal are poorly pleaded. They do not seek  to
             identify any arguable errors of law save to disagree with  the
             judge's finding that the appellant had failed to show that she
             lived with her two children as stated.


        3.   Given the importance of the human  rights  issues  involved  I
             have considered the First-tier Tribunal decision and  conclude
             that there are arguable errors that are  sufficiently  obvious
             on the face of the decision to justify granting permission  to
             appeal despite the poor quality of the grounds.


                i. While the judge was correct  to  say  that  there  is  no
                   longer an  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules  it  is
                   arguable that  the  immigration  rules  are  nevertheless
                   relevant  to  a  proper  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
                   immigration rules are said to  reflect  the  respondent's
                   policy relating to  where  the  balance  will  be  struck
                   between the right to respect for private and family  life
                   and the legitimate public  interest  considerations;  see
                   GEN.1.1. and SF and others (Guidance, post  -  2014  Act)
                   Albania [2017] UKUT 00120.  Whether  an  applicant  meets
                   the private or family life requirements now  included  in
                   the immigration rules is arguably relevant  to  a  proper
                   assessment of Article 8. It is arguable  that  the  judge
                   erred in failing to consider whether the appellant or the
                   children met the requirements of the rules.
               ii. The judge failed to have regard to material  issues  that
                   were relevant to a proper determination  of  the  appeal.
                   Both children were  refused  leave  to  remain  alongside
                   their mother. Their immigration status formed part of the
                   decision that was under appeal. Whether or not the  judge
                   accepted that the appellant was living with her  children
                   it is arguable that  he  should  have  gone  on  to  make
                   findings in relation to the children, in particular,  one
                   of the children was  naturalised  as  a  British  citizen
                   since the respondent's decision.
              iii. While it seems clear that the appeal was poorly prepared,
                   and that little evidence was produced in support  of  the
                   claim, it is at least arguable that the  judge  erred  in
                   relying on rather vague and outdated evidence  buried  in
                   medical records for 2007, when more  up-to-date  evidence
                   was available  indicating  that  the  appellant  and  her
                   children were likely to be living at the same address.


        4. Permission to appeal is granted and all the above grounds."




Error of law


     7. There are several problems with the decision under  challenge  some
        of which are highlighted in the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
        Whilst it is accepted the  Judge  was  not  assisted  by  a  poorly
        prepared case, many the difficulties relate to the Judges  approach
        to the way in which the appeal was determined.
     8. The Judge was aware of the fact the appellant had two children  one
        of whom is a British citizen. The Secretary of  State's  policy  in
        relation to a British national child is that they will  not  remove
        the child from the United Kingdom if the effect of that event is to
        remove the child from the territory of a Member State. This is  the
        application  of  the  Zambrano  decision  within  the  respondent's
        policy.
     9. If J cannot be removed the Judge  was  required  to  consider  what
        other options were available.
    10. The  Judge  did  not  appear  to  accept  the  appellant  had  sole
        responsibility for the child, indicating  it  was  in  fact  shared
        between possibly three people, but  removing  the  appellant  would
        still have meant that the mother of the children  would  have  been
        taken away from J or, if the appellant and J's sister left, that  J
        would be deprived the company of his sibling. If the appellant left
        on her own, leaving  the  children  in  the  United  Kingdom,  both
        children would lose the support and input of their mother.
    11. At [34] the Judge found that  whilst  not  treating  the  Rules  as
        determinative there was no reason to consider the appellant's  case
        outside the Immigration Rules, which is treating the provisions  of
        the Rules as being determinative of the issue on the  known  facts.
        Such an approach is based upon a misdirection of  law.  It  is  now
        known that earlier authorities suggesting  there  was  no  need  to
        consider the matter outside the Rules are no longer good  law.  The
        jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  is  a
        human rights jurisdiction meaning that  what  is  required  by  any
        decision-maker is a structured application of the Razgar guidance.
    12. The suggestion by the Judge that considering the matter outside the
        Rules would "be little more than effectively granting  a  right  of
        appeal under the  Rules"  is  wrong.  It  also  suggests  incorrect
        thinking as it maintains the argument  that  the  issue  should  be
        determined through the lens of the Rules which is not the  view  of
        the Supreme Court.
    13. The Judge was right to look at the Rules first as they set out  the
        Secretary of State's view and policy relating to how the balance in
        human rights questions should be struck.  To ignore the  merits  of
        an appeal under the Rules would therefore be to  exclude  from  the
        proportionality assessment the respondent's arguments as to why  an
        appeal should be dismissed. This is not granting a right of  appeal
        under  the  Rules,  as  no  such  right  of  appeal   exists,   but
        incorporating these details into the proportionality assessment, if
        one is required, as part of a  right  of  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.
    14. The Judge in [36] concluded it was not necessary  to  consider  the
        family life outside the Rules as a separate article 8 claim  which,
        on the facts, is an arguable misdirection in law.
    15. At [32] the Judge found that if the appellant were removed from the
        United Kingdom it would not necessarily follow that J or his sister
        will be expected to return to Ghana with her. If it  was  suggested
        the appellant could leave the United Kingdom and apply to  re-enter
        lawfully this is not expressly made out but, if so, the  merits  of
        such a suggestion does fall outside the  Rules  -  see  R  (on  the
        application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
        separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).
    16. Because the Judge limited consideration of the matter to the Rules,
        even though they are said to be Section 55 compliant, there are  no
        findings in relation to either the best interests of  the  children
        or the reasonableness of the Judges proposals.
    17. The Judge was required to determine the matter as  a  human  rights
        appeal as this is the ground on which the appeal was dismissed.
    18. The determination sets out the correct legal self-direction at [28]
        that if there was  a  need  to  consider  the  appeal  outside  the
        Immigration Rules then the decision in Razgar must  be  considered,
        but the Judge failed to do so.
    19. It was agreed between the parties that, considering  the  fact  the
        Judge had failed to undertake a proper article  8  assessment,  the
        determination had to be set aside as the findings made therein  had
        not been formulated on a proper  basis.  It  was  also  agreed  the
        appeal had to be remitted to Hatton Cross  to  be  heard  by  Judge
        other than Judge Keith.
    20. As stated before the Tribunal, it may be that the outcome  will  be
        the same it may not. The difficulty is that until a proper approach
        is adopted, sufficient findings made, and adequate  reasons  given,
        it is not possible to say what the outcome of the  appeal  may  be.
        The error made is therefore material.
    21. The status of J as a  British  national  child  shall  have  to  be
        factored into the assessment.


Decision

    22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal hearing centre sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard by
        a judge nominated by the Resident Judge other than Judge Keith.

Directions


    23. Listing and further case management direction shall be given by the
        Resident Judge at Hatton Cross.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.  I make such order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 July 2017












