
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/03745/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 January 2020                 |On 29 January 2020                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     S J
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesuram, of Counsel, instructed by Hounslow
                    Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on 11 December 2019 in respect
         of the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  B  Grant,
         promulgated on 1 April 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on
         19 March 2019.

      2. The appellant is an Indian national born on 24  January  1982.  She
         claims to be a Muslim. She entered the UK with entry clearance as a
         Tier 4 student on 13 June 2010. On 12 December  2012,  she  applied
         for Tier 1 leave, but this was refused on  26  June  2013  and  her
         appeal was dismissed. A copy of that  determination  has  not  been
         adduced. The appellant's appeal rights were exhausted  on  1  April
         2014; she then made a Tier 4 application which was  refused  on  15
         July 2014 with no right of appeal. On 27 March  2015,  as  she  had
         failed to embark, she was served with enforcement papers. She  then
         claimed asylum. Two interviews were  arranged  but  she  failed  to
         attend either one. I  am  told  that  the  asylum  application  was
         treated as abandoned due to  her  non-attendance.  In  her  witness
         statement, the appellant blamed her  representatives  for  advising
         her not to attend. At the hearing before Judge Grant, she confirmed
         she, nevertheless, did not wish to pursue an asylum  claim.  On  26
         August 2015 she sought leave to remain  on  private  life  grounds.
         That was refused on 15  February  2017.  The  appellant  then  gave
         notice of appeal.

      3. The appeal was listed for hearing on 17 April 2018 at Hatton Cross.
         The appellant sought a transfer of the venue on the basis that  she
         had moved to Yorkshire. The request was granted but the  follow  up
         notification sent by the Tribunal to the  appellant's  alleged  new
         address was returned marked "not at this address since  May  2017".
         When the new date was set at the centre requested, the  appellant's
         representatives sought a transfer back to Hatton Cross on the basis
         that she was living in Hounslow.  The  appeal  hearing  had  to  be
         adjourned yet again and it was then relisted at Hatton Cross on  19
         March 2019.

      4. The appellant claims to come from a very strict,  conservative  and
         religious Muslim family. Her claim is that she nevertheless managed
         to receive an education, attend college and have  a  secret  affair
         with a Hindu man which led to her "secretly"  giving  birth  whilst
         unconscious in a property her lover had arranged for  them  in  the
         weeks leading to the birth.  She  claims  that  when  she  regained
         consciousness, her lover told her  that  the  baby  was  stillborn.
         Years later after she had come to the UK to study and been reunited
         with her partner who had also come here, she discovered that he had
         given the baby to his family so that the child could be raised as a
         Hindu. That soured  their  relationship  but,  meanwhile,  she  had
         another child in the UK whose paternity she  was  unsure  of.  She,
         nevertheless,  remains  involved  with  her   Hindu   partner.   No
         information or evidence of his immigration status has been  offered
         and there is no supporting evidence from him. She claims  that  she
         cannot return to India because she would be killed  by  her  family
         for refusing to  a  marriage  they  had  arranged  and  for  having
         illegitimate children. She also claims that her  son  is  stateless
         and that she is interested in Christianity. She denies having  used
         deception in an ETS test in 2012.

      5. Judge Grant heard the appeal but  found  the  entire  claim  to  be
         lacking in credibility. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

      6. The grounds for permission to appeal  essentially  argue  that  the
         judge was not a medical  expert  and  so  "cannot  comment  on  the
         circumstances of the appellant's birth" (sic)  and  cannot  dismiss
         the medical evidence with respect to the appellant's health.  It is
         argued that the judge's decision was irrational and failed to  give
         adequate reasons for rejecting the claim. Reliance is  also  placed
         on the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal  which  repeat  the  same
         complaints  but  also  include  criticisms  on  the  judge's  other
         findings of fact and failure to consider the best interests of  the
         appellant's son.

         The Hearing

      7. The appellant attended the hearing at  which  I  heard  submissions
         from the parties. It has to be said that Mr  Jesuram's  submissions
         vastly expanded on the grounds put forward  almost  to  the  extent
         that they changed the basis on which the challenge was brought.

      8. Mr Jesuram's first point was that the judge had  raised  a  dispute
         over the account of the birth of the child  (in  India)  which  had
         never been disputed by the respondent and had  failed  to  put  the
         point to the appellant at the hearing. It was not for the judge  to
         go behind unchallenged evidence. The issue had not been the subject
         of  cross  examination  and  the  appellant  was  not   given   the
         opportunity of rebuttal. He also argued that the judge had  wrongly
         recorded (at paragraph 36) what  the  appellant  had  said  in  her
         statement. He next submitted that the judge had failed to  consider
         the Presidential  guidance  on  vulnerability  and  had  failed  to
         analyse how the appellant's vulnerability as a person  with  mental
         health issues impacted on  her  evidence.  He  submitted  that  the
         correct approach was to  consider  the  medical  evidence  and  the
         guidance on vulnerable witnesses before considering  the  evidence,
         rather than the other way around. He complained  that  this  was  a
         Mibanga (2005 EWCA Civ 367) error.

      9. Mr Jesuram also submitted that there had been no  consideration  of
         the best interests of the appellant's son;  this  was  particularly
         important because of the appellant's mental health.

     10. He argued that the judge's findings on  the  ETS  issue  were  also
         flawed. At paragraph 54, it was plain that the  judge  had  already
         concluded that the appellant was dishonest  and  had  then  applied
         that conclusion to the ETS decision. The findings might  have  been
         different had the correct approach been  followed.  The  respondent
         had to show that the burden on her  had  been  discharged  and  the
         appellant's innocent explanation had to  be  considered.  Moreover,
         the judge's comments about 100% of the tests (at paragraph 53)  did
         not accord with the evidence of 88% of tests being invalid.

     11. Mr Jesuram conceded that the argument over the statelessness of the
         appellant's son was not made out.

     12. In response, Mr Tufan pointed out that the judge's findings on  the
         ETS matter  started  at  paragraph  47  of  the  determination.  He
         referred me to MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450  (IAC)  and
         to what the Presidential panel said about the Look Up Tool  (at  51
         and 52). He pointed out that 100% of the test results had not  been
         released at the appellant's college. The judge had also  considered
         the Fa�ade report and the appellant's language ability (at  52  and
         51 respectively).

     13. Mr Tufan submitted that the arguments now made on vulnerability had
         not been made to the First-tier Tribunal.  He  submitted  that  the
         medical reports were very short documents, fell  short  of  meeting
         the guidance for medical reports  given  in  JL  (medical  reports-
         credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) and  were  based  on  an
         acceptance of what the appellant had said.  He submitted  that  the
         Mibanga point was clarified by the Court of Appeal in S  (Ethiopia)
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1153. He submitted this  was  a  case  where  Judge
         Grant had not  fallen  foul  of  "that  artificial  separation  and
         structural failure which were found to exist in Mibanga"  (at  24).
         Moreover, the medical evidence in Mibanga was very powerful; in the
         present case it was not.

     14. On the issue of the birth of the  appellant's  daughter,  Mr  Tufan
         submitted that the judge had considered the  evidence  and  made  a
         finding which was  open  to  her  based  on  life  experience.  Her
         conclusion that the claim was preposterous was not irrational.  Her
         partner had not given evidence to support her claim and  there  was
         no statement from him. The evidence was before the  judge  and  she
         was entitled to make findings on it.

     15.  Mr  Jesuram  replied.   He   submitted   that   medical   evidence
         corroborating a claim of torture in an asylum appeal was  different
         to the wider scope of evidence in an immigration case. He submitted
         that the first consideration was whether a  witness'  evidence  was
         impaired by a  mental  health  condition.  He  referred  me  to  AM
         (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 and argued  that  the  appellant
         should have been considered as a vulnerable person.  If  there  was
         any dispute as to the medical diagnosis, it should have been put to
         the witness. It was  not  appropriate  for  fact  finders  to  make
         decisions on matters not put to an appellant especially  where  the
         appellant was vulnerable.

     16. On the ETS issue, Mr Jesuram submitted  that  all  that  was  known
         about a person's ability should be considered before a decision was
         made on credibility. The appellant had taken a Pearson test in 2014
         and that supported her claim to have  a  command  of  English.  The
         judge should have taken account of that. The problem was  that  the
         judge had reached her conclusions on credibility and then  rejected
         the ETS matter.

     17. He argued that there were multiple reports all  reaching  the  same
         conclusion about the appellant's  vulnerability.  Consideration  of
         the appellant as  a  vulnerable  witness  was  not  subject  to  an
         application being made to treat her as such. It was not  surprising
         the appellant's partner was not called  to  give  evidence  as  the
         appellant was unsure whether  her  UK  born  child  was  his.   The
         determination was unfair and the matter should be  remitted  for  a
         fresh hearing. The appellant now had received DNA evidence to  show
         that her partner was not the father of her son. That was  a  matter
         that required further fact finding.

     18. In answer to an enquiry I made of the parties, I was told that  the
         appellant's asylum claim had been treated  as  abandoned  following
         her non-attendance at the two arranged interviews.

     19. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination which
         I now give with reasons.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     20. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions made and the authorities referred to.  I  reach  my
         decision only after having considered the evidence as a whole.

     21. Dealing first with the issue of the appellant's  vulnerability  and
         the judge's failure to apply the guidance on vulnerable  witnesses,
         I note that the appellant has been legally  represented  throughout
         the proceedings, that she was represented by Counsel at the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing and that there was no suggestion at any stage
         that the appellant should be treated as a  vulnerable  witness.  It
         has to be said that Mr Jesuram made much of her mental  health  and
         it is difficult to accept  that  were  the  appellant  as  mentally
         unstable and vulnerable as is claimed, that her representatives and
         previous  Counsel  would  fail  to  make  any  representations   or
         submissions  on  this  point.  Indeed,  the  First-tier  and  Upper
         Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Witnesses  Practice
         Direction and the Presidential Guidance Note both  point  out  that
         responsibility for identification of  a  vulnerable  witness  rests
         with  the  appellant's  representatives.  The  appellant's  witness
         statements prepared with the assistance of her representatives fail
         entirely to indicate that any special adjustments were made for the
         taking of her evidence to prepare the statements and there were  no
         requests for her to be treated in any special  way  when  she  gave
         oral evidence at the hearing. It was not maintained by  Counsel  at
         the hearing before Judge Grant that the appellant was incapable  of
         giving evidence  or  that  the  evidence  given  may  be  adversely
         affected by the anxiety and depression she is said to have. Nor  is
         there any reference at all in her application to the respondent  or
         in her witness statement to the claim (made  to  the  Watford  Rape
         Crisis and others in the UK) that she attempted to hang herself  in
         India after she told her partner of the abuse she had suffered from
         a family member and he had become violent towards her.

     22. The  most  recent  medical  letter  is  dated  12  March  2019.  It
         confusingly refers to the author having seen the appellant with her
         10 month old son although in March 2019 the child would  have  been
         some 17 months old, having been born in October 2017.  It  confirms
         that the appellant has denied any suicidal intent and confirms that
         any risk of self-harm is low and that she has capacity. The  author
         finds that her immigration case is  causing  her  stress  and  that
         removal would cause her mental health to deteriorate,  although  no
         reasons are provided. The author does not appear to have considered
         the appellant's ability to return with her partner and son.

     23. A letter from the West London NHS Trust dated 1 March  2019  states
         that the appellant was of low mood  in  April  2018,  had  attended
         therapy, had described high levels of anxiety  and  fear  at  being
         removed and indicated that she would end her life  if  she  had  to
         return  as  she  would  feel  unsafe.  Again,  there  has  been  no
         consideration of the fact that the appellant could return with  her
         partner.  The same is the case with  an  earlier  letter  from  the
         Trust of February 2018.

     24. I have considered AM (Afghanistan) on which Mr Jesuram relied,  and
         which gave guidance on the general approach to be  adopted  by  the
         Tribunal where claims for  asylum  were  made  by  children,  young
         people and other incapacitated or vulnerable persons whose  ability
         to participate effectively in proceedings might be limited. In that
         case the appellant was as 15 year old asylum seeker  with  learning
         difficulties and there was a  medical  report  which  outlined  the
         ground rules which should be  adopted  at  the  hearing  to  ensure
         procedural fairness. The judge ignored the advice and made  adverse
         credibility findings. That scenario was entirely different  to  the
         present situation. As I have already said, there was no  suggestion
         by  the  appellant's   solicitors   or   Counsel   that   she   was
         incapacitated, that her ability to participate effectively  in  her
         appeal hearing was impaired in  any  way,  or  that  she  may  give
         incoherent evidence as a result of her anxiety.

     25. It was found in AM that "the primary responsibility for identifying
         vulnerabilities must rest with the appellant's representatives  who
         ... have  access  to  private  medical  and  personal  information.
         Appellant's representatives should draw the tribunal's attention to
         the  PD  and  Guidance  and  should  make  submissions  about   the
         appropriate directions and measures to be considered  e.g.  whether
         an appellant should give oral evidence or the special measures that
         are required to protect his welfare or make effective his access to
         justice. The SRA practice note of 2 July 2015 entitled 'Meeting the
         needs  of  vulnerable  clients'  sets  out  how  solicitors  should
         identify and communicate with vulnerable clients. It also sets  out
         the professional duty on a solicitor to  satisfy  him/herself  that
         the client either does or does not have capacity" (at 32).  Nothing
         in the evidence before the judge suggested that any  such  approach
         was taken by the appellant's representatives or Counsel.

     26. In all the circumstances, Judge Grant was not in error in 'failing'
         to consider the guidelines on vulnerable witnesses.  It  not  being
         suggested that she was such a  person,  and  there  being  no  sign
         during the course of the hearing that she had problems in  any  way
         in her ability to participate and recount her evidence,  the  judge
         was not required to consider her as a vulnerable person. Unlike the
         situation in AM, the  judge  did  take  the  various  letters  into
         account.  Unfortunately,  for  the  appellant  they  raise  further
         issues, which I shall come on to later.

     27. It is also important to note that at no  stage  has  the  appellant
         maintained that any of the evidence she  has  given  was  adversely
         affected by her state of  mind,  nor  that  she  had  forgotten  to
         mention any events or that she had provided incorrect  information.
         There been no attempt to  correct  any  part  of  it.  Further,  Mr
         Jesuram did not explain how any of the judge's findings could  have
         differed even if she had accepted the appellant to be a  vulnerable
         witness, given that those findings were based  on  the  appellant's
         confirmed evidence.

     28. Mr Jesuram submitted that the judge's approach to  credibility  and
         the medical  evidence  was  flawed  because  she  had  reached  her
         conclusions and then considered the evidence. He further  submitted
         that the adverse  credibility  finding  was  then  applied  to  the
         consideration of the issue of deception over the TOEIC certificate.
         This submission disregards wholly what  the  judge  stated  at  the
         commencement of her findings at paragraph 34. There,  she  confirms
         that she has reached an adverse decision and then proceeds  to  set
         out all her reasons in the following  paragraphs  (35-62).  It  is,
         therefore, not the case that  she  considered  the  evidence  after
         reaching a conclusion and certainly not  a  Mibanga  point  as  was
         argued.  The  judge  did  not  reach  a  negative   assessment   of
         credibility and then ask whether that assessment was  displaced  by
         other material. There was a holistic  assessment  and  the  letters
         from the therapists were not treated as an "add on"  nor  were  the
         contents rejected as a result of an adverse credibility  assessment
         made prior to and without regard to that evidence.

     29. In the case of S (Ethiopia), referred to by  Mr  Tufan,  the  court
         pointed to the injuries described in the medical report in  Mibanga
         as "extraordinary in their severity" (at 21) and  it  was  in  that
         context that Wilson J stated that the adjudicator had  fallen  into
         legal error by addressing the medical evidence only after  she  had
         conclusively rejected central features in the appellant's  case  as
         incredible (S:22). In S the court held that the  logic  of  Mibanga
         did not apply because the  structure  of  the  immigration  judge's
         reasoning here did not fall foul of that artificial separation  and
         structural failure which  were  found  to  exist  in  Mibanga,  and
         because the medical evidence in Mibanga  was  so  powerful  and  so
         extraordinary as to take that case into  an  exceptional  area  (at
         24). Neither of those scenarios applies in the present case either.
         As in S, the judge sets out all the evidence considered (at  7,  9,
         23, 24, 25, 26, 32, 35, 49, 50, 52 and 52). She specifically refers
         to the medical evidence and the appellant's health.  She  sets  out
         the appellant's claim at length. She also refers repeatedly to  the
         evidence and the claim in her findings. As  in  S  (at  25),  these
         factors demonstrate that the judge had taken proper account of  all
         the evidence, including the medical evidence,  at  the  appropriate
         stage.

     30. Reference was also made  to  JL  (medical  reports  -  credibility)
         (China) [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) and I  have  considered  that.  The
         second head-note states, inter alia, that: "when an advocate wishes
         to rely on their medical report to support the  credibility  of  an
         appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about
         it affords support to what the appellant has said and which is  not
         dependent on what the appellant has said to the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,
         credibility and psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic  of  Congo
         [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming
         that the account given by the appellant was  to  be  believed,  the
         less likely it is that significant weight will be  attached  to  it
         (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23])".

     31. In this case, the authors of the letters relied on by the appellant
         based their assessment and opinion on what they were  told  by  the
         appellant. That reduced the weight the letters could be  given  and
         the judge did not err in so finding. None appear to have considered
         the appellant's ability to return to India with  her  partner  when
         they make comments as to the impact upon her of removal on her own.

     32. Mr Jesuram also complained that the judge had been wrong  to  raise
         an issue that the respondent had not relied upon  in  the  decision
         letter; namely, the circumstances in  which  her  first  child  was
         born. It is correct that the decision letter does not touch on this
         topic but then there is no consideration  at  all  of  the  claimed
         events in India and equally no acceptance  or  rejection  of  them.
         The application was refused  on  suitability  grounds  because  the
         respondent considered that the appellant had  used  a  fraudulently
         obtained  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS  in  support   of   earlier
         applications. The respondent also  considered  that  the  appellant
         would be able to access medical care in India and that  there  were
         no very significant obstacles to her re-integration there.

     33. The judge had evidence before her of the appellant's claim that she
         had been unconscious during the birth of her first child, that  the
         birth had taken place in secret in accommodation organised  by  her
         partner and that she had been told when she regained  consciousness
         that the baby was stillborn/had died at birth.  There  is  no  mis-
         recording or misunderstanding of the appellant's  evidence  as  was
         submitted by Mr Jesuram. That is what she  stated  in  her  witness
         statement  and  her  solicitors'  representatives  make  the   same
         contention. Both the appellant's witness statement were adopted  as
         true and correct  at  the  hearing,  according  to  the  Record  of
         Proceedings. The judge did not accept the account of the birth  for
         the reasons she gave at paragraphs 36-38 however this  did  not  go
         directly to the reasons for the appeal's failure.  The  appeal  was
         dismissed  because  the  judge  found  that  there  were  no   very
         insignificant obstacles to the appellant's return  to  India,  that
         she could return with her Indian partner and her young son, because
         the suitability requirements had not been met and because there was
         no article 8 breach (at 54,  55,  57,  58,  59,  62).  The  judge's
         approach to the issue of delivery of the child in India, even if Mr
         Jesuram is right that the  matter  should  have  been  put  to  the
         appellant, is not material to the outcome of the  appeal  and  does
         not make the decision unsustainable because there are so many other
         difficulties with the appellant's case.

     34. It should, however, be noted that the story over the  secret  birth
         in a flat arranged by the appellant's partner (as set  out  in  the
         witness statements - both of which were adopted at  the  hearing  -
         and in  the  representations  which  accompanied  her  application)
         conflicts entirely with what the appellant told  her  therapist  at
         Hounslow IAPT. The account set out by  Rashmeet  Gupta  on  8  June
         2016, states that she was  told  by  the  appellant  that  she  had
         delivered the baby in a hospital in India, that it was a  difficult
         birth and that the doctors took the baby away for treatment  as  it
         was unwell. She was then informed the following day that  the  baby
         had died. There is no reference to a secret birth in a flat  or  to
         being unconscious for the delivery.  There  is  a  claim  that  her
         partner was violent and abusive towards her which is not  mentioned
         in her witness statement or the representations and there is also a
         claim that she was not in a relationship with him (at F1-2). In her
         evidence to the judge, however, it is claimed that the relationship
         is ongoing. The letters raise many  other  discrepancies  over  the
         timing of her partners abuse and its cause, of the number of  times
         she claimed to have been raped and her claims  of  being  suicidal.
         However, these were not  explored  by  the  judge  and  it  is  not
         necessary to go through them at this stage.  Suffice  to  say  that
         they all further undermine the appellant's credibility.

     35. A further point of criticism is that the judge did not consider the
         best interests of the appellant's son. I have examined the evidence
         before the judge and the submissions made, as recorded by the judge
         in her Record of Proceedings. No submission was made  on  s.55  and
         there was  no  evidence  which  even  touched  upon  the  issue  or
         suggested that the best interests of this very young child could be
         anything other than remaining with his mother wherever  that  might
         be. It would have been preferable  had  the  judge  addressed  this
         issue, even if only to say that there was no evidence  on  it,  but
         given the child's very young age  (he  is  2  years  old)  and  the
         absence of any evidence about him, it is difficult to see  how  any
         other decision could have been reached. It was now maintained  that
         the appellant has obtained  DNA  test  results  to  show  that  her
         partner is not the father of the child.  This  is  a  matter  which
         neither the respondent nor  the  judge  had  knowledge  of  and  is
         something that it is open to the appellant to put to the respondent
         by way of fresh representations along with any  information  as  to
         the status of the child's father.

     36.  The  judge's  findings  on  the  issue  of  deception  were   also
         criticised. Mr Jesuram submitted that the judge had already reached
         an adverse finding on credibility before  she  considered  the  ETS
         matter. As I have explained earlier, that is  not  what  the  judge
         did. She considered all the evidence, reached a conclusion and then
         set out her reasons. She found that the Look Up Tool identified the
         test supposed to have been taken by the appellant (at 49), that the
         voice recognition software identified the use of a proxy, that  the
         results had been invalidated, that 88% of tests taken on that  date
         were declared invalid and a further 12% rated questionable  (at  50
         and 52) and that incriminating evidence was found when the homes of
         the college directors were searched (at  52).  The  judge  properly
         found that if the appellant had genuinely taken the test she  would
         have witnessed the wide-scale use of  a  proxy  on  that  date  who
         participated with the knowledge of the directors  (at  52-3).   She
         took account of the explanations offered by  the  appellant,  noted
         her language ability but found no credible innocent explanation had
         been given  (at  51).  She  also  found  that  the  respondent  had
         discharged the burden on her (at 54). Those findings were  open  to
         her on the available evidence.

     37. The judge reached sustainable findings on the  appellant's  private
         life  (at  55-61)  and  also  found  that  the   decision   was   a
         proportionate one (at 62).

     38. Mr Jesuram conceded that the ground on the issue  of  statelessness
         had not been made out and he quite rightly did not pursue  it.  The
         finding made by the judge  (at  42)  that  the  appellant  had  not
         established that her son was stateless stands.

     39. Mr Jesuram also took no issue with the  judge's  finding  that  the
         appellant and her partner were probably not of different faiths but
         that in the absence of any evidence from him,  she  was  unable  to
         make a finding as to  the  appellant's  claimed  faith  or  alleged
         change of faith (at 39).

     40. The appellant did not pursue any claim based on Christianity.

     41. For all the reasons set out above, I conclude  that  there  are  no
         material errors in the judge's determination.

     42. Further documentary evidence has been submitted since  the  hearing
         on 20 January 2020. This evidence was not placed before the  First-
         tier Tribunal as  is  acknowledged  and  cannot  form  part  of  my
         assessment.




         Decision

     43. The appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     44. No request for anonymity has been made and no order was made by the
         First-tier Tribunal but for the protection of the appellant's  son,
         I make an anonymity order.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 23 January 2020


