
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03939/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                            |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    Mr CJ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singer, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the USA.  He was born on 1 February 1979.



 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's refusal  to  grant  him
    leave to remain.

 3. The appeal was allowed by Judge G Wilson in a decision promulgated on 3
    August 2018.  The judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 4. The grounds claim the  judge  materially  erred  in  giving  weight  to
    immaterial factors and/or giving inadequate reasoning in the  balancing
    exercise.  At [17]-[22] the judge found the Rules could not be met.  At
    [3] the judge found the appellant did not have a parental  relationship
    with his stepdaughter, and at [38] that S.117B(6) did  not  apply  with
    regard to his relationship with his son or his stepdaughter.  The judge
    further found at [38]  that  the  Family  Court  proceedings  were  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

 5. The only reasons the judge gave for finding that the balance should  be
    struck in the appellant's favour is  that  his  application  for  entry
    clearance would succeed and that it would not be in the  stepdaughter's
    best interests for him to be removed  because  he  provided  childcare.
    See [47]-[48.  The grounds claim  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter or his findings  when  striking  a  balance.
    The fact that the appellant could not meet the  Rules  weighed  heavily
    against leave being granted.  His partner earned a  significant  amount
    of money to be able to singularly support the family  and  the  grounds
    contended that there had been no consideration of whether  or  not  she
    could pay for childcare or whether anyone else would be able to  assist
    her during a period of temporary separation whilst the  appellant  made
    an entry clearance application from abroad.  Given that the Rules could
    not be met and there was no guarantee that the application from  abroad
    would be successful, the judge did not  consider  whether  family  life
    could continue in the USA.  In that sense, the balancing  exercise  was
    entirely one-sided.  Further, there had been no  consideration  of  the
    mandatory public interest considerations in S.117B and the  maintenance
    of immigration control.

 6. Permission was refused by Judge Simpson  on  17  September  2018.   She
    said:

         "2.  Permission to appeal is refused because:

             (i)   contrary  to  the  assertions  made  on  behalf  of  the
                  respondent  the  decision  arguably  disclosed  the  judge
                  having carefully  weighed  all  material  matters  in  the
                  proportionality assessment, including weight to  be  given
                  where an appellant has not met the Immigration  Rules  and
                  the importance  of  effective  immigration  controls,  and
                  nevertheless concluded on findings reasonably open to them
                  on the evidence combined with an  adequacy  of  reasoning,
                  that  the  respondent's   decision   had   constituted   a
                  disproportionate interference with his  family  life  with
                  his  British  citizen  family  members,   his   wife   and
                  stepdaughter, there appearing having had  material  regard
                  to Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10;

             (ii) notwithstanding in the concluding paragraphs dealing with
                  proportionality  (46-48),  that  there  was  not   express
                  reference to S.117B of the NI  and  A  Act  2002,  earlier
                  discussion in the decision arguably disclosed an  adequacy
                  of  cognisance  of  the  provisions   of   the   statutory
                  considerations  in   that   provision   along   with   the
                  respondent's  reasons  when  refusing  his  human   rights
                  application".

 7. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal arguing that  there  had
    been an  inadequate  balancing  exercise  which  included  all  of  the
    relevant public interest considerations.  The refusal of permission  to
    appeal stated that the judge had regard  to  S.117B  elsewhere  in  the
    decision but did not point to where that had  taken  place.   As  such,
    apart from the consideration of S.117B(6), which was found not to apply
    in the appeal because there was  no  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the children, there was a lack  of  consideration  of
    the other factors.  The judge had failed to consider and factor in  the
    balancing exercise that the Rules could not be met and even though  the
    refusal for permission to appeal stated that the judge  had  regard  to
    Chikwamba and Agyarko, the grounds claim that there  was  no  guarantee
    that any application from abroad would succeed and as such, that  could
    not be determinative of the outcome.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal on 22  November
    2018.  She said inter alia:

         "The grounds take issue with the judge's  Article  8  findings  and
         argue that the determination does not contain any assessment of the
         public interest issues encompassed in  S.117B  other  than  117B(6)
         which was found not to apply.  Given that the  appellant  does  not
         meet  the  eligibility  requirements  or  any  other  part  of  the
         Immigration Rules, it is arguable  that  the  judge's  reasons  for
         allowing  the  appeal  outside  the  Rules   are   inadequate   and
         insufficiently reasoned".

 9. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Walker relied upon the grounds.

11. Mr Singer submitted that the only issue was that the appellant had come
    here as a visitor.  Leaving that aside, there was an acknowledgement in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter that he met all  the  other  eligibility
    requirements.  The judge was entitled to reach the decision he did.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. The judge erred because he did not fully engage with  S.117B.   He  did
    find that S.117B(6) did  not  apply  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with his stepdaughter and son.  Nevertheless,  considering
    the anticipated family court proceedings and the evidence  with  regard
    to the children, the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion  that
    it was in their best interests that the appellant remain in the  United
    Kingdom.  It is true that the judge erred because he failed  to  engage
    with the  whole  of  S.117B  although  there  was  no  issue  that  all
    provisions were satisfied with the exception of S.117B(5) and (6).   As
    regards  (5)  "little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious" the judge did not materially err in  failing  to  engage
    with this provision given that it was accepted that the  appellant  was
    claiming not only interference with private life but also family  life.
    The appellant's relationship with Mrs Willis-Jones had been formed when
    the appellant was here  lawfully  in  terms  of  S.117B(4).   S.117B(5)
    relates to private life only although admittedly, the appellant's  life
    here had always been precarious.

13. The judge carried out a careful and comprehensive analysis taking  into
    account the relevant case law such as  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  and
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10.

14. The judge clearly considered the Reasons for Refusal Letter and had  in
    mind the appropriate case law in reaching his decision.  There  was  no
    issue that the appellant would meet the requirements of the Rules  save
    for the fact that he was here as a visitor.  That being the  case,  the
    judge was entitled to come to the decision that  there  was  no  public
    interest in his removal to the USA.

15. The judge made no material error of law.  His decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
