
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/03404/2020_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision sent on:                    |
|hearing                              |On 19 August 2021                    |
|On 3 August 2021                     |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                             Farah Ahmed Ismail
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

 1. By a decision signed on 20 April 2021 (sent to the parties on 26  April
    2021), Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gumsley granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal M R Oliver who (in a decision  promulgated  on  11  March
    2021) dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  against
    a decision  of  the  respondent  of  15  January  2020  to  refuse  her
    application of 11 November 2019 to settle in the United  Kingdom  under
    para 297 of the Immigration Rules with her  father,  Mr  Ahmed  Warsame
    (the "sponsor").

 2. On 6 May 2021, the respondent filed a response of the same  date  under
    rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the  "UT
    Rules") which stated, inter alia, that the respondent  did  not  oppose
    the appellant's application for permission and which invited the  Upper
    Tribunal to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  in  order  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    hearing.

 3. By a "Memorandum & Directions" signed on 30 April  2021  (sent  to  the
    parties by email on 24 June 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  stated
    (at para 1) that, in light of the need to take precautions against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and the overriding objective and  having  regard  to
    the judgment of Fordham J in R (JCWI) v President of the Upper Tribunal
    [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), he had reached the provisional view  that  it
    would be appropriate in this case to determine the following  questions
    without a hearing:

         (a)      whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
         involved the making of an error of law; and if so

         (b)      whether that decision should be set aside.

 4. Judge Rintoul proceeded to give directions which (inter  alia)  enabled
    any party who considered that a hearing was necessary to submit reasons
    for that view within a specified period.

 5. By a letter dated 29 June 2021 sent to the Upper Tribunal by  an  email
    of the same date, the respondent replied to  the  directions  of  Judge
    Rintoul, stating that, as had been indicated in the Rule  24  response,
    the  respondent  did  not  oppose  the  appellant's   application   for
    permission and that the Upper Tribunal was invited to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing. The letter proceeded to
    state that the respondent agreed that there was no  need  for  an  oral
    hearing to determine the error of law issue.

 6. On 5  July  2021,  the  Upper  Tribunal  received  an  email  from  the
    appellant's solicitors which attached a document  entitled:  "Heads  of
    Argument in support of remittal for hearing de novo". This document did
    not state whether the appellant objected to the Upper Tribunal deciding
    questions (a) and (b) identified at para 3  above  without  a  hearing.
    However, it is clear that the appellant submitted that the decision  of
    Judge Oliver should be set aside in its entirety and that she sought  a
    remittal of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    on the merits.

 7. I noted that the respondent had also agreed that the decision of  Judge
    Oliver should be set aside and that the appeal should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits.

 8. I considered very carefully whether the Upper  Tribunal  should  decide
    questions (a) and (b) identified at para 3 above without a  hearing.  I
    considered and applied paras 4 and 5 of the Senior  President's  "Pilot
    Practice Direction: Contingency Arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal" (hereafter the "PPD") issued on 19 March 2020 on  a
    pilot basis for a period of six months and extended subsequently for  a
    further six months until 18 March 2021 and  rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I had regard to the decision  of
    Fordham  J  in  R  (JCWI)  v  The  President  of  the  Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Fordham J did not find  that  the  PPD
    was unlawful. Furthermore, the judgment in R  (JCWI)  did  not  concern
    cases in which the parties and the Upper Tribunal were agreed as to the
    outcome.

 9. Having considered the decision of Judge Oliver, the grounds  of  appeal
    and the decision of judge Gumsley in granting permission to  appeal,  I
    agree with the parties that the decision of Judge Oliver should  be  se
    aside. I entirely agree  with  Judge  Gumsley's  reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal. Whilst Judge Oliver had recited the  evidence  in
    some detail, he erred by failing to give any or  any  adequate  reasons
    for his findings  and  for  rejecting  the  case  as  asserted  by  the
    appellant and the sponsor. He also erred by failing to make findings on
    material issues. I am satisfied that these errors of law were  material
    and that Judge Oliver's decision should be set aside  in  its  entirety
    save that his summary of the sponsor's oral evidence, at para 13 of his
    decision, shall stand as a record of the oral  evidence  given  at  the
    hearing.

10. I also agree with the parties that the appeal should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits. I  am  satisfied
    that this case falls within para 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal.

11. Accordingly, I am satisfied, having taken into  account  the  PPD,  the
    overriding objective and the judgment in R (JCWI) v  The  President  of
    the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and in all  of  the
    circumstances, that it  is  just  and  appropriate  for  me  to  decide
    questions (a) and (b) identified at para 3 above without a hearing. For
    the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of Judge Oliver  save
    that para 13 shall stand as a record of the oral evidence given  before
    him and I remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing on the merits by a judge other than Judge Oliver.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. This appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on  the  merits  by  a  judge
other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M R Oliver.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill    Date: 3 August 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
  Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
  covering letter or covering email.

