
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03722/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2020, via Skype for        |On 29 July 2020                      |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                  Craig [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Victor-Mazeli, Counsel, instructed by Bridges
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected to by the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video).  A face to face hearing
was not held because it was not practicable, and no-one requested the same;
I issued directions which stated that my provisional view was that the
matter was suitable for a remote hearing, and no objections were received.
I reached a final decision to direct that a remote hearing would be
necessary and appropriate having considered the overriding objective, the
need to avoid delay (insofar as compatible with the proper consideration of
the issues), in particular the need for the parties to have this matter
resolved, in light of my familiarity with the matter following the face-to-
face error of law hearing on 19 March 2020.  The documents that I was
referred to are outlined in the body of the decision, the contents of which
I have recorded. The order made is described at the end of these reasons.
At the conclusion of the hearing, all parties were content that the hearing
had been conducted fairly and, in particular, that no procedural or other
unfairness arose by virtue of the hearing having been conducted remotely.

 1. The appellant, Craig [M], is a citizen of  Zimbabwe,  born  on  14  May
    1990.  He appeals against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20
    February 2019 to refuse to revoke a deportation order dated 15 May 2013
    made under the automatic  deportation  regime  established  by  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").  The automatic deportation order was
    triggered by the appellant's conviction, following his plea of  guilty,
    to attempted burglary of a dwelling, for which he was sentenced to  two
    years' imprisonment on 2 December 2011.   At  the  same  time,  he  was
    sentenced to an additional total of two months'  imprisonment,  arising
    from two previous failures to comply with the community requirements of
    suspended sentence orders. Thus, the appellant was sentenced to a total
    of two years', two months' imprisonment.

Procedural history

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on 1 November 2012. His claim was  refused
    by the Secretary of State, and the appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal. On 20 November 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Morgan)
    dismissed his appeal against  the  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim  and
    dismissed his appeal against the  deportation  order  on  human  rights
    grounds. The appellant exhausted all available  avenues  of  appeal  in
    relation to that decision on 19 December 2013. On 31 August 2018 and 28
    January 2019, the appellant made a further human rights  claim  to  the
    Secretary of State, in the form of an application for  the  deportation
    order to be revoked. That application  was  refused,  and  it  is  that
    refusal  decision  which  the  appellant  appeals  against   in   these
    proceedings.

 3. The appellant originally appealed against the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order and the corresponding refusal  of  his  human  rights
    claim  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  who,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 10 December 2019, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of
    State appealed to this Tribunal.  Sitting  with  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jackson on 19 March 2020, I held in  an  extempore  decision  that  the
    decision of Judge Widdup involved the making of an error of law and set
    it aside in its entirety (see the Annex to this decision).  I  directed
    that the matter be reheard in this tribunal, and invited the  appellant
    to  provide  further  evidence  going  to  the  issue  of  whether  his
    deportation would be unduly harsh on either his partner, or their  son,
    and reminded the parties of the need to  provide  updated  evidence  in
    further directions, issued on 5 June 2020.

 4. I issued directions stating that it was my provisional  view  that  the
    matter  would  be   suitable   for   a   remote   rehearing,   inviting
    representations in response. Neither  party  objected  to  the  hearing
    taking  place  remotely.  Accordingly,  having  satisfied  myself  that
    proceeding in that way was consistent with  the  overriding  objective,
    the resumed hearing took place, via Skype for business, on 1 July 2020.
     Although Ms Victor-Mazeli experienced some  connectivity  difficulties
    during the hearing, they were overcome, and the  hearing  was  able  to
    resume without further difficulty.  At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
    during which both the appellant and his partner had given evidence over
    the Skype link, both parties agreed that the hearing had been conducted
    fairly, and that there had been no  issues  arising  from  the  hearing
    being conducted  remotely  which  had  affected  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings.

Cases for the appellant and the Secretary of State

 5. In summary, the appellant contends that it would be "unduly harsh"  for
    his partner, Ms M, a British citizen of Hungarian origin, and their one
    year old son, N, for him to be deported; either for them to remain here
    without him, or for them to accompany him to Zimbabwe.  He has no links
    with Zimbabwe, having moved here aged 11.  All his family are here.  He
    is now 30 years old.  His life, and theirs, is  firmly  rooted  in  the
    United Kingdom, and Europe.  Ms M has worked hard to establish  herself
    in her adopted country of nationality and has no desire to leave.   Her
    work as an audiologist could not continue in Zimbabwe, or anywhere else
    in Africa.  She experiences mental health conditions, including anxiety
    and depression.  She has attempted to commit suicide in  the  past  and
    would likely do so again in his absence.  The  offences  took  place  a
    long time ago.  The appellant has learned his lesson.  He has paid  his
    punishment.

 6. The Secretary of State  resists  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    threshold for something to be regarded as "unduly harsh" has  not  been
    met.  The appellant has not lost all links to Zimbabwe,  and  would  be
    able to establish himself there, either with Ms M and  N,  which  would
    not be unduly harsh, or they could choose to stay here.  That would  be
    difficult for them, but not unduly harsh.  In summary, his  deportation
    would be proportionate.

Documentary evidence

 7. The appellant relied on the bundle originally prepared for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing in December 2019,  plus  two  additional  medical
    documents: a letter from Ms M's GP, Dr IM, dated 10 June  2020,  and  a
    report from Tamara Licht,  a  clinical  and  counselling  psychologist,
    dated 26 June 2020.

Legal framework

 8. Section 32 of the 2007 Act defines those, such as this  appellant,  who
    have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12  months
    as a "foreign criminal". Pursuant to subsection (5), the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation  order  in  respect  of  such  a  foreign
    criminal. There are a number of exceptions contained in section 33,  of
    which the  only  relevant  exception  is  "Exception  1",  namely  that
    "removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance of the deportation  order
    would breach - (a) a person's [ECHR] rights..." (see section 33(2)(a)).

 9. The essential issue for my  consideration  is,  therefore,  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellant to be deported to Zimbabwe.  This issue is
    to  be  addressed  primarily  through  the  lens  of  public   interest
    considerations contained in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, in particular section 117C (additional  considerations
    in cases  involving  foreign  criminals):  see  section  117A(2).   The
    Immigration Rules also set out the Secretary of  State's  views  as  to
    where the public interest balance lies in relation to matters  relating
    to Article 8.

10. It is settled law that the best interests of the children are a primary
    consideration.

11. It is for the appellant  to  establish  his  case  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities standard. It is for the Secretary of State to demonstrate
    that any interference with the Article 8 rights of the appellant or his
    family would be justified.

12. Although Ms M is a dual Hungarian/British citizen, at no stage has  the
    appellant  sought  to  argue  that  he  enjoys  any  rights  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  or  the  EU
    Treaties.  He is not married to Ms M and he has not been recognised  as
    a durable partner.  For that reason, this decision  will  not  consider
    whether the appellant enjoys the higher levels of protection under  the
    EU regime.

The hearing

13. The appellant and Ms M gave evidence and adopted their statements.  The
    appellant provided a single statement, dated 25 November  2019.   Ms  M
    provided two statements, dated 25 November 2019, and 2  December  2019.
    Each witness was cross-examined.  I will summarise the salient parts of
    their evidence under my findings, below.

14. The appellant's sister, AM, provided a statement.  She was available to
    give evidence, but Mr Jarvis indicated that he  had  no  questions  for
    her.  I have taken the contents of her statement into account.

Discussion

15. Turning to the substantive issues for my consideration,  I  reached  my
    decision in this case having considered the entirety of  the  evidence,
    in the round.

16. I find that the appellant's private  and  family  life  plainly  engage
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  He has lived in this country for more than half
    of his life, and many of his formative  years  have  been  spent  here,
    given he arrived age 10.  He was only a child when  he  left  Zimbabwe.
    He has been in a relationship with Ms M since  around  2010,  and  they
    have a child together.  His  deportation  will  engage  his  Article  8
    rights, and those of his family, to such an extent as to amount  to  an
    interference with those rights.  That would  be  an  interference  that
    would be in accordance with the law, in the sense it would be  pursuant
    to an established legal framework, accompanied by a right of appeal  to
    this tribunal.  The operative question for my consideration is  whether
    it would be proportionate, for the purposes  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    convention for the appellant to be deported.

17. The Immigration  Rules  make  provision  for  a  person  subject  to  a
    deportation  order  to  apply  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for   its
    revocation:  see  paragraph  390.   Paragraph  390A  incorporates   the
    criteria that feature in paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  of  the  rules,
    concerning the making  of  deportation  orders.   Those  rules  largely
    replicate the statutory regime established by section 117C of the  2002
    Act.  As the Court of Appeal noted in CI (Nigeria) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20],  because  of  the
    statutory regime "there is  no  room  for  any  further  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article  8(2)  [through  an  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules  in  a  deportation  case]  because  these  statutory
    provisions determine the way in which the assessment is to  be  carried
    out in accordance with UK law." Therefore:

         "it is generally unnecessary for a tribunal or court in a  case  in
         which a decision to deport a "foreign criminal"  is  challenged  on
         article  8  grounds  to  refer  to  paragraphs  398-399A   of   the
         Immigration Rules, as they have no additional part to play  in  the
         analysis..."

    Accordingly, I will conduct my analysis by reference to the  structured
    regime contained in section 117C.  Those are considerations to which  I
    must, "in particular", have regard: see section 117A(2)(b).

The offence

18. It is for the Secretary of State to justify  the  interference  in  the
    Article 8 rights of the appellant and his family that deportation  will
    necessarily entail.  Since the appellant's deportation was triggered by
    his offending, and since section 117C looks to the seriousness of  that
    offending in order to determine the extent of the corresponding  public
    interest in the appellant's deportation, I will begin  my  analysis  by
    examining the offence for which the  Secretary  of  State  pursues  the
    appellant's deportation ("the index offence").

19. The appellant was convicted of  a  serious  offence.  He  attempted  to
    burgle the home of a young mother  present  with  her  baby.   He  only
    failed because he was thwarted by a contractor.  The sentencing  judge,
    sitting in the Crown Court at Luton, said:

         "Domestic burglary - dwelling house  burglary  -  is  not  just  an
         offence against property; it is an offence against the  person,  as
         has been said  times  before.  It  causes  devastating  effects  to
         householders to know that their house has  been  burgled.  In  this
         case, although only an attempt, the householder -  a  young  mother
         with a child, a  baby  -  has,  in  her  victim  impact  statement,
         explained vividly how, now, she feels unsafe for her safety. To  be
         the victim of a burglary - dwelling house  burglary  -  must  be  a
         horrible experience... Regrettably,  you  must  serve  a  custodial
         sentence of some length to reflect that."

20. This was not, as the sentencing  judge  noted,  the  appellant's  first
    attempt. He had  two  convictions  for  dwelling  house  burglaries  in
    October 2009. For those two  offences,  the  appellant  had  been  made
    subject to suspended sentence orders. The index offence  was  committed
    during the suspension period for those offences. The judge  noted  that
    it was a "merciful view" for the magistrates who sentenced him  on  the
    earlier occasions only to have imposed suspended  sentences  and  that,
    "despite that" the appellant had gone on to reoffend. The  judge  noted
    that the appellant needed to "get out of the grips of  drug  addiction,
    and of the circle of people you mix with..."

21. The appellant was in effect a third time domestic burglar.  This was  a
    very serious offence, in respect of which -  as  the  sentencing  judge
    noted - the appellant received credit for his plea of  guilty,  meaning
    that the sentence would have been higher but for that reduction.

22. Viewed through the lens of  section  117C(1)  of  the  2002  Act,  "the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public  interest."  Pursuant
    to subsection (2), "the more serious the offence committed by a foreign
    criminal, the greater is the public interest in the deportation of  the
    criminal." This was an offence which was  not  at  the  bottom  of  the
    spectrum of severity. Although, as  is  regrettably  the  case,  it  is
    possible to envisage more serious offending, the appellant is  not  one
    who is caught by the automatic deportation provisions "on the cusp". He
    is over the threshold for being categorised as  a  "foreign  criminal",
    which merely requires a sentence of at least 12 months,  by  a  margin.
    As the appellant has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of over
    12 months, but less than four  years,  "the  public  interest  requires
    [his] deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies."

23. I turn, therefore, to the exceptions.  The statute terms the person  in
    the appellant's position as "C" throughout.

Exception 1

24. Section 117C(4) provides:

         "(4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported."

25. The appellant has not been lawfully resident  for  most  of  his  life,
    although he cannot be held responsible for his  unlawful  status  as  a
    child (a factor which  goes  to  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
    circumstances over  and  above"  the  statutory  exceptions).   He  was
    granted discretionary leave in November 2009, when he would  have  been
    approximately 19 and a half, for what appears to be a period  of  three
    years.  The grant of discretionary  leave  was  not  renewed,  and  the
    appellant remains here unlawfully.  Although he has lived here for more
    than half of his life, he was not lawfully resident for that time.

26. I accept that the appellant is socially and culturally integrated,  and
    Mr Jarvis made no  attempt  to  contend  otherwise.   Although  he  has
    committed a series of offences, the most recent of which was  in  March
    2018, possession of heroin, for which he was  fined  �50,  the  picture
    that emerged before me was of an individual who  is  committed  to  his
    family, and prior to the pandemic, engaged  in  a  range  of  community
    activities with his baby son. Ms M was an impressive witness who  spoke
    with great clarity about the extent and depth of the  family  ties  she
    enjoys with the appellant, and the importance of family to them.

27. A central tenet of the appellant's case is that he would not be able to
    resume life in Zimbabwe, a country he does not know. His  evidence  was
    that he has no family in Zimbabwe anymore; his family are all here, and
    his experience of life, both as a teenager growing up, and as an adult,
    is confined to this country. I accept that the appellant no longer  has
    any family in Zimbabwe; in November 2013, in unchallenged  findings  of
    fact, the First-tier Tribunal accepted that he no longer has any family
    in Zimbabwe: see [18] of the decision of Judge Morgan.  However,  Judge
    Morgan also found that the appellant had not lost all ties to Zimbabwe.
    It was the country of his birth, and he would  be  able  culturally  to
    associate himself with the country. I accept that almost 7  years  have
    passed since Judge Morgan's findings were made.  However,  the  reasons
    given by the appellant for his  claimed  inability  to  integrate  into
    Zimbabwe do not demonstrate  that  anything  significant  has  changed,
    other than the passage of time, since Judge Morgan's  decision.   I  do
    not accept  that  the  appellant  would  experience  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his integration. The mere claimed inability to be able to
    find work, or unfamiliarity with the language  (bearing  in  mind  that
    English is one of  the  official  languages  of  Zimbabwe),  or  feared
    destitution cannot amount to "very significant  obstacles".   It  is  a
    high threshold. The question of whether there will  be  such  obstacles
    calls for a broad evaluative judgement, of  whether,  given  sufficient
    time, the appellant will be able to establish himself as enough  of  an
    insider as to be able to enjoy a reasonable prospect of establishing  a
    private life there.  I find that he will be able to establish a private
    life in Zimbabwe, within a reasonable period of time, on the  basis  of
    the preserved links found by Judge Morgan to continue to exist, and the
    family he has here to support him.

28. A central plank of the appellant's case is that  he  has  a  supportive
    family around him in this country. He is financially supported by Ms  M
    and, to an extent, by his mother.  I  accept  the  evidence  of  Ms  M,
    outlined in her statements, that the family finances  are  very  tight,
    and that they have been plunged into debt, principally as a  result  of
    the appellant's conviction and immigration status, which  has  had  the
    dual impact of preventing him from being able to work, and  the  family
    taking on debt to meet legal fees and other  expenses.  However,  other
    than the assertion of the appellant, there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    wider family would not  be  able  to  remit  at  least  some  financial
    support, at least initially. At [9] of her statement, AM  writes  that,
    "we have all been there for Craig and until this  day  we  continue  to
    support him because that is the many values of being a  family."  Under
    cross-examination, the appellant  said  that  his  family  support  his
    brother at  university,  and  that  his  mother  helps  with  household
    expenses. I do not accept that the clear  evidence  of  the  warmth  of
    family relationship that is evident between the appellant and his wider
    family, and the support that they provide to him at the  moment,  would
    simply draw to a halt in the event of his deportation. The  reality  is
    that his family support him  now  and  are  more  likely  than  not  to
    continue to do so in the future, at least initially.

29. Ms M said that a significant expense she and the appellant have had  to
    meet  has  been  the  cost  of  these  legal  proceedings.  I  do   not
    underestimate the expense that that will have  put  them  to.  However,
    upon his return, those expenses will, by definition, come  to  an  end.
    There is no evidence, other than the bare assertions  which  I  do  not
    accept for the reasons given, that the appellant would be left high and
    dry by his loving and caring family here.

30. Ms Victor-Mazeli did not  contest  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  some
    funding may be available from the Secretary of State,  to  assist  with
    the appellant's initial arrival in Zimbabwe.  I find that some  support
    would be available to him from the respondent.

31. I accept that the appellant will encounter a range of difficulties upon
    his return. However, the obstacles which the appellant will  inevitably
    face, cannot be so  significant  as  to  amount  to  "very  significant
    obstacles". He has not demonstrated that the ties Judge Morgan found he
    continued to enjoy to Zimbabwe in November 2013 (see also [12] of  that
    decision) have been lost altogether.  Judge Morgan's decision forms the
    starting point for my  analysis,  and  there  has  been  no  additional
    evidence, other than the passage  of  time,  demonstrating  that  those
    findings should be displaced. The appellant will be able to  use  those
    retained ties, support and encouragement from his family, and  his  own
    Zimbabwean roots to put down the foundations of a private  life  which,
    within  a  reasonable  period  of  time,  will  enable  him  to  become
    integrated. There are obstacles to his integration, but none of them is
    "very significant".

32. It follows, therefore,  that  the  appellant  is  not  able  to  resist
    deportation on the basis that Exception 1 is met.

Exception 2

33. Section 117C(5) provides:

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

34. It is common ground that the appellant enjoys a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms M and N.  Both  are  British  citizens,  with  the
    effect that they are a qualifying partner and child  respectively:  see
    section 117D(1).  Mr Jarvis did  not  suggest  that  the  relationships
    within the family unit are anything but genuine and subsisting.

35. The essential question is whether it would be "unduly harsh" on  either
    Ms M or N for the appellant to be deported.

36. I begin with the medical evidence which has been adduced in relation to
    Ms M. She experiences anxiety and depression. In an extract from her GP
    records, she is noted as having a "significant past"  in  the  form  of
    anxiety with depression, in September  2015.   In  a  single  paragraph
    letter of four lines dated 28 November 2019, Dr IM writes that Ms M:

         "... has a history of depression. If [the  appellant]  were  to  be
         deported this may have a severe impact on [Ms M's]  mental  health.
         Equally separation from his father would have an  impact  on  their
         child."

    Unfortunately, other  than  confirming  that  Ms  M's  medical  history
    includes depression, this letter does not provide any detail as to  the
    nature  of  her  depression,  its  suspected  causes,  nor   what   the
    "significant history" recorded by her medical  records  entailed.  Some
    assistance is provided by a further letter from Dr IM,  dated  10  June
    2020, which states:

         "[Ms M] has a history of anxiety and depression, and a  history  of
         an impulsive overdose of over-the-counter sleeping tablets and pain
         medication  in  response  to  social  stress  which   required   an
         assessment in hospital.

         She has already been through a lot of stress  due  to  the  ongoing
         immigration court case, which I understand has been  going  on  for
         several years. If [the appellant] were to be  deported  this  would
         likely have a serious impact on [Ms M's] mental  health  especially
         given her previous history. As a result she would  likely  struggle
         to look after their son."

         I also believe their  son,  although  only  13  months  old,  would
         suffer, possibly psychologically if separated from his father. This
         would further compound issues for [Ms M]."

37. Although this letter provides a degree of  additional  detail,  I  have
    included its operative contents in full to highlight its brief  nature,
    and the absence of  detail  concerning  the  "social  stress"  and  the
    "assessment in hospital" which that entailed. In her own evidence, Ms M
    said that the appellant's unexpected continued detention following  the
    expiry of the custodial element of his criminal sentence, had triggered
    this incident.  The letter does not assist with any specificity at  all
    in relation to the likely "serious impact" upon Ms M's  mental  health,
    in the event of the appellant's deportation.

38. Some further detail is provided in the report  of  Ms  Licht,  but  the
    report features significant limitations,  as  set  out  below.  It  was
    drafted following a video consultation with Ms M which lasted  an  hour
    and 15 minutes. At [3.03], Ms Licht writes that she  had  not  received
    any documentation from the appellant or  those  representing  him  (or,
    indeed, Ms M herself, although I make no criticism of  her  for  this),
    which means that she must have drafted the report without  having  even
    seen the very brief medical summary included in the  bundle  for  these
    proceedings, still less the broader range of materials that  must  have
    been  generated  by  the  hospital  admission  and  the  other  medical
    attention Ms M had at the time and since. Ms Licht concludes that Ms  M
    meets the criteria for  "major  depressive  disorder"  single  episode,
    without psychotic features, with anxious distress: see [4]. In the same
    paragraph, Ms Licht writes that the ongoing uncertainty from the  legal
    proceedings involving the appellant have had a significant impact on Ms
    M's mental health.

39. In the fourth unnumbered paragraph on page 8,  Ms  Licht  writes,  with
    emphasis added:

         "It's my professional opinion that a major risk to [Ms M's]  health
         if she were to lose her husband [sic],  is  that  current  suicidal
         thoughts may increase and get  more  intense;  thus,  the  risk  of
         committing  suicide  remains  high  in  this  scenario.  Literature
         suggests that the possibility of suicidal behaviour exists  at  all
         times during major depressive  episode...  Furthermore,  literature
         indicates that it  should  be  remembered  that  most  contemplated
         suicides are not preceded by unsuccessful attempts..."

40. The suggestion that Ms M experiences "current suicidal thoughts" is not
    one that finds support  in  any  of  the  other  medical  documents  or
    evidence in the case, including that of Ms M herself.  At [21]  of  her
    first statement, Ms M writes about  how  she  is  able  to  manage  her
    anxiety of depression.  At [58], she writes that he has  a  history  of
    the conditions, explaining at [59] what her  fears  are  in  the  event
    "these problems return".  In her  oral  evidence,  Ms  M  was  keen  to
    emphasise that she had only attempted suicide once, and that  was  some
    time ago - 2015. Neither of the letters from Dr  IM,  her  GP,  suggest
    contemporary suicidal ideation.

41. It is not clear, therefore, why or how Ms Licht - who, of  course,  had
    not been asked to  view  any  supporting  medical  documents  ahead  of
    writing her report - refers to Ms M as experiencing  "current  suicidal
    thoughts".  There appears to be no  support  for  the  introduction  of
    those concerns in the report.  That is  a  concerning  feature  of  the
    report.

42. At page 10, Ms Licht writes, in the present tense:

         "...it is my professional opinion that [Ms M] will need a long  and
         constant psychological process before being fit to  function  again
         in society." (Emphasis added)

    The  suggestion  that  Ms  M  requires  such  extensive   psychological
    treatment before being "fit to function again in society"  is  at  odds
    with the GP's letters, and the remaining evidence in the case.  Dr IM's
    most recent letter states that Ms  M  has  a  history  of  anxiety  and
    depression but makes no mention of it being a  contemporary  condition,
    not does the GP state that any conditions which are experienced by Ms M
    impair her fitness to "function again in society".  The evidence  Ms  M
    herself does not support that proposition.  She writes vividly  in  her
    statements, and spoke with equal enthusiasm in her evidence before  me,
    of the training that she has undertaken to qualify as  an  audiologist.
    She works for a private audiology company, which  operates  within  the
    NHS system, and is about to be offered a senior  audiologist  role.  In
    her December 2019 statement, she wrote at [7] that she looks after:

         "hundreds if not thousands of patients who  are  in  dire  need  of
         hearing care... Our line of  work  not  only  helps  patients  hear
         better but helps preserve their mental health and brain health keep
         people away from isolation... It is crucial for these patients that
         I continue my job."

    She adds that [9] that:

         "it is extremely difficult to find anybody for my position. My work
         is very demanding in time and energy as well. My diary is  back  to
         back and I have four clinic days a week. The job requires  a  great
         amount of admin, which must be done on a separate day, on the fifth
         day of the week."

    At [11] she writes:

         "I also have patients whom I look after for  years.  They  know  me
         personally and they tend to request their appointment with me only.
         It is extremely important for me that I  provide  the  highest  and
         best possible care for patients with  continuity  and  reliability.
         [12] I enjoy my work and I do it with great passion."

43. The picture of a  suicidal,  extremely  depressed  individual,  who  is
    "unable to function in society", and who would not be able to  function
    unless these proceedings are resolved in favour of the appellant,  that
    emerges from the report of Ms Licht, is at odds with the evidence of Ms
    M herself, and the remaining medical evidence. These weaknesses lead me
    to diminish the weight that would otherwise be attached to the report.

44. Drawing this analysis together, I accept  that  Ms  M  does  experience
    anxiety and depression, and that the stress of high pressure situations
    where there is unpredictable and impacting change has the potential  to
    bring  about  further  anxiety  and  depression.  However,  given   the
    weaknesses in Ms Licht's report identified above, I am unable to accept
    its conclusions concerning the impact of the appellant's deportation on
    the mental health of Ms M. His deportation  would  inevitably  have  an
    impact, but it is not likely to be as acute or extensive  as  -  and  I
    regret to put it in these terms - Ms Licht has speculated.   Similarly,
    the lack of detail in Dr IM's letters means it is difficult to  ascribe
    much weight to the assertions in either letter, other  than  to  accept
    that, in broad terms, the mental health of Ms M will  suffer  upon  the
    appellant's deportation.

N: best interests

45. Against that background, I turn to the best interests of N. I  have  no
    hesitation in concluding that N's best interests are to remain in  this
    country, with Ms M and the appellant, and for the family to continue as
    a family  unit.  N  is  a  British  citizen,  as  is  his  mother.  The
    appellant's devotion to his son was evident  from  the  description  he
    gave of their daily life together, which summarised in warm and  loving
    terms the strength and depth of the  relationship  between  father  and
    son.  Although N is  a  very  young  child  at  the  moment,  his  best
    interests are to avoid the disruption and uncertainty that  would  flow
    from the deportation of the appellant. If he were  to  remain  in  this
    country without the appellant, he would be deprived of his father,  and
    the family unit would be separated. In turn, while that would not  have
    the devastating impact on Ms M's mental health that Ms Licht speculated
    it would, it would nevertheless have an impact on Ms M, and  inevitably
    upon the wellbeing of N.

46. Ms M may have to stop work in order to look after  her  son,  or  would
    have to source childcare from elsewhere. Either way, that  would  place
    the remaining family unit in this country, Ms M and  N,  under  immense
    emotional and financial stress, which they would have  to  face  alone.
    See the letter from the appellant's son's NHS keyworker at page  39  of
    the bundle.  There will  be  an  impact  upon  Ms  M's  mental  health,
    although in the absence of any detail from either medical expert, it is
    not clear what that impact would be, nor its extent.  There is  a  lack
    of  depth  in  Dr  IM's  assertion  that  N  "would  suffer,   possibly
    psychologically"; it lacks the detail and  precision  to  necessary  to
    attract weight: see the 10 June 2020 letter.  The commitment that Ms  M
    clearly has to her work, and the sense of fulfilment she has  from  it,
    could be lost if she has to stop work for childcare reasons,  and  that
    would have a corresponding impact on the atmosphere of the family home.
    None of this would be in the best interests of N.

47. It would plainly not be in the best interests of N for him to accompany
    the appellant, with Ms M, to Zimbabwe. While  I  have  found  that  the
    appellant, if returned in isolation, would - within a reasonable period
    of time - be able to integrate, and establish a private life consistent
    with his own nationality, ethnicity and the  cultural  origins  of  his
    early childhood, I have no basis to read those findings across to reach
    a similar conclusion in relation to the return of Ms M and N  with  the
    appellant. It is one thing to expect the appellant to cope on his  own.
    It is another to expect the entire family to be able to  accompany  him
    and cope alongside him. For the purposes of this assessment of N's best
    interests, I find that it is not in his best interests to accompany his
    father to Zimbabwe with Ms M. It would be an alien environment for  his
    mother, who would likely take some time to find  work  in  her  current
    field, or retrain,  in  the  already-fragile  post-pandemic  Zimbabwean
    economy.  In turn, that would  have  a  corresponding  and  detrimental
    impact on the child.  It is not in the best interests of any  child  to
    be required to live in the country where  his  father  will  experience
    difficulties (albeit not very significant  obstacles)  to  integrating,
    and where the mother,  being  of  a  completely  different  ethnic  and
    cultural  background,  would  be  likely  to  struggle  immensely  with
    bringing up a young child, against the background of  severe  financial
    problems the family would be likely to encounter, and a past history of
    mental health conditions.

48. Drawing this analysis together, therefore, the best interests of N, are
    to remain in this country, with both parents.

Unduly harsh

49. A certain amount of harshness is "due",  or  to  be  expected,  when  a
    person is  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  level  of  "due"
    harshness is that set out in section 117C(1), arising from  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.   The level of  "due"
    harshness does not correspond to  the  seriousness  of  the  offending,
    otherwise that would result in some children being "due" greater levels
    of harshness depending on what their parent(s) had  done.   That  would
    offend  the  settled  principle  that  children  are  not  to  be  held
    responsible for the acts or  omissions  of  their  parents.   But  when
    considering the threshold, "one is looking for a  degree  of  harshness
    going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced
    with the deportation of a parent...": see KO (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 at [23].

50. I find that the difficulties the family would encounter if they  sought
    to relocate to Zimbabwe would be "unduly harsh" for N, in light  of  my
    assessments of his best interests.  The harshness of requiring a  young
    British  child  to  relocate  to  Zimbabwe,  with  its  well-documented
    economic difficulties, compounded by the difficulties  his  father  and
    mother would face, would go beyond what  is  "due".   The  family  unit
    would be exposed to a poverty unlikely to be faced by the appellant  if
    he were to return alone, for finding funds  to  maintain  a  family  of
    three will be a greater challenge than the  appellant  will  face  when
    seeking to sustain himself, or rely on remittances  from  family  here.
    Accommodation that would be sufficient (and affordable) for a single 30
    year old man would be very unlikely to be suitable for a  young  family
    with a toddler; common sense dictates that suitable  accommodation  for
    the entire family would be more expensive, and harder to  secure.   The
    risk of destitution for the family unit would be significant.   Ms  M's
    past anxiety and depression would be at risk of returning, and  placing
    considerable barriers before what minimal prospects  the  family  would
    have of being able to establish themselves there. I find that it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect either Ms M or N to accompany  the  appellant
    to Zimbabwe.  I reach this conclusion taking full account of the  level
    of harshness that is "due", calibrated by the public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, as set out in section 117C(1) of  the
    2002 Act.  Exposing a family, including a young British child,  to  the
    real possibility of living an impoverished life in a country which  has
    experienced significant instability and extreme economic pressure, goes
    beyond the harshness that is due.

51. The same cannot be said, however, in relation to Ms M and  N  remaining
    here, in the absence of the appellant.

52. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1213, Hickinbottom LJ summarised the position in  relation  to
    the impact on family life, commencing with the position of the children
    involved, in this way, at [46]:

         "When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy  for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in  circumstances  in
         which they can remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  other
         parent, they will inevitably be  distressed.  However,  in  section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its  will  that,
         for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one to four years,  only
         where the consequences for the children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will
         deportation  be  constrained.  That  is  entirely  consistent  with
         article 8 of the ECHR. It is important  that  decision-makers  and,
         when their decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour
         that expression of Parliamentary will. In this case,  in  agreement
         with Holroyde  LJ,  I  consider  the  evidence  only  admitted  one
         conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will be  for  his
         children, for none of them will it result in undue harshness."

53. "Unduly harsh" is an elevated threshold, as the Supreme Court  observed
    in KO, endorsing this  tribunal's  approach  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] INLR 563 (see [27] of
    KO).  It is clear that the passage of time, and any element  of  delay,
    in  the  Secretary  of  State's  consideration   of   the   appellant's
    deportation is  not  a  relevant  consideration  for  the  purposes  of
    determining  whether  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh":  see  PG
    (Jamaica) at [40].  That means that, contrary to the submissions of  Ms
    Victor-Mazeli,  the  "delay"  and  the  passage  of  time   since   the
    appellant's 2011 convictions is not a factor which goes to the issue of
    whether the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" on Ms M  or
    N. The reference point for what is "due"  is  that  which  the  Supreme
    Court emphasised in KO is contained  in  section  117C(1),  namely  the
    fixed public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  For the
    purpose of this exception,  the  issue  of  delay  is  not  a  relevant
    consideration; what is "due" cannot be tempered by the passage of time.

54. I set out above how the appellant's  supplementary  evidence  in  chief
    described the care and affection which characterises  his  relationship
    with N, and their daily routine together. I accept that  the  appellant
    is the primary carer for N, given the extensive  work  responsibilities
    of Ms M. The family income is not significant, and although Ms M  is  a
    qualified audiologist, she does not currently earn enough  to  pay  for
    full-time childcare. The family are able to cope at the moment  because
    the appellant is the primary carer. However, the loss of childcare is a
    normal consequence of deportation which is not capable of amounting  to
    being "unduly harsh" in isolation.

55. The most significant aspect of the impact of  the  appellant's  removal
    upon Ms M is her mental health.  I  accept  that  she  has  experienced
    anxiety and depression in the past and attempted suicide  on  a  single
    occasion in 2015. I also accept  that  the  catalyst  for  the  suicide
    attempt was likely to have been the stress arising from the uncertainty
    of the appellant's continued detention.

56. I accept that the absence of the appellant is likely to augment Ms  M's
    mental health conditions, with the potential to lead to her anxiety and
    depression returning. However, the evidence does not  demonstrate  that
    the mental health consequences of the appellant's deportation  upon  Ms
    M, and therefore by proxy upon N, go  beyond  the  expected  and  sadly
    tragic likely consequences  of  most  deportations  of  a  parent.  The
    medical evidence submitted on behalf of Ms M is vague and imprecise. It
    does not specify, with the required clinical precision, what the impact
    of the appellant's removal would be.  As I  have  set  out  above,  the
    report of Ms Licht was drafted without the  sight  of  any  of  Ms  M's
    medical records, and proceeded on the  erroneous  assumption  that  she
    experiences suicidal ideation and was unable properly to  "function  in
    society". That, of course, was plainly incorrect.  The medical evidence
    does not demonstrate a suicide risk or the risk of severe deterioration
    of Ms M's health.

57. I accept that the deportation of the appellant would deprive N  of  his
    father and would be contrary  to  his  best  interests.  Against  those
    concerns, is the fact that the appellant's family, his mother,  brother
    and sister, live in this country. They assisted with  childcare  during
    the hearing. I accept the appellant's evidence that his mother provides
    extensive practical  and  financial  assistance  towards  the  cost  of
    bringing up N. I find that Ms M would not be left without  any  support
    from her wider family by marriage. She has demonstrated resolution  and
    determination in the pursuit of her career here, and  has  demonstrated
    that she is able to function highly in a broad range of contexts,  from
    national security to audiology. She is relied upon by a large number of
    her patients in the area she  lives,  and  is  on  the  cusp  of  being
    promoted to a more senior position, underlining her broad skill set.  I
    find that, although her mental health will be  impacted,  there  is  no
    evidence demonstrating a causal and likely link to  a  further  suicide
    attempt or a significant and unduly harsh deterioration.

58. As tragic as the appellant's deportation  is,  and  despite  the  great
    sympathy, to adopt the terminology of Hickinbottom LJ in PG  (Jamaica),
    I have for  N,  and  the  inevitable  distress  which  the  appellant's
    deportation will cause for Ms M, on the facts of this case,  those  are
    the sad consequences which can be expected ordinarily to flow from  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.

59. Exception 2 is not, therefore, met.

Very compelling circumstances over and above

60.  The  remaining  question  is  whether  there  are   "very   compelling
    circumstances"  over  and  above  the  exceptions.   Pursuant   to   NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    662, those in the position of this appellant are to enjoy  the  ability
    to contend that there are  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2",  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117C(6).   This  is  an  analysis  which  must  take  place  by
    reference to the extent to which Exceptions 1  and  two  were  met,  in
    addition to considering any additional factors.

61. Ms Victor-Mazeli contends that the passage of time since the  appellant
    committed the index offence means  that  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation has diminished.  I reject this submission.  The  difficulty
    with the appellant's delay argument, is that this is not a  case  where
    the respondent's approach may  properly  be  characterised  as  one  of
    inactivity  or  acquiescence  in  long-term  unlawful  residence.   The
    appellant was placed in immigration detention for a considerable period
    of time, in order to facilitate the appellant's removal.  There  is  no
    suggestion that that detention has been found to  be  unlawful  on  the
    basis that there was no realistic prospect of the appellant's  removal;
    while he was released on bail, Ms Victor-Mazeli has not contended  that
    the Secretary of State's detention of him  was  unlawful  or  otherwise
    unaccompanied by efforts to secure his removal.

62. Mr Jarvis put to the  appellant  that  the  respondent  has  attempted,
    unsuccessfully, to arrange meetings  between  him  and  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities,  in  order  to  secure  a  travel  document.   In   cross-
    examination, the appellant gave the rather unimpressive reply  that  he
    has been reporting to the respondent on a regular basis, and that those
    attendances could have been used to secure his cooperation for a travel
    document interview. It seems that the  appellant's  attitude  is  that,
    rather  than  complying  with  the  specific  requests  to  arrange  an
    interview  at  a  time  of  mutual  convenience  with  the   Zimbabwean
    authorities, he expects the  respondent  simply  to  have  secured  the
    attendance of the relevant Zimbabwean officials, in order  to  coincide
    with one of his  regular  reporting  attendances  at  the  respondent's
    premises. Taken with the remainder  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  in
    which he accepted that he had no intention  of  returning  to  Zimbabwe
    unless physically placed on a plane as part of an enforced  removal,  I
    find this to be an unconvincing explanation.

63. This is not one  of  those  cases  where  the  respondent's  delay  has
    contributed significantly to the longevity of the appellant's continued
    residence.  The respondent detained the appellant with a  view  to  his
    removal for a considerable period  and  has  attempted  to  secure  his
    cooperation for a travel document interview. The appellant was, at  all
    times, under an obligation to leave, and he chose not to. He has  never
    approached the Zimbabwean authorities himself to secure an extension to
    his passport, which, he said under cross-examination, expired in  2006.
    Any delay is not the fault of the respondent.  The appellant  has  done
    absolutely nothing to progress his own removal, despite being under  an
    obligation to leave the country.

64. I will adopt a balance sheet approach to analyse the  remaining  issues
    which  are  relevant  to  the  "very  compelling  circumstances"  test.
    Factors mitigating against the appellant's deportation include:

          a. The best interests of N are for the appellant to remain  here.
             The appellant's deportation would deprive  N  of  his  father.
             The appellant plays a significant  role  in  N's  life,  which
             would come to an end in its current form in the event  of  his
             deportation.

          b. The appellant arrived aged 11, and has grown up in the  United
             Kingdom, and considers this country to be his home.

          c. Although the appellant was here unlawfully  for  most  of  his
             childhood residence, that cannot be held against him,  for  it
             was entirely out of his hands. It is an established  principle
             that when considering the best interests of a  child,  as  the
             appellant was at the times under consideration, that  children
             are not to be held responsible for  the  misdeeds  of  others.
             Accordingly, I treat the appellant as though he  was  lawfully
             resident until at all material times when he was under 18.

          d. The appellant has not always resided here unlawfully;  he  was
             granted limited discretionary leave in November 2009.

          e. As Ms Victor-Mazeli highlighted, the European Court  of  Human
             Rights has ascribed significance to longevity of residence for
             the purposes of assessing Article  8:  see  Maslov  v  Austria
             (1638/03) [2009] INLR 47.

          f. The length of the appellant's residence here, and the  passage
             of time since his offending, are weighty factors.

          g. Save for a single offence for  the  possession  of  heroin  in
             March 2018, and a caution for the possession  of  cannabis  in
             April  2015,  the  appellant  has  not  reoffended  since  the
             commission of the index offence.

          h. Ms M provides a valuable service  to  a  number  of  patients,
             operating within the NHS context. Her work as  an  audiologist
             may be called into question, at least in the short  to  medium
             term,  in  the  event  of  the  appellant's  deportation.  The
             appellant's deportation would have an  impact  that  would  be
             felt in the local community, not because of  any  contribution
             he makes, but because of that made by Ms M.

          i. The appellant speaks English and is financially independent.

65. Factors militating in favour of the appellant's deportation include:

          a. The public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

          b. The appellant committed a serious offence, for which, pursuant
             to section 117C(2), attracts a correspondingly greater  public
             interest in deportation (note this factor does  not  apply  in
             relation to  the  amount  of  harshness  that  is  "due",  the
             reference point for which is  fixed  by  section  117C(1),  by
             reference to the general public interest in the deportation of
             foreign criminals).

          c. The appellant  meets  none  of  the  statutory  exceptions  to
             deportation.  He would not face very significant obstacles  to
             his integration in Zimbabwe, and his deportation would not  be
             unduly harsh on Ms M or N.

          d. To the extent that the appellant contends that there has  been
             significant delay by the Secretary of State  in  pursuing  his
             removal, pursuant to EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2008] UKHL 41, there  is  no  merit  to  this
             argument.  As set out above,  any  delay  cannot  properly  be
             attributed to the respondent.  The appellant was  quite  clear
             in his evidence that he has never had any intention of leaving
             the country.  Nor can it be said that he has lived an entirely
             blameless life since the  index  offence,  having  received  a
             caution and a conviction for the possession  of  cannabis  and
             heroin in 2015 and 2018 respectively.

          e. Although the appellant  has  lived  here  for  a  considerable
             period, he did spend his early years in  Zimbabwe,  and  still
             retains some links (albeit not familial) to the country.  This
             is not a case where, for example, the appellant  was  five  or
             six when he arrived (for example, the applicant in Maslov  was
             six years old upon his arrival in Austria).

          f. Speaking  English,  and  being  financially  independent,  are
             neutral factors.

66. Ms Victor-Mazeli highlighted [46] of Hesham Ali v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.  There, Lord Reed spoke of  the
    need for an appellate  tribunal  to  reach  its  own  decision  on  the
    proportionality of the deportation of a  foreign  criminal.  Lord  Reid
    added that, "where the Secretary of State has adopted a policy based on
    a general assessment  of  proportionality,  as  in  the  present  case,
    [appellate  tribunal]  should  attach  considerable  weight   to   that
    assessment..."  In reaching my own view of the proportionality  of  the
    appellant's removal I do, of course,  take  into  account  the  general
    policy of the Secretary of  State.   That  is  nothing  to  the  point,
    however, as the legislative framework applicable to these  proceedings,
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act, sets out not only  the  Secretary  of  State's
    views of the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals,
    but Parliament's view, in the form of statutory considerations to which
    I must, in particular, have regard. What is clear from Ali at  [46]  is
    that the public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals  "can
    generally be outweighed only by countervailing factors which  are  very
    compelling..."

67. In light of the above analysis, I do not consider that there  are  very
    compelling circumstances, over and  above  the  exceptions,  mitigating
    against  the  public  interest  being  in  favour  of  the  appellant's
    deportation.  The cumulative  force  of  the  factors  that  have  been
    advanced on his behalf are not capable of outweighing the force of  the
    public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  In  light  of
    the statutory considerations prescribed by Parliament, I consider  that
    the appellant's deportation is a proportionate response  to  the  index
    offence. The consequences which will no doubt be very  significant  for
    Ms M and N bearing in mind the expected harshness which is  "due"  when
    crimes are committed by foreign criminals. The pain  which  the  family
    will have to endure has been augmented by the appellant's  defiance  of
    the deportation order which has been in force against him, in  relation
    to which exhausted all available avenues of appeal  in  December  2013,
    rather than leaving the country. It is not disproportionate to expect a
    person in the position of this appellant to be deported to Zimbabwe  in
    these circumstances. While the best interests of N are  not  consistent
    with this conclusion, the cumulative force of the reasons in favour  of
    the appellant's deportation, the public interest in the maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  controls  and  the   deportation   of   foreign
    criminals, the appellant's inability to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    either of the statutory exceptions, in the absence of "very  compelling
    circumstances  over  and  above"  the  exceptions,   are   capable   of
    outweighing his best interests.

68. It follows that the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals pursuant to Part 5A of the 2002 Act has not been overcome  by
    the  appellant.   That  is  dispositive  of  an  application   of   the
    Immigration Rules to revoke the deportation  order  made  against  him.
    The operative requirement of paragraph 390A of the rules concerning the
    revocation of deportation is to  consider  whether  the  exceptions  in
    paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the  rules  are  met.    Paragraph   399
    corresponds  to  Exception  2  in  section  117C,  and  paragraph  399A
    corresponds to Exception 1.   Pursuant  to  my  earlier  analysis,  the
    appellant is unable to meet either exception, and  there  are  no  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.  Having  regard
    to the considerations in Part 5A, the appellant's deportation is in the
    public interest, and the appellant cannot defeat the application of the
    automatic deportation provisions  on  that  basis.   The  exception  to
    automatic deportation contained in section 33(2)(a) (deportation  would
    breach a person's Convention rights) is not made out.

69. This appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Fee Award

I make no fee award.

Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 16 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03722/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2020                     |                                     |
|Extempore decision                   |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON
                                     and
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                  Craig [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Agho, Bridges Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal of the Secretary of State.  For convenience  we  will
    refers to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where
    appropriate.

 2. The appellant, Craig [M], is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  The  Secretary  of
    State appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup
    promulgated on 10 December 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal against
    a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20  February  2019  refusing
    his  application  to  revoke  a  deportation  order  and  refusing  his
    associated human rights claim.

 3. The appellant had been made subject to a deportation order  on  account
    of offences he committed between 2009 and 2011.  He  was  convicted  of
    burglary and sentenced to two years and two months'  imprisonment.   He
    was also convicted for attempted burglary and  for  failing  to  comply
    with  the  requirements  of  a  community  sentence.    The   appellant
    thereafter claimed asylum, but that claim was refused on  15  May  2013
    and a deportation order  was  made  against  the  appellant  under  the
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The appellant appealed  against
    the refusal of his asylum claim to the First-tier Tribunal in  November
    2013.  The appeal was dismissed and  there  was  no  successful  onward
    appeal from that decision.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge on this occasion accepted the submissions
    made on behalf of the appellant that it would be unduly harsh  for  his
    Hungarian-British partner and his son for him,  the  appellant,  to  be
    deported to Zimbabwe.  The Secretary of State contends that the reasons
    given by the judge for reaching that finding  were  insufficient.   She
    also submits that there was no proper self-direction  in  the  relevant
    legal principles which the judge was bound to apply when  finding  that
    the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh either on his partner
    or on his son.

 5. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Agho submits that the  judge's  decision
    was sufficiently reasoned and featured the correct  self-directions  in
    law.  He took us through the materials that were before the  judge  and
    submitted that they supported a finding that it would be  unduly  harsh
    on the partner and son if deportation were to  proceed.   The  evidence
    featured a report from the appellant's British son's  key  worker  with
    the East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust,  medical  materials  and  records
    concerning the appellant's partner and other  evidence  concerning  the
    impact of deportation upon the family unit.  The judge found  that  the
    deportation of the appellant would be disproportionate.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    the basis that the judge failed to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  his
    findings.

Discussion

 7. At the outset of our analysis, it is  necessary  to  recall  the  legal
    framework pursuant to which the judge was considering  the  appellant's
    deportation.  The  judge  correctly  directed  himself  concerning  the
    Immigration Rules' approach to the revocation of deportation orders and
    the rules in connection with the making of  a  substantive  deportation
    order, which are relevant to the question of revocation.   He  did  not
    set out, in terms, the legislative framework contained in  Part  5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in particular section
    117C.  This is the statutory framework which  not  only  underpins  the
    deportation provisions of the Immigration Rules  but  also  supersedes,
    and it is by reference to the primary legislation  that  a  deportation
    assessment should take place: see CI (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20].

 8. Section 117C(5) sets out one of the exceptions to  the  principle  that
    the deportation of certain foreign criminals, including this  appellant
    is in the public interest.  It states as follows:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

    The judge did not address that legislative provision as  such  but  did
    purport to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
    "unduly harsh".

 9. The judge considered the best interests of the appellant's son.  He was
    born on 14 May 2019 and lives with the appellant and his partner  as  a
    family unit.  It was common ground in the hearing before  us  that  the
    best interests of the appellant's son would be  for  the  appellant  to
    remain with the family unit for the family unit  to  remain  living  in
    this country.  So much is clear from even brief  consideration  of  the
    authorities concerning the best interests of the  child.   Despite  the
    appellant's offending, there are no  safeguarding  concerns  that  have
    been drawn to our attention.

10. Mr Agho submitted that the entirety of the evidence in the  case,  when
    considered in the round, was sufficient to justify the conclusions  the
    judge reached.  For the reasons we set out below, we disagree.

11. In order to consider whether deportation would be unduly harsh, it  was
    necessary for the judge to consider the concept  by  reference  to  the
    relevant legal principles.  In the Supreme Court case of KO (Nigeria) v
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UK Supreme  Court
    53 at [27] Lord Carnwath endorsed the guidance given by  this  Tribunal
    in MK (Sierra Leone) v the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2015] UKUT 223 at [46].  The endorsed guidance of the  Upper  Tribunal
    was in these terms:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

12. We remind ourselves that our task is to determine whether the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.   We
    are not charged  with  deciding  whether  we  agree  with  the  judge's
    decision or would have decided it in the same way.  Our jurisdiction is
    limited to determining whether the decision involved the making  of  an
    error of law.

13. We consider that difficulties with the judge's decision  arise  because
    he conflated the best interests of the child assessment at  [108]  with
    his subsequent discussion at [109] and following of whether it would be
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant's  partner  and  son  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe with him.  The judge sets out brief reasons at  [109]  why  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and son to follow him
    to Zimbabwe.  In doing so, the judge did not follow the approach of the
    Supreme Court in applying the "elevated threshold" of what  amounts  to
    unduly harsh.

14. The factors outlined by the judge in that paragraph,  namely  the  fact
    that the appellant's partner is a trained  audiologist  whose  services
    are in great demand in the part of the country  where  they  live,  and
    that she would not be able to continue her work in Zimbabwe, are not in
    our view factors which could properly be categorised  as  enabling  the
    appellant's deportation to be viewed as having an "unduly harsh" impact
    on his family.

15. One of the other factors relied upon by the judge was the impact on the
    appellant's partner's mental health of his  possible  deportation.   In
    our view, there was insufficient medical evidence to  merit  a  finding
    that deportation would be unduly harsh.  It is true that the  partner's
    medical notes recorded a history of past depression, although that  was
    listed as being in 2015.  There was  an  update  from  the  appellant's
    partner's GP dated 28 November 2019, in these terms:

         "With reference to your  letter  dated  27  November  requesting  a
         report from the doctor regarding this patient Ms [] and Mr M have a
         6 month old son.  Ms [] has a history of depression.  If Mr M  were
         to be deported this may have a severe  impact  on  Ms  []'s  mental
         health.  Equally, separation from his father would have  an  impact
         on their child."

16. There was no analysis in the GP's very  brief  letter  of  the  factors
    which caused Ms [] to suffer a history of  depression  previously,  nor
    the likely triggers for it to reoccur.  The  details  of  the  doctor's
    concern that the "severe impact" of the appellant's deportation on  his
    partner would follow are simply not set out.

17. The judge did not consider the elevated threshold to which  the  unduly
    harsh assessment is subject.  As we have noted, he  did  refer  to  the
    adverse impact that deportation would have on the family,  but  appears
    to have done so by reference to his assessment of the best interests of
    the child at [108], which is a  different  matter.   Deportation  of  a
    parent is rarely in the best interests of any child, but that does  not
    mean that the elevated threshold is met.  In [108], the judge  outlined
    how the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  entail  a  risk  that  the
    appellant's partner  would  suffer  and  that  that  would  be  to  the
    detriment of their son.  He also referred to the  key  worker's  letter
    which  stated  that  the  appellant's  partner  would  need   to   find
    alternative childcare because she had no  support  and  would  have  to
    cease to work.

18. The judge appeared to ascribe significance to those two factors and the
    medical evidence, elevating them to the level of  being  unduly  harsh.
    We do not consider those factors to get remotely close to the threshold
    that must be met to merit an "unduly harsh" finding.

19. The judge took the difficulties which  are  likely  to  attach  to  the
    deportation of any adult family member from a family unit  involving  a
    child, and did not consider whether those difficulties, and the  impact
    of deportation, would entail more than mere discomfort,  inconvenience,
    undesirable consequences or something that merely difficult. We  stress
    that we do not underestimate the severe impact that the deportation  of
    the appellant would have on his family, in particular his  partner  and
    his son.  We consider that if he were to be  removed,  it  would  be  a
    matter of significant impact on the entire family unit.  That, however,
    is not the test.

20. In light of these findings, we consider  that  the  overall  assessment
    conducted by the judge was flawed.  The factors the judge  went  on  to
    outline at [111] were against the background  of  that  earlier  flawed
    assessment.  The judge set  out  the  factors  mitigating  against  the
    deportation of the appellant.  On their own, the factors the judge  set
    out were entirely reasonable.  Similarly,  at  [112]  the  factors  the
    judge there set  out  were  also  entirely  reasonable.   However,  the
    overall analysis conducted by the judge was flawed.  It is not possible
    for the judge's reasoning to be saved by his  balance  sheet  analysis,
    given his flawed application of the unduly harsh test, and his reliance
    on evidence which was not capable of  meeting  the  statutory  test  in
    purported fulfilment of it.

21. It follows, therefore, that we set aside the decision of  Judge  Widdup
    in its entirety with no findings preserved.

22. It is appropriate for the matter to be retained in this Tribunal for  a
    further hearing based upon up-to-date evidence concerning the impact of
    the appellant's deportation on his partner and on their son.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Widdup involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside with no findings preserved.

The matter will be relisted for reconsideration before the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 17 April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

