








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: HU/03782/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 September 2019            |On 5 November 2019              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    F. T.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


        1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Australia.  He  entered  the  UK
           lawfully on 15 February 2018 on a visit visa with his parents.
        2. On 1 August 2018 the Appellant made an application for leave  to
           remain outside the Immigration Rules. This  was  refused  on  12
           February 2019. The Appellant's Article  8  appeal  against  that
           decision was heard on 14 June 2019 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
           Fisher, and dismissed, in a  decision  promulgated  on  26  June
           2019.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by decision of  9
           August 2019 of Judge Neville on the basis it  was  arguable  the
           approach of the First-tier Tribunal ["FtT"] to both the question
           of whether Article 8(1) was engaged, and, the assessment of  the
           proportionality of the decision was flawed.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The background
        5. The Appellant accepts that he had not seen  his  mother  for  14
           years, and indeed told the FtT that he had wholly  lost  contact
           with her, following the divorce of his parents  when  he  was  a
           young child. Upon her re-marriage his mother had come to live in
           the  UK  with  the  Appellant's  step  father.  She  had   since
           naturalised as a British citizen, although she would also appear
           to have retained her citizenship of Pakistan.
        6. By 2010 the Appellant was living  in  Australia,  where  he  had
           naturalised as an Australian citizen. He did not suggest that he
           had lost his citizenship of Pakistan.
        7. The Appellant told the FtT that it was only as an adult that  he
           was able to establish contact with his mother. Having done so he
           resolved to visit  her  in  the  UK.  He  accepts  that  he  had
           originally intended to apply for a working holiday  maker  visa,
           so that he could take employment in the  UK  and  stay  for  two
           years. Instead he decided to apply for a six month  visit  visa.
           He told the FtT that he decided to do so when  his  mother  told
           him that she proposed to commit suicide, and  he  did  not  feel
           able to wait whilst a working holidaymaker visa was processed.
        8. Upon arrival in the UK the Appellant took up  residence  in  the
           matrimonial home shared by his mother and  step-father.  He  has
           been supported financially by his step-father ever since.
        9. Although the Appellant and his mother gave evidence to the  FtT,
           the Appellant's step-father did not.
       10. The FtT was told that the Appellant's  step-father  wanted  both
           the Appellant and his wife to vacate the matrimonial  home  upon
           the conclusion of the appeal proceeding. The  Appellant  claimed
           that their marriage was at an end, although he accepted that his
           step-father continued to support him, and, that no step had been
           taken to begin the process of terminating their marriage.
       11. The FtT was told that the Appellant's  mother  was  too  ill  to
           work, but also inconsistently, that  she  worked  in  his  step-
           father's shop from time to time. It was claimed that she had not
           worked since the week after  the  receipt  of  the  decision  to
           refuse the Appellant's application,  although  it  was  accepted
           that she was still capable of  working  on  at  least  a  casual
           basis.
       12. The FtT was told that the Appellant proposed to remain in the UK
           permanently and to care for his mother here. The  Appellant  had
           no intention of taking his mother to Pakistan, and said that  he
           was unable to take her to Australia because  he  was  not  in  a
           financial position to sponsor an application for entry clearance
           by her to Australia.


      Error of Law in relation to Article 8(1)?
       13. It is plain that even on his own  case  the  Appellant  did  not
           enjoy  "family  life"  with  his  mother  whilst  he  lived   in
           Australia. He  was  an  adult,  who  was  living  alone,  having
           established his own household. He had not seen  his  mother  for
           some 14 years.
       14. It is also plain that at  the  date  of  the  hearing  both  the
           Appellant and his mother were  financially  dependent  upon  her
           husband; his step-father. However the Judge accepted  the  claim
           that the Appellant's step-father had set a deadline  upon  their
           continuing to enjoy his financial support of the  conclusion  of
           the appeal proceedings [18]. The Appellant  told  me  that  they
           continued to enjoy that support, but argued that  this  deadline
           had not yet passed. He accepted that it was still the case  that
           no step had been taken toward a divorce,  and  that  the  couple
           remained married.
       15. As a married woman, I am satisfied that the  Appellant's  mother
           continues to enjoy  "family  life"  with  her  husband  for  the
           purposes of Article 8(1). That does  not  prevent  her  enjoying
           "family life" with her adult son, but it does  place  the  claim
           that she does so into its proper context.
       16. The Judge accepted that the Appellant helped in  the  household,
           and that his mother had told her GP on 2 April 2018 that he  was
           caring for her. The Judge accepted that  he  provided  her  with
           emotional support but did not accept that this amounted to  more
           than the usual love and affection that adult offspring  show  to
           their parents in times of ill-health or infirmity  through  age.
           Thus he rejected the claim that the  relationship  between  them
           amounted to "family life", having directed himself that the test
           in Kugathas [2003] INLR 170 required an  element  of  dependency
           beyond that usually found, and that  the  usual  emotional  ties
           between adult son and mother would not without  more  amount  to
           "family life" for the purposes of Article 8(1) [13].
       17. The Judge accepted however that  the  relationship  between  the
           Appellant and his mother formed  the  substantial  part  of  the
           "private life" enjoyed by both of them. Indeed it was  the  only
           aspect of the Appellant's "private life" upon which he was given
           any evidence [14]. That was not however the case in relation  to
           the Appellant's mother. Beyond the time  spent  working  in  her
           husband's shop, there was evidence  of  the  Appellant's  mother
           having formed relationships with two neighbours,  of  sufficient
           strength that they gave evidence to the FtT in support  of  her.
           There was also her relationship with her husband:  whatever  the
           Appellant may have thought of the strength of that marriage, the
           fact remained that neither his mother, nor his  step-father  had
           yet taken any step to terminate it by divorce.
       18. The Judge accepted that Article 8(1) was engaged by the decision
           under appeal, and he therefore turned pursuant to  Article  8(2)
           to an assessment of the proportionality of the decision.
       19. In the circumstances I am not satisfied the Judge fell into  any
           error in his approach to the question of  whether  Article  8(1)
           was engaged. He accepted the Appellant's claim that it was.
       20. However,  having  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  providing
           emotional support to his  mother,  and  that  her  marriage  had
           broken down, the Judge had clearly accepted that the  nature  of
           the relationship between mother and  adult  son  had  materially
           altered and strengthened during the time he had spent in the UK.
           To the extent that it would be material to do so, I am satisfied
           that he ought in those circumstances, to have gone on to  accept
           that this relationship constituted "family life" between them.
       21. Whilst the distinction between "family life" and "private  life"
           may count for little in the European jurisprudence (the question
           is  simply  whether  Article  8(1)  is  engaged,  or  not)   the
           consequences that follow from section 117B of the 2014  Act  are
           that a material distinction is drawn between them in the context
           of Article 8(2), in relation to the weight that  Parliament  has
           stipulated can be attached to each of them, by virtue of section
           117B(5). Thus only little weight can be attached to  a  "private
           life" formed in the UK at a time when the claimant's immigration
           status is "precarious". There is no such restriction imposed  in
           relation to the weight that can be given to "family life" in the
           Act.
       22. On the other hand this decision contains no  self  direction  in
           relation to section 117B(5), and no phrase to suggest  that  the
           Judge felt obliged to attach only limited or  little  weight  to
           the "private life" that he had found existed.


      Error of law in relation to Article 8(2)?
       23. Whether it bore the legal badge of  "private  life"  or  "family
           life" it is plain that the Judge took fully into account all  of
           the  evidence  concerning  the   nature   of   the   Appellant's
           relationship with his mother. He  accepted  that  evidence.  The
           Appellant is unable to point to any evidence that was  left  out
           of account, and is unable to identify any arguable error of  law
           in the findings of primary fact that were made upon the evidence
           concerning the support available to his mother, her  ability  to
           work, and the friendships she would continue to enjoy,  even  if
           the Appellant were to leave the UK [19].
       24. If the Appellant wishes to live with, and continue to  care  for
           his mother, then it was open to him to do so in  Pakistan  where
           they are both citizens. Alternatively it  was  open  to  him  to
           return to Australia and put himself into a position  to  sponsor
           an entry clearance application by her to Australia. The evidence
           did not persuade the Judge that the Appellant's mother would  be
           unable to cope in his absence, given the NHS  support,  and  the
           support of her friends in the UK.
       25. The Judge was obliged to note that the Appellant  did  not  meet
           the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant  of  leave
           to remain as the carer  for  an  adult  dependent  relative,  or
           indeed in any other category.
       26. The Judge was  obliged  to  note  that  although  the  Appellant
           entered the UK lawfully with a visit visa on  15  February  2018
           his immigration status was as a result of the  most  precarious.
           Any "private life" or "family life" formed in the  UK  after  15
           February 2018 had to be viewed in that light when being balanced
           against the relevant public interest.
       27. Equally the Judge was obliged by virtue of  section  117B(3)  to
           identify that the Appellant was not financially self sufficient.
           He had no savings, was not entitled to work, and had always been
           dependent upon his step-father for financial support in the UK -
           although it was his case that this support  would  be  withdrawn
           upon the conclusion of the appeal,  whatever  the  outcome.  The
           consequence  was  that  the  public  interest  in  removal   was
           enhanced.
       28. The fact that the Appellant is fluent in  English,  having  been
           educated in Australia, does not weigh positively in his  favour.
           It is a neutral factor for the purposes of section  117B(2);  AM
           (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 260 and Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58.
       29. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that  the  FtT  did  err
           materially in the approach taken to the Article 8(2)  assessment
           of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  under  appeal.  The
           assessment of where the balance of proportionality lay was in my
           judgement the correct one,  even  if  the  relationship  between
           mother and adult son had been identified as amounting to "family
           life". Standing back to look at those findings of  primary  fact
           in the round, and asking myself how a  fair  balance  should  be
           struck between the competing individual interests and the public
           interest, applying the proportionality test; Agyarko [2017] UKSC
           11, I am satisfied that there could only  be  one  outcome;  the
           appeal must be dismissed.
       30. In the circumstances, even if the Judge erred in his approach to
           the question of whether the relationship at  the  heart  of  the
           appeal constituted "private life" or "family life", there is  no
           need for me to go on to re-make the decision myself, or to remit
           the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  do  so.  I  am  not
           required by either statute or the procedure rules to  re-make  a
           decision once an error of law has been identified: the provision
           is permissive.
       31. In the circumstances the decision of  the  FtT  to  dismiss  the
           human rights appeal is confirmed.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 26
   June 2019 contains no material error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
   the Appellant's human rights appeal which requires that decision  to  be
   set aside and remade.


   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  human  rights  appeal  is   accordingly
   confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
 granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
 proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction
 applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
 with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought  for  contempt
 of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 25 October 2019




