
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03109/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016            |On 13 September 20016           |
|Prepared on 12 September 2016   |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    V. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Russia  who  first  entered  the  UK
         lawfully as a student in August 2004. On 26 May  2015  she  applied
         for indefinite leave  to  remain  based  upon  the  length  of  her
         residence in the UK, pursuant to paragraph 276B of the  Immigration
         Rules. That application was refused by the  Respondent  on  9  July
         2015 because the total number of days spent outside the  UK  within
         the requisite ten year period exceeded 540 days.  No  decision  was
         however made to remove the Appellant from the UK  by  reference  to
         s47, because at that time she still held leave to remain as a  Tier
         2 Migrant until 14 May 2016. No decision to curtail or cancel  that
         leave was made.
      2. The Appellant duly appealed the decision to  refuse  to  grant  her
         ILR. Her appeal was heard on 7 January 2016, and allowed on Article
         8  grounds  by  decision  of  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge   Kelly,
         promulgated on 14 January 2016.
      3. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Pedro dated 3 June  2016
         the First Tier Tribunal granted the Respondent permission to appeal
         on the basis it was arguable that the Judge  had  made  a  material
         error of law because the Appellant's  Article  8  rights  were  not
         engaged by the decision under appeal given the lack of any  removal
         decision and the leave to remain that she continued to enjoy.
      4. The Appellant has filed  no  Rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission.
      5. Thus the matter comes before me.


         Article 8
      6. Judge Kelly proceeded on the basis that the Appellant only  enjoyed
         a right of appeal against the  decision  of  9  July  2015  if  the
         Respondent had decided to refuse a human rights claim [6], and that
         the only ground of appeal available to her was  that  the  decision
         was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 [7], as a result
         of the statutory amendments introduced by s15 of the 2014 Act [25].


      7. At the hearing  before  the  Judge  both  parties  appear  to  have
         proceeded upon the basis that the Respondent had  refused  a  human
         rights claim.
      8. The Respondent had conceded at the hearing that the  Appellant  had
         established both a "private life", and a "family life" in the UK as
         a result of her six year relationship with her  boyfriend  [26],  a
         citizen  of  Switzerland.  There  has  however   never   been   any
         consideration  by  the  Respondent  of  the  Appellant's   position
         pursuant to Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations  2006,  since  that
         concession appears to tacitly concede  that  she  was  then  in  "a
         durable relationship" with a Swiss national. Given  the  length  of
         time he has lived and worked in the UK it is  likely  that  he  has
         acquired a permanent right of  residence  in  the  UK  pursuant  to
         Regulation 15. Thus,  although  the  point  was  not  taken  below,
         arguably the Respondent should have considered whether to  exercise
         her discretion in order to issue the  Appellant  with  a  residence
         card pursuant to Regulation 17(4).
      9. The Judge stated that "the consequences of the Appellant's  removal
         would plainly be sufficient to surmount the modest hurdle necessary
         to engage the  potential  operation  of  Article  8".  The  obvious
         difficulty with that approach to the appeal was that there  was  no
         removal decision. The Appellant continued  to  enjoy  a  period  of
         leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant for a further four months.  All
         that the Respondent had done in the decision under  appeal  was  to
         refuse to vary her limited leave as a Tier 2 Migrant, to grant  her
         ILR well in advance of the expiry of that  limited  leave.  If  the
         Appellant wished to apply to vary her limited  leave  in  order  to
         obtain a further limited grant of leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
         Migrant (or in any other capacity) then it was open to  her  to  do
         so, and she had ample time to do so before her  existing  grant  of
         leave expired. There was no curtailment,  or  cancellation  of  the
         Appellant's leave.
     10. In fact  the  Appellant  did  have  the  time  and  opportunity  to
         successfully apply for a further period of leave  to  remain  as  a
         Tier 2 Migrant, so that she was granted a further period  of  leave
         to expire  on  14  September  2016  to  allow  herself  and  Durham
         University to arrange with their commercial  sponsor,  the  funding
         for a further period of research in her area  of  expertise,  which
         would allow her to apply for a lengthier period of limited leave to
         remain. I was told that those commercial arrangements were  now  in
         place, and that as a result a further application for  a  variation
         of her limited leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant had  been  made,
         and that it awaited a lawful decision.
     11. Ms Petterson's stance, upon instructions,  was  that  the  decision
         that was under  appeal  before  Judge  Kelly  did  not  engage  the
         Appellant's  Article  8  rights,  as  indeed  the  grounds  of  the
         application for permission assert.
     12. In the course of discussion about that stance, which do not  appear
         to reflect the way the  appeal  was  presented  on  behalf  of  the
         Respondent below, Ms Petterson accepted  that  the  Respondent  had
         incorrectly calculated the number of days the Appellant  had  spent
         outside the UK as 837 days in the relevant ten year period, when as
         the Judge noted it was conceded at the hearing to  have  been  only
         765 days. She also accepted that the  decision  maker  appeared  to
         have drawn no distinction between periods that were  spent  outside
         the UK for study purposes, for work, or for holiday. All  had  been
         treated as carrying equal weight. I therefore raised  the  question
         with Ms Petterson as to whether the Respondent had in fact followed
         her own policy in relation to the application  that  the  Appellant
         had made. It is not uncommon for study at degree  level  to  either
         require study abroad, or to encourage it, and  thus  I  would  have
         expected the Respondent  to  have  considered  under  any  relevant
         policy, or pursuant to  her  general  discretion,  whether  such  a
         period of time should be counted as part of the  permitted  maximum
         period of 540 days outside the UK within the  ten  year  period  of
         continuous lawful residence relied upon. (Whilst the point was  not
         formally conceded by the Respondent, it  is  the  Appellant's  case
         that without the periods of study at the University of Santiago  de
         Compostela none of the periods outside the UK exceeded 28  days  in
         length, and in total they fell well short of the 540 day  permitted
         maximum.)
     13. Ms Petterson requested permission to  take  instructions,  which  I
         granted, and the appeal was stood down. When the appeal was  called
         on once again, she conceded upon  instructions  that  the  decision
         under appeal was not in accordance with the  law,  and  she  sought
         permission to withdraw the decision under appeal, which  I  granted
         pursuant to Rule 17(2) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.
     14. The effect, as Ms Petterson accepts, is to  leave  the  Appellant's
         application for ILR pursuant to paragraph 276B  awaiting  a  lawful
         decision upon it. This application  therefore  sits  alongside  the
         Appellant's outstanding application  for  a  variation  by  way  of
         extension of her existing leave as a Tier 2 Migrant. For  a  lawful
         decision to be made the Respondent will no doubt have  to  consider
         the Appellant's position pursuant to Regulation 17(4)  of  the  EEA
         Regulations in addition.




DECISION


    The Upper Tribunal consents pursuant to Rule 17(2)  to  the  Respondent
    withdrawing the decision under appeal of 9 July 2015.


    The decision of the First Tier Tribunal promulgated on 14 January  2016
    is in the circumstances set aside by operation of law.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated: 12 September 2016
