
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/03240/2018
                                                               HU/03241/2018
                                                               HU/03243/2018
                                                               HU/03247/2018
                                                               HU/03252/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 December 2018               |           On 20 December 2018      |
|                                  |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

               1) Mrs SHARMAN AZAD
               2) Mr ALI JABER JOY
               3) Master E M
               4) Miss Z A
               5) Master Y A
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Shah, Solicitor (Taj Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
      Introduction


      1.    The Appellants appealed with limited permission granted by First-
           tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew  on  19  October  2018  against  the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freer  who   had
           dismissed their linked Article 8 ECHR appeals. His decision  and
           reasons was promulgated on 20 September 2018.


      2.    The Appellants are a family, all nationals of Bangladesh with no
           leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  First
           Appellant is a long term overstayer from  2007  onwards,  having
           entered as a visitor.  The child Appellants were all born in the
           United Kingdom. None has been in the United Kingdom for 7 years.
            Their father,  the  Second  Appellant,  is  also  a  long  term
           overstayer from 2009 onwards, also having entered as a visitor.


      3.    It was accepted that the Appellants did not meet the Immigration
           Rules at the date of the decisions or appeal hearing.  The judge
           found that the various reasons advanced as  to  why  the  family
           could not go to Bangladesh had no substance.  He found that  the
           children would have access to education and were young enough to
           adapt. The parents retained their cultural  ties  to  Bangladesh
           and could guide their children as necessary. The children  speak
           Bengali as well as English, to their advantage.  The  children's
           best interests required  them  to  remain  with  their  parents.
           Better living accommodation was available in Bangladesh than was
           currently available to the family in the  United  Kingdom.   The
           family had access to the local police and religious  authorities
           in Bangladesh where by implication  they  could  practise  their
           Muslim religion freely.  The family's private  and  family  life
           could  continue  unimpeded  in  Bangladesh.   Thus   the   judge
           dismissed the human rights appeals.


      4.    Various allegations were made concerning  procedural  unfairness
           at the hearing in the permission to appeal application, but they
           were unsupported by any evidence and  were  roundly  refused  by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew.   Permission  to  appeal  was
           granted on the sole ground that it was arguable that  the  judge
           had failed to make proper findings  about  the  children's  best
           interests.


      Submissions


      5.    Mr Shah for the Appellants submitted that the judge  had  failed
           to apply section 55 of the Borders Act 2007, and  had  neglected
           to consider the best interests  of  the  three  minor  children.
           There was no analysis of their position.  A  dialogue  with  the
           tribunal followed, examining the judge's decision  and  reasons.
           Mr Shah submitted that the decision should be set aside and  the
           appeals reheard.


      6.    Mr Lindsay for  the  Respondents  submitted  that  KO  (Nigeria)
           [2018] UKSC 53 and MT and ET (child's best interest; ex  tempore
           pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC) applied and showed that  the
           judge's determination was  correct  in  substance.  The  onwards
           appeal must fail.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal considers that the grant of  permission  to  appeal
           was excessively generous.  The linked appeals had little obvious
           merit.  Both parents were long term overstayers who  had  failed
           to leave in  the  face  of  refusal  decisions.   There  was  no
           evidence of compelling circumstances, very significant obstacles
           or  any  similar  consideration.   Indeed,  adverse  credibility
           findings  had  been  made  on  the  matters  advanced   by   the
           Appellants,  against  which  no  onwards  challenge   has   been
           permitted.


      8.    The grant might perhaps have been avoided if the judge had taken
           a more structured approach towards the children, setting  out  a
           specific section dealing with their  best  interests.   Instead,
           the whole  determination  has  to  be  read  to  see  that  this
           essential question was in fact fully considered,  discussed  and
           addressed, in substantial detail with reference to the evidence.
            At [9] the judge noted the section 55 issue, which was a thread
           carried through the determination, ultimately summarised in part
           at [93] and also at [97].


      9.    During the submissions dialogue the tribunal invited Mr Shah  to
           identify any relevant matter which the judge  had  left  out  of
           account in his consideration of  the  children's  position.   Mr
           Shah was unable to do so.


      10.   Importantly, the judge did not fall into the  error  of  holding
           the  parent's  conduct  as  overstayers  against  the  blameless
           children.  His analysis and findings sit  comfortably  with  the
           reasonableness test set out in KO (Nigeria) (above).  In  effect
           he found that it was both reasonable and in the children's  best
           interests for them to go to Bangladesh  with  their  loving  and
           competent parents, where the parents would be able to  work  and
           had access to accommodation, and where the children  had  access
           to education.


      11.   Thus there  was  nothing  in  the  onwards  appeals,  which  are
           dismissed.  The original decision and reasons stands unchanged.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


      Signed                                  Dated 12 December 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




