

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 25 April 2016                              |On 01 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     M X
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel instructed by K & G Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of China. On 5  August  2015  the  Respondent
   made a decision to deport her and to refuse her human rights  claim.  The
   Appellant appealed that decision under section 82 (1) of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the grounds  that  her  removal  would
   breach Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR).  Her
   appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Barrowclough  in  a
   decision dated 11 November  2015.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
   appeal that decision. Permission was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
   but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on renewal of  the  application
   to the Upper Tribunal. He found it was arguable that the Judge  erred  in
   'going behind' the Respondent's  concession  that  it  would  be  'unduly
   harsh' for the Appellant's son 'J'  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
   Appellant. Secondly, it was arguable that the Judge failed to  take  into
   account the son's British citizenship and EU citizenship  in  finding  it
   would not be 'unduly harsh' for him to accompany the appellant to  China.
   Thirdly, it was arguable that  the  Zambrano  point  was  raised  in  the
   decision letter and was arguably a matter which  the  Judge  should  have
   considered.


   The Grounds


2. Ground 1 asserts that the Judge's finding that it  would  not  be  unduly
   harsh for the Appellant's son to remain in the UK without  the  Appellant
   was not open to her as the Respondent had conceded in paragraph 44 of the
   refusal letter that it would be unduly harsh for him to remain in the  UK
   without her. The concession was not withdrawn by the Respondent  and  the
   Judge failed to appreciate that it had been made.  It  is  conceded  that
   this on its own was not material  as  the  Judge  found  that  the  other
   component of paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration Rules was not satisfied
   but it is submitted that the Judge's findings in this  regard  themselves
   contained a material error of law.


3. Ground 2 asserts that in assessing whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
   her son J to accompany the Appellant to China the Judge was  required  to
   conduct a balancing  exercise  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  public
   interest in deportation and on the other, the competing interests of  the
   Appellant and her son. This required  the  Tribunal  to  treat  his  best
   interests as a primary consideration. It  is  submitted  that  the  Judge
   failed to have regard to all the factors relevant to his  best  interest.
   In particular it is asserted that the Judge had failed to  recognise  the
   intrinsic value of the Appellant's  son's  British  Citizenship  and  his
   right of residence in the European Union and the fact that relocation  to
   China would deprive him of the genuine enjoyment of that right.  Had  the
   Judge had regard to this, it is argued that he could have concluded  that
   relocation to China was contrary to the child's best interests and unduly
   harsh.

4. Ground 3 asserts that in the event paragraph 399 was not  satisfied,  the
   Judge was obliged by paragraph 398 to consider whether there  were  'very
   compelling circumstances' outweighing the public interest in deportation.
   Since the Immigration Rules were a complete code in Article 8 deportation
   cases, they incorporated a full application of the five stage Razgar test
   and the Judge was obliged to consider whether the Appellant had  a  right
   of residence  pursuant  to  the  principle  in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (C-34/09,
   EU:C:2011:124) and if she did, the decision was not  in  accordance  with
   the law. The Appellant had a right of residence because there was no  one
   else to care for her son. The Judge was obliged to determine as  part  of
   the paragraph 398 assessment, whether or not the  Appellant  had  a  Ruiz
   Zambrano  right  of  residence  and  whether  this  right  prevented  her
   deportation. He failed to do so and this was an  error  of  law.  In  the
   event that the Ruiz Zambrano point was not raised before  the  Judge  the
   Appellant submitted that it was Robinson obvious.


   The Hearing


5. Mr Blundell relied on the grounds of appeal. He referred to paragraph  44
   of the RFRL at K8 of the Respondent's bundle  where  the  concession  was
   made that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's son to  remain  in
   the UK without her as there was  no  one  to  care  for  him.  The  first
   complaint in the grounds was that the Judge went behind that  concession.
   That he did so was clear from paragraph 14 on the bottom of page 6 of the
   decision. It appeared that the Judge did so because Mrs Arnesen adopted a
   stance contrary to the refusal letter that was recorded at  paragraph  11
   of the  decision.  The  law  with  regard  to  the  maintenance  and  the
   withdrawal of concessions was set out at page 173 of the  report  in  the
   case of NR (Jamaica). What Kennedy LJ said at paragraph 22  was  recorded
   at paragraph 11. Simply put, the Tribunal can allow a  concession  to  be
   withdrawn if it felt it was a proper course. The factors were set out. It
   did not appear that Judge Barraclough had appreciated that there  was  an
   intention to withdraw a concession and there was no evidence to show that
   he  appreciated  that  a  concession  was   being   withdrawn   and   the
   considerations in NR (Jamaica) applied. With regard to  the  question  of
   timing, there was no indication that there was an application. There  was
   also a question of prejudice. It was difficult to see  how  she  was  not
   caused serious prejudice because she did not have an opportunity to  call
   oral evidence.  Ms Fenney, who appeared on behalf of the Appellant before
   the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude that she did not need to
   set out written or oral submissions. Had she directed  her  attention  to
   that she could have brought arguments or evidence as to him remaining  in
   the UK in the absence of his carer.


6. Firstly, as a matter of community law the Court of Appeal had  considered
   the possibility of a child needing to go into care. At page 4117  p11  in
   Hines v Lambeth London Borough  Council  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660,  Vos  LJ
   clarified what the Judge must have meant. The Zambrano father was in  the
   UK in that case. Paragraph 24 was to similar effect. At paragraph  24  it
   was common ground that a foster care placement  would  not  be  adequate.
   There was an answer born out of authority to the proposal seemingly  made
   by Ms Arnesen. At paragraph 44 of the refusal  letter,  the  Respondent's
   criminality guidance at paragraph 3.5.14  the  Respondent  gave  guidance
   that if the only way a child to remain in the UK would be with  a  foster
   care placement it would usually be unduly harsh. There was a  presumption
   that the stance at paragraph 44 was the correct one. The error  disclosed
   by ground one was twofold. The Judge did not appreciate that a concession
   had been made.  He  did  not  appreciate  that  a  concession  was  being
   withdrawn and that there were legal and factual answers which could  have
   been brought to bear on it.

7. The second ground concerned very familiar territory in  the  form  of  ZH
   (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4. The Judge failed to give any  weight  or
   separate consideration to the fact that J was a British Citizen and  that
   he would be deprived of the benefits of that  citizenship  if  forced  to
   relocate. Lady Hale's comments in that  case  were  at  page  79  of  the
   Appellant's  bundle.  She  quoted  the  dicta  in  Wan  v  Minister   for
   Immigration and Multi-cultural Affairs [2001] FCA 568 at paragraph 30 and
   the particular importance in assessing the best interests. Translating it
   to the context of this child, he had an identity as a British Citizen and
   access to all the benefits and the right to British education and he  was
   an A* student who was going to study at Exeter College and be an Oxbridge
   grade student. He was not a child who had familiarity with China  and  it
   was not in the slightest bit fanciful that his educational qualifications
   would be dashed. He had an entitlement and there was no reference in  the
   Judge's  assessment  to  the  significance  of  British  Citizenship.  He
   referred me to p81 of the Appellant's bundle and paragraph 47,  page  82.
   Before leaving Ground 2 he stressed that British Citizenship would hardly
   ever be less than a weighty factor especially  if  they  would  lose  the
   advantages for the rest of their childhood.


8. With regard to Zambrano, the Respondent at K3 to K5  of  her  bundle  set
   out in some detail her view of the Respondent's case. It was difficult to
   imagine of a more paradigm Zambrano case than this. The  Appellant's  son
   had to go into foster care when she was in prison. Despite the Respondent
   setting out her view of his case in some detail and despite the case that
   there was relevant authority at item 7 in the Appellant's bundle  in  the
   form of the case of Sanade and Others  (British  children  -  Zambrano  -
   Derici) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) there was simply no consideration of this
   issue in the decision. That established the error  of  law.  Mr  Blundell
   produced two linked cases referred to in the  R24  response.  SSHD  v  CS
   (Case C-304/14) was referred from the Upper Tribunal.  CS  was  the  more
   relevant case because it was a pure Zambrano case and in the  other  case
   the Advocate General concluded that the Directive was relevant. CS was  a
   clear sole carer of a  Zambrano  British  Citizen  child  and  it  was  a
   criminal case. The question considered by the  Advocate  General  was  in
   what circumstances they could be denied the right to reside on the  basis
   of criminality. The facts of CS were set out at paragraphs 34-41  and  39
   the  conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  the  ultimate
   conclusion that a citizen could not be constructively expelled. The Upper
   Tribunal considered in what circumstances it was permissible. The  common
   features were set out at 59. Seriousness was considered at  68-70.  A  12
   month sentence was sufficient to engage automatic deportation provisions.
   At paragraph 124, 136 and 146 the Attorney General  posed  the  question.
   The conclusion was at paragraphs 167 and  168  that  a  similar  approach
   should be used to an expulsion to cases under the citizenship  Directive.
   There  was  three  tier  protection  and   paragraph   168   applied   in
   circumstances such as those which obtained in this case the highest level
   of protection where the Zambrano child would have to follow the carer  at
   177 there had to be an imperative reason relating to public security.  At
   15-24 of RFRL the test in the regulations was applied.  Reg  21  (a)  was
   applied and rejected in CS and the Court applied  an  imperative  grounds
   test instead. So there was a very real Zambrano issue to be  examined  in
   this case and based on the developing law an extremely arguable  Zambrano
   case. There was no evidence deployed by SSHD to show that  the  Appellant
   represented any genuine, present and serious threat and certainly not  on
   an imperative level. The only rational outcome was that the appeal should
   succeed.


9. Mr Richards submitted that in terms of the concession seemingly made,  it
   was not withdrawn  as  it  was  clear  that  Arnesen  cross-examined  the
   Appellant on matters directly going to the issue of the  undue  harshness
   of him remaining here and those submissions were recorded. The  Appellant
   was legally represented by Ms Fenney and no doubt  she  would  have  been
   alerted to that matter and had every opportunity to make any  application
   that she might have thought necessary  to  lead  any  evidence  that  she
   thought might assist the court and make any submissions.  Nothing  turned
   on the apparent concession in the refusal letter. All parties were  alert
   to that issue and the Judge was entitled to make the findings.  In  terms
   generally of ZH and Zambrano, it was an unusual case. The  Appellant  had
   served a lengthy term of imprisonment. Her son J initially went to  China
   and stayed for a short period and returned and  returned  here  where  he
   blossomed. The Judge looked at matters and concluded that  Jackson  could
   remain in the UK and do well in circumstances where  his  mother  was  in
   prison and therefore it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  remain
   having matured in the interim period. J in effect would not be forced  to
   go to China and that it would be a  matter  of  choice  to  continue  his
   education or if that was their preference for him to join his  mother  in
   China. The Judge took account of all of the circumstances and was clearly
   mindful that J had British Citizenship. It was a matter of choice for the
   family whether J remained here as he had done before or whether  he  went
   with his mother to China and adequate reasons  were  given.  No  material
   error of law arose from those conclusions. This decision ought to stand.


10. Mr Blundell submitted with regard to Ground 1, if  paragraph  9  of  the
   decision showed that questions were asked in cross-examination that  went
   behind the concession that was not an adequate answer to  the  complaint.
   Whether the attempt was made to go behind the concession the Judge needed
   to go through the steps set out in NR. Paragraph 9 appeared to show  that
   the questions on which Mr Richards relied flew in the face of the  policy
   suggesting that children should go into foster care. Paragraph 9 was  not
   an answer. Mr  Richard  adopted  the  same  position  as  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. With regard to British Citizenship, it was a significant factor
   and simply mentioning it as a fact was not the same as considering it  as
   a factor.


   Discussion and Findings

11. I consider that there was a material error of law  in  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons. Ground 1 asserts  that
   the Respondent had made a concession that it would be "unduly harsh"  for
   the Appellant's son to remain in the UK  without  the  Appellant.  I  was
   referred by Mr Blundell to the case of NR (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA in
   which the Court of Appeal considered the  case  law  on  concessions  and
   concluded that the Tribunal has a wide discretion to permit a  concession
   to be withdrawn if in its  view  there  is  a  good  reason  in  all  the
   circumstances to permit it.


12. The first question therefore is whether there was a concession.  I  find
   that there was. At paragraph 44 of the RFRL at  K8  of  the  Respondent's
   bundle the Respondent stated:




   It is accepted that it would be unduly harsh for J to remain in the UK in
   the event of your deportation, as there is no one to care for him. It  is
   noted that his father is no longer in the UK. However, as  above,  it  is
   considered that it would not be unduly harsh for Jackson to accompany you
   to China in the event of your deportation; you do not meet the  exception
   at paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration Rules.


13. There is no record, in the decision, of  the  Respondent  notifying  the
   Judge that she wished to resile from that concession.  It is  clear  from
   paragraph 9 of the decision that the Appellant was  cross-examined  about
   leaving her son in the UK if she was returned to China.  The  submissions
   of both representatives were recorded at paragraph 11 of the decision and
   it is clear that Mrs Arnesen, whilst relying on the RFRL, also  submitted
   that the Appellant's son could remain here without his mother. Ms  Fenney
   dealt with that submission.   She did not apply  for  an  adjournment  or
   claim to be prejudiced as a result of  the  change  in  the  Respondent's
   position.


14. It is unfortunate that the Judge was not alerted by the parties  to  the
   concession at the hearing for two reasons. Firstly because  it  is  clear
   from the case of NR (Jamaica) that an application should be made  by  the
   Respondent to withdraw a concession which the Judge may or may not accede
   to depending on the nature of the  concession  and  the  requirements  of
   fairness. Secondly, in this  case,  there  were  sound  reasons  for  the
   concession having been made by the Respondent as a result of  established
   case law. This case, was, as is also clear from the  RFRL,  a  "Zambrano"
   case as the Appellant's son was a British Citizen and the  Appellant  his
   primary carer. It is clear from paragraph 24 of Hines  v  Lambeth  London
   Borough Council (CA) [2014] 1 WLR that, in considering  whether  a  child
   would be constructively expelled from the Union because of the removal of
   a primary carer alternative care in the form of a foster  care  placement
   would not be adequate to avoid the conclusion that  the  child  would  be
   forced to leave.

15. In the circumstances,  therefore,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
   concession had not been brought  to  the  Judge's  attention,  there  was
   clearly prejudice to the Appellant in the withdrawal  of  the  concession
   and an application should have been made by the Respondent and considered
   by the Judge.

16. As the grounds acknowledge, this error of law cannot be said  in  itself
   to be material to the outcome of the appeal because, the Judge found that
   the Appellant had not met the other  component  of  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules and  shown  that  it  would  be
   "unduly harsh" for the Appellant's son to accompany her to China. In this
   regard, it is asserted in Ground 2 that the Judge failed to  have  regard
   to all factors relevant to  J's  best  interest.  In  particular,  it  is
   asserted that the Judge failed to recognise the intrinsic  value  of  J's
   British Citizenship and his right of residence in the EU.

17. There is no reference in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  the
   case of Ruiz Zambrano. The Respondent was clearly aware of the  relevance
   of Zambrano to this case and paragraphs 15 to 24 of the  RFRL  deal  with
   the question of whether the Appellant, as her son's primary  carer  could
   be deported and whether she could derive a right of  residence  from  the
   Appellant despite the  circumstances  of  her  offending  behaviour.  The
   Appellant's bundle also contained the case of Sanade and  other  (British
   children - Zambrano - Derici)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC).  Although  the
   Advocate General's opinion in case C-304/14 had not been delivered at the
   date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there was very much  a
   live issue in this case as to whether the removal of the Appellant  would
   amount to the constructive expulsion of her  son  and  whether  and  what
   circumstances deportation was lawful. There is also no reference  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal to the  intrinsic  value  of  British
   Citizenship  with  all  the  consequent  rights  and  privileges  and  an
   assessment of this in relation to the question of  whether  it  would  be
   unduly harsh for J to live in China.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date: 1st July 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

