
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03741/2019
                                                               HU/03743/2019
                                                               HU/03746/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2020                     |On 27 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                 Halima [A]
                                Ashiquer [R]
                                    [AR]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R. Wilcox, Counsel instructed by JS Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by the GLD on behalf
                    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  Mrs Halima [A] was born  on
    9 December 1982.  She came to the UK on 10  October  2010  having  been
    granted a Tier 4  (General)  Student  visa  which  was  valid  from  22
    September 2010 to 30 June 2013.  On 2 December 2010 she was  joined  by
    her spouse, the second named Appellant, who was granted entry clearance
    as a dependant to join her  here.   Their  daughter,  the  third  named
    Appellant, was born in the UK on 27  April  2016.   The  Appellant  was
    granted further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student which expired on 29
    December 2014.  Her leave was curtailed by the Respondent  on  24  July
    2014.  The Appellant submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS  with  a
    student application she submitted on 12 June  2013.  According  to  the
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) a speaking test was taken by a  proxy
    test taker on 12 December 2012. Thus, the Respondent concluded that the
    certificate was obtained by deception.

 2. The Appellant made an application for leave to remain under  Article  8
    on 20 July 2016.  The application was  refused  in  a  decision  of  29
    January 2016.  The Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent.  Her appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    matter came before me on 20 January 2020,  the  Appellant  having  been
    granted permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I set aside the decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal.
     My error of law decision reads as follows:-

         "17. The APPG report is capable of undermining the strength of  the
             Respondent's case against the Appellant or  at  least  assists
             the Appellant to raise an innocent explanation.  The judge did
             not properly engage with the report  and  did  not  adequately
             reason why the opinions and recommendations  expressed  in  it
             were of "little evidential weight."  The report post-dates the
             decision in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden  of
             Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 and MA (ETS - TOEIC  testing)  [2016]
             UKUT 00450.  The evidence of Dr French  before  the  APPG  was
             that his estimation of the rate of false  positives  was  less
             than 1%, but this was qualified because  it  depended  on  the
             results from ETS to the Home Office being correct.   The  APPG
             concluded that there was significant doubt on  the  usefulness
             of the statistic so heavily relied on by the Home Office.  The
             experts before the APPG all  agreed  that  there  had  been  a
             worrying lack of scrutiny of the evidence supplied by ETS.

         18.  The error is so significant that I set aside the  decision  of
             the judge to dismiss the appeal.  Whilst, the report  has  not
             been subject to judicial scrutiny, its evidential  weight,  in
             my view is significant.  The Respondent relies on the evidence
             of Professor French (item 6 of the  supplementary  bundle)  to
             support his case.  However, that evidence is wholly undermined
             by what the same witness said to the APPG (see the APPG report
             under the heading "Misuse of advice") namely that his estimate
             of false positives relied on by the Respondent  was  qualified
             and only valid "if the results that ETS  had  given  the  Home
             Officer were correct".  The APPG concluded that;

                  "But, as we have seen, the reliability of those  "results"
                  (the evidence provided by ETS)  was  questioned  by  every
                  expert to give evidence,  including  the  three  technical
                  experts, making the reliability of the  voice  recognition
                  software almost irrelevant and casting  significant  doubt
                  on the usefulness of that statistic so heavily relied upon
                  by the Home Office."

         19.  In the light of the evidence the only conclusion that  can  be
             drawn is that the Respondent has not discharged the evidential
             burden of proving that the TOEIC certificate was  procured  by
             dishonesty.   Mr  Aziz,  representing  the  Appellant  at  the
             hearing before the FtT was correct to say that in the light of
             the APPG report the Respondent's evidence was  not  sufficient
             to discharge the evidential burden.  It follows that there was
             no need for the judge to consider whether  the  Appellant  had
             raised an innocent explanation.  None of the findings made  in
             this respect are sustainable.  I set aside the decision of the
             judge to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds."

 3. I summarised the position at paragraph 24 as follows:-

         "24. To summarise, the decision of the FtT to dismiss the appeal is
             set aside.  I find that the Respondent has not  satisfied  the
             evidential  burden.   I  find  that  the  Appellant  has   not
             exercised deception.  Thus, the decision to curtail her leave,
             in 2014, was wrong.  The issue is  whether  in  the  light  of
             this, the decision of 29 January 2019 breaches the Appellant's
             rights under Article 8.  There will be a  resumed  hearing  so
             that the parties can address  the  issue  of  proportionality.
             Neither party served  further  evidence  following  directions
             from  the  UT.   The  decision  will  be   re-made   following
             submissions only."




Submissions

 4. The hearing was resumed on 18 March 2020. Mr Malik attended  on  behalf
    of the GLD who was instructed on behalf of the Secretary of State.   He
    relied on a written application to set aside my  decision  pursuant  to
    Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   He
    submitted that  Court  of  Appeal  authority  was  not  brought  to  my
    attention, namely, Secretary of State for the Home Department v Shehzad
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and Majunder v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.  These cases  held  that  the  generic
    evidence relied on by the Secretary of State is sufficient to discharge
    the initial evidential burden of proof. The authority is binding on the
    UT, irrespective of the APPG report.  As the Court of  Appeal  said  in
    Nirula v First-tier Tribunal [2012] EWCA Civ 1436 at [29] that  "judges
    at first instance should accept a considered judgement of [the Court of
    Appeal] that binds them, "even if they consider  the  judgement  to  be
    wrong.

 5. The Court of Appeal is hearing the appeal in DK (India) -  C5/2019/2221
    on 16 June and 17 June 2020 on the issue of the relevance of  the  APPG
    report in TOEIC appeals. Mr Malik said that the UT should set aside the
    error of law decision and adjourn pending the outcome of the case of DK
    (India). There is procedural irregularity in the error of law decision.
    The UT did not take  into  account  that  the  APPG  had  not  received
    evidence from the Secretary of State or ETS. The  APPG  report  is  not
    akin to judicial scrutiny of evidence. The evidence was not  tested  by
    way of cross-examination. Furthermore, there are potential questions as
    to the admissibility of the APPG report by virtue of Article 9  of  the
    Bill of Rights 1689.

 6. Mr Wilcox submitted that the application by the Secretary of State  was
    without merit. The decision  of  the  UT  was  a  final  decision.  The
    application to set aside is out of time, in any event.  The decision of
    the UT was on the evidence. The UT engaged with Mr  Kotas'  submissions
    about the shortcomings in the evidence.



Conclusions

 7. The Secretary of State's application under Rule 43 is out of time.  The
    Rules require such an application to be received no later than 12  days
    after the notice of the UT's decision being sent. The notice  was  sent
    on 3 February 2020. The written application is dated 16 March 2020.  It
    is not clear to me when it was received by the UT; however,  it  is  at
    least a calendar month out of time. The  application  is  misconceived.
    Should the UT have departed from binding precedent, this  would  be  an
    error of law  that  is  not  properly  characterised  as  a  procedural
    irregularity. Should the Secretary of State believe that  there  is  an
    error of law in my decision, a remedy is available to her by way of  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 8. In any event, the problem with the Secretary of State's application  is
    that the UT did not depart from  binding  precedent.  The  UT  directed
    itself on the law with reference to SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence
    - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229. In that case the  UT  found  that
    the generic evidence of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the initial evidence the burden of proof.  The  Secretary  of
    State appealed that decision in Majumder v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167;
    however, the appeal was conceded by the Secretary of State.  The  Court
    of Appeal in Shehzed [2016] EWCA Civ 615 held that the generic evidence
    relied on by the by the Secretary of State sufficed  to  discharge  the
    initial evidence the burden of proof.  The approach taken by the UT  in
    following the  guidance  in  SM  is  unarguably  correct  and  entirely
    consistent with Court of Appeal authority.

 9. There was no departure from a decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal.  The
    evidence of the APPG report was not before  the  UT  or  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  It unarguably undermines  the  Respondent's  generic  evidence
    which was found to narrowly discharge the initial evidential burden. In
    any event, in the light of the evidence, the Secretary of State's  case
    generally is significantly weakened. She would not be able to discharge
    the legal burden. The UT was aware of  those  weaknesses  in  the  APPG
    report which were drawn to its attention by Mr Kotas and considered the
    weight to attach to it accordingly. If the Respondent is  of  the  view
    that the UT has made an error of law, it is a matter for her  to  apply
    for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

10. Mr Malik conceded that should the application under Rule 43 be refused,
    in the light of the consent  order issued by the  Court of Appeal of 21
    November 2018 and the case of Ahsan v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  209  referred  to  in  my  error  of  law
    decision,  the appeal should be allowed under Article 8.

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 26 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




