
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/03054/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 November 2017                       |  On 21 November 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                       Mr emmanuel abolarinwa gansallo
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel, instructed by Daniel Aramide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Coll
    which was promulgated on  11  April  2017.   The  claim  relates  to  a
    Nigerian citizen (aged 33  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination) married to a British citizen. The appeal arises  from  a
    decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain, which appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

2.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  gave  permission  to  appeal  on  12
    September 2017. This was not on any of  the  grounds  advanced  in  the
    application but on a separate matter as follows:

         "The appellant's case was not advanced on the  basis  of  Chikwamba
         and the judge found at [73] that the  appellant  did  not  wish  to
         acknowledge the strengths in assessing his chances  of  success  in
         respect of  entry  clearance;  however  it  is  arguable  that  the
         strengths as found by the judge should have  been  (and  were  not)
         factored into the proportionality assessment."

3.   The reference made in the grant  of  permission  was  to  paragraph  73
    which reads as follows:

         "I find that the appellant and his wife have a pessimistic view  of
         Nigeria.  Both consider that it could take two or three  years  for
         the appellant to obtain  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.   Neither
         referred to objective country evidence to support  this  assertion.
         The appellant would seem to have a strong case  in  respect  of  an
         application for a spousal visa: the Home Office has  accepted  that
         their relationship is genuine and subsisting and Ms  McAvock  noted
         that the income threshold was satisfied. Neither the appellant  nor
         the wife wish to acknowledge the strengths in assessing his chances
         of success.  I do not accept their figures of two to three years."

4.   The judge in paragraph 76 made reference to the recent case  of  R  (on
    the application of Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 but came to the view that the appeal should be refused.

5.   Mr Mold, who acts for the appellant,  has  advanced  the  appeal  today
    with economy and moderation submitting that there is an error of law in
    the way in which the judge dealt with Chikwamba in two regards.  First,
    as relates to the issue of "insurmountable obstacles" and  secondly  in
    considering whether this is a case where permission should  be  granted
    exceptionally outside the Rules.  Mr Mold, entirely properly,  conceded
    that this is not a case  where  it  can  be  said  with  any  agree  of
    certainty that entry clearance would be granted were the  appellant  to
    return to Nigeria and apply in-country for entry clearance.

6.   I have been taken to the judgment in Agyarko and, in addition,  to  the
    well-known decision of Secretary of State for the Home Department v  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  I have also helpfully been referred by Ms
    Ahmad, who  acts  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  to  the  R  (on  the
    application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -  proportionality)
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)  which  deals  the  application  of  Chikwamba,
    particularly in respect of temporary separation while  entry  clearance
    is being sought.

7.   Although Judge McWilliam properly raised this matter for  consideration
    in the Upper Tribunal, when one examines the  decision  in  the  round,
    there is nothing wrong in the manner in  which  the  judge  dealt  with
    considerations such as those in  Chikwamba (though not expressly  cited
    in the decision) or in Agyarko which was referred to.

8.   When I suggested to Mr Mold in the course of submissions that the  lack
    of anything approaching certainty in relation to prospective in-country
    entry clearance was fatal to his appeal,  he  graciously  and  properly
    conceded that it was. In the  circumstances,  therefore,  there  is  no
    error of law and this appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

   1) Appeal dismissed and decision of First-tier Tribunal affirmed.
   2) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         21 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



