
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03784/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 5 July 2019                                |On 17 July 2019              |
|Error of law decision given extempore at the  |                             |
|hearing                                       |                             |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     GA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Philip Heywood, Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity order  was  made  in  respect  of  the  sponsor  in  these
    proceedings by Judge Munonyedi in a decision and reasons promulgated on
    29 November 2016.  That order remains  in  force  and,  to  the  extent
    necessary, I extend it to cover this decision.

 2. The appellant, GA, is a citizen of Sri Lanka born 8 January  1936.   He
    is 83 years old.  He appeals against a decision of Judge Hussain of the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  15  February  2019  dismissing  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 4 January  2018  to  refuse
    entry clearance for the purposes  of  family  unification  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

Background

 3. The appellant's son, GG, is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  1  November
    1975.  He is the sponsor in these proceedings, and has  "held"  refugee
    status in this country since 27 February 2017, following a decision  of
    Judge Munonyedi promulgated  on  29  November  2016.   Judge  Munonyedi
    allowed the  sponsor's  appeal  against  an  earlier  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse his asylum claim.  The basis of the claim was that
    he was wanted by the Sri Lankan authorities for suspected  LTTE  links.
    The sponsor has resided here since 2009, having originally  lived  here
    as a student.  During a return visit to  Sri  Lanka  in  2012,  he  was
    detained by the authorities and tortured.  He managed to return to  the
    United Kingdom, and claimed asylum.  His family remained in Sri  Lanka.
    The continued attention they received, in his absence, at the hands  of
    the authorities is the focus of this case.

 4. The appellant applied for family unification with  the  sponsor,  along
    with the sponsor's wife, JG, and the sponsor's son, AG (date  of  birth
    15 May 2009), and daughter, KG (date of birth 21  October  1998).   The
    sponsor's  wife  and  son  were  successful  in  their  family  reunion
    applications.  The sponsor's daughter was initially refused as, by  the
    time the application was submitted, she was over the age  of  18.   Her
    appeal against that refusal decision was heard alongside  that  of  the
    appellant in this matter, and she was successful.  There  has  been  no
    onward appeal by the respondent in relation to that decision.

 5. Before Judge Hussain, the appellant accepted that, as the father  of  a
    person with refugee status,  his  situation  was  not  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  Instead he  appealed  to  the  respondent's  policy
    Family reunion: for refugees and those  with  humanitarian  protection,
    which permits those  who  have  other  family  relationships  with  the
    sponsoring refugee to be admitted provided  there  are  exceptional  or
    compassionate circumstances.  The relevant guidance  in  force  at  the
    time, as quoted in the skeleton argument submitted to Judge Hussain  at
    [18], provided as follows:

         "...  Where  a  family  reunion  application  does  not  meet   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules,  caseworkers  must  consider
         whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate
         factors which may justify a grant of leave outside the  Immigration
         Rules.

         There may be exceptional circumstances raised  in  the  application
         which make refusal of entry clearance a breach of  ECHR  Article  8
         (the right to respect for family life) because refusal would result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  applicant  or  their
         family.  Compassionate factors are, broadly  speaking,  exceptional
         circumstances, which might mean that a refusal of leave  to  remain
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  applicant
         or their family, but not constitute a breach of Article 8."

    The issue before Judge Hussain was,  therefore,  whether  refusing  the
    appellant's   application   would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences either for him or for the sponsor and the wider family.

 6. The case advanced before Judge Hussain on behalf of both  of  the  then
    appellants was that they would not be able to cope on their  own.   The
    daughter had encountered a range of depressive illnesses and was deeply
    unhappy.  She had to be cared for by her  mother  who,  despite  having
    entry clearance as the family member of a refugee here, was  forced  to
    remain in Sri Lanka caring for her and her father in law.   The  threat
    which had been manifested by the  Sri  Lankan  Government  towards  the
    sponsor continued to face them.  His wife was still required to  report
    to the authorities, as she still does to this date, even though she has
    entry clearance for  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  father  had  been
    harassed at the family home.

 7. Judge Hussain accepted that the situation in relation to the  sponsor's
    daughter was such that she needed her mother's help and that  it  would
    be unjustifiably harsh to keep her in Sri Lanka without the support  of
    her mother, given her mother was entitled to  reside  in  this  country
    pursuant to the refugee family member leave she had been  granted.   At
    [32] Judge Hussain said,

         "If [the daughter] is not  allowed  to  join  her  family  in  this
         country then she remains a very vulnerably exposed person.   In  my
         view, having  granted  family  reunion  to  her  mother  and  young
         brother, it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  mother  to
         continue to remain there to guard her.  That would then defeat  the
         objective of her being admitted to this country on family reunion."

 8. In relation to the appellant in these proceedings (the second appellant
    before Judge Hussain) the position was less clear-cut, the judge found.
     At [34] he made the following findings, which I quote  in  full,  with
    emphasis added:

         "With regard to the second appellant, I accept that he too has been
         part and parcel of the sponsor's family in Sri Lanka before he fled
         and since coming here, the sponsor has kept  in  contact  with  his
         father.  However, whilst he is aged 83 years and appears to  suffer
         from dementia, which would not be uncommon in a person of his  age,
         the same considerations do not apply to him.  At the  hearing,  the
         appellant's counsel impressed on me his vulnerability by suggesting
         that having been the subject of an arrest, he would be  of  adverse
         interest to the authorities.  The only evidence she could point  to
         of this was references in the sponsor's own  evidence  in  his  own
         appeal as recorded in the decision of the judge who tried his case.
          It seems to me not sufficient to take passing comments of a  judge
         recording proceedings before her as a basis on which to find  as  a
         matter of fact that he was arrested and still remains  the  subject
         of interest.  In fact, the sponsor in  the  hearing  admitted  that
         because of his age, his father was no longer required to report."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Cruthers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that Judge Hussain did not give sufficient weight
    to  the  findings  of  Judge  Munonyedi  relating  to  the   appellant.
    Secondly,  Judge  Hussain  may  not  have   sufficiently   taken   into
    consideration the medical  evidence  relating  to  the  various  health
    conditions of the appellant; and thirdly, that the judge may have erred
    in not giving sufficient weight to family unity/reunion principles when
    deciding that the appeal must be dismissed.





Analysis

10. By the end of the hearing, it was common ground that Judge Hussain  had
    erred in law.  I am grateful to Ms Cunha  for  her  realistic  approach
    during submissions, which led to  an  understandable  revision  of  her
    initial view, leading her to concede that the Judge had erred.

11. At the outset of my analysis, I  note  that  judges  of  this  Tribunal
    should exercise considerable caution before interfering in the decision
    of a  judge  below  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  did  not  ascribe
    "sufficient weight" to a particular matter  before  him  or  her.   For
    example, in the recently reported decision of Durueke (PTA: AZ applied,
    proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197  (IAC),  this  Tribunal  noted  that
    permission to appeal (and, therefore, by  implication  the  substantive
    consideration of an appeal against a decision of the First-tier) should
    only be granted on the basis that the judge who decided the appeal gave
    insufficient weight to a particular aspect of the case  if  it  can  be
    properly said that, as a consequence, the judge who decided the  appeal
    had arguably made an irrational decision.  Indeed, Mr Heywood sought to
    distance himself from the characterisation of the grounds of appeal  by
    Judge Cruthers in that way, and instead presented his case before me on
    the basis that  Judge  Hussain  simply  failed  to  take  into  account
    material  evidence,  either  through   overlooking   it,   or   through
    mischaracterising it.  There is considerable force in  the  submissions
    of Mr Heywood.

12. Turning to [34] in Judge Hussain's decision, the judge  has  overlooked
    key  elements  of  Judge  Munonyedi's  decision.   He   dismissed   the
    suggestion that the authorities are still playing an active interest in
    the family in Sri Lanka, on the basis that  it  was  simply  assertions
    made by the appellant before Judge  Munonyedi  (the  sponsor  in  these
    proceedings) that the authorities were still interested in the  family.
    Judge  Hussain  simply  said  that  there  were,  "references  in   the
    appellant's sponsor's evidence in his own appeal  as  recorded  in  the
    decision of the judge who tried the case"  and,  by  implication,  that
    there was nothing more: see the text emphasised, above.

13. It is clear that there were references in Judge Munonyedi's decision to
    the evidence that was advanced before her; for example, see [4],  which
    records  the  sponsor  giving  evidence   about   the   detention   and
    interrogation of his father (this appellant) and  wife  for  two  days.
    The sponsor also is recorded as having given  evidence  that  both  are
    required to report to the camp every week, and that neither are able to
    move from the family home without the permission  of  the  authorities.
    Similarly, at [41] the judge described other evidence received  in  the
    case which gave a similar account.  Judge Hussain's findings would have
    been  sustainable  had  the  paragraphs  cited  above  been  the   only
    references in Judge Munonyedi's decision to the father and the wife  of
    the  appellant  being  detained  or  subject  to  continued   reporting
    obligations.

14. However, Judge Munonyedi made substantive findings that  such  activity
    does, in fact, continue to  take  place.   For  example  at  [63]  when
    addressing the timing of the  sponsor's  application  for  asylum,  the
    judge stated this, "He  [the  sponsor]  made  an  application  when  he
    discovered that the authorities were  harassing  his  father  and  wife
    because of his previous involvement with the LTTE".

15. In addition, the judge made global findings at [85]:

         "It is my finding  that  the  authorities  are  interested  in  the
         appellant.  They know that he had some form of involvement with the
         LTTE intelligence wing and that he escaped from custody in February
         2012.  The authorities have visited  his  family  home  asking  his
         whereabouts.  His wife and father have to sign on at the camp  once
         a month  and  are  asked  about  him  on  each  visit.   There  are
         reasonable grounds for believing that he may have  been  identified
         by the authorities at any of the many demonstrations and pro  Tamil
         activities that he has participated in, particularly his support of
         the TGTE and their aims."

16. There are parallels in  the  present  scenario  to  Devaseelan  (Second
    Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri  Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702, although I consider that that case is not entirely on point.  In
    Devaseelan,  the  then  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  considered   the
    approach to be taken to an earlier decision of an adjudicator,  in  the
    event that the same appellant came  before  another  adjudicator.   The
    decision of the first adjudicator, held the IAT,  must  always  be  the
    "starting point" for the consideration of  the  second.   The  decision
    gave guidance as to the exceptions to the principle.  Devaseelan is  of
    some relevance, in the sense that an  earlier  finding  of  fact  by  a
    different judge cannot be ignored (or, as here, overlooked).  But it is
    not entirely on point with the present matter for at least two reasons.
     First, the guidance in Devaseelan concerns the  treatment  of  earlier
    decisions of different judges in relation to the  same  appellant.   By
    contrast, whereas Judge Munonyedi was concerned with the risk faced  by
    the sponsor, these proceedings concern the situation of a member of the
    sponsor's family.  Secondly, and more  significantly,  Judge  Munonyedi
    made findings to the lower standard applicable to  protection  appeals.
    As this is a human rights appeal, the balance of probabilities standard
    is engaged.  It is not,  therefore,  possible  automatically  to  adopt
    findings made in a protection appeal in a human rights appeal,  without
    further analysis.

17. With those caveats in mind, however, the findings  of  Judge  Munonyedi
    were - and are -  highly  relevant  to  these  proceedings.   They  are
    material facts which must be taken into account, or, if they are not to
    be taken into  account,  good  reasons  must  be  provided  for  why  a
    different approach must be adopted.  The error Judge Hussain fell  into
    was to overlook the potentially material findings of  Judge  Munonyedi,
    mischaracterising her decision as simply reciting evidence  she  heard,
    as though she did not make any findings.

18. That was a material error;  Judge  Munonyedi's  findings  were  clearly
    highly relevant to the findings of fact Judge Hussain had to make,  and
    yet his characterisation of her decision was as though she had made  no
    such findings.  By failing to  engage  with  the  significant  findings
    reached by Judge Munonyedi, I consider Judge  Hussain  to  have  fallen
    into error by failing to  take  into  account  material  evidence  when
    reaching his findings of fact.

19. There are other reasons why the judge erred.

20. At page 133 of the  appellant's  bundle,  there  is  a  letter  from  a
    consultant psychiatrist in the  mental  health  unit  at  the  teaching
    hospital in Jaffna.  This describes the appellant in these  proceedings
    as presenting with symptoms of severe dementia  and  moderate  dementia
    with co-morbid depressive disorder, moderate in severity, and that  his
    dementia was objectively confirmed by a mini mental  state  examination
    in which he scored 19 out of 30.  An MRI scan  of  his  brain  revealed
    cerebral atrophy with evidence of small  vessel  disease.   The  letter
    continues to state that dementia  is  a  progressive  illness  and  the
    appellant will have more  deterioration  in  his  memory,  intellectual
    functions and personality in the future.  He may need a care  giver  to
    support his daily activities and supervise  his  medications.   Against
    that background  I  find  that  Judge  Hussain  erred  in  law  by  his
    characterisation of the appellant's mental  state  as  merely  that  he
    "appears" to suffer from dementia.  In my  view  the  medical  evidence
    demonstrates that the symptoms presented by the appellant are more than
    mere apparent dementia and instead amount to something which is capable
    of meriting a finding that dementia is present in the appellant.

21. In light of these  findings,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  considerable
    hesitation that  a  judge  of  this  Tribunal  should  exercise  before
    interfering with a decision of fact in the Tribunal below, I find  that
    Judge Hussain did materially err in law by failing to  have  regard  to
    relevant evidence as described above.  It follows that the decision  of
    Judge Hussain is to be set  aside.   I  will  preserve  some  of  Judge
    Hussain's findings, as set out in my error of law decision.

REMAKING DECISION

22. I informed the parties that I would remake Judge Hussain's decision and
    that I would allow his appeal, with reasons to follow. I  now  give  my
    reasons.

23. I have allowed the appeal because I consider there  to  be  exceptional
    circumstances rendering a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  unjustifiably
    harsh arising from the ongoing interest of the Sri Lankan  authorities,
    his poor health, and the invidious choice that  would  face  the  wider
    household (as Judge Hussain found it  to  be)  arising  from  his  non-
    admission to this country.  Either the  sponsor's  wife  will  have  to
    continue to care for him, placing herself at further risk of harassment
    and depriving her and the sponsor of the family reunion  to  which  the
    Secretary  of   State   has   already   accepted   she   is   entitled.
    Alternatively, the appellant will be without the care that he currently
    enjoys from his daughter in law, and will be potentially subject to the
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities, in the absence of his daughter
    in law.

24. During the error of law hearing, Ms Cunha and Mr Heywood submitted that
    it would not be necessary for me to hear additional  live  evidence  in
    order to dispose of the case.

25. I agree with the submissions of the parties on this point.  I  consider
    there to be sufficient material available to me in order to remake  the
    decision for myself.

26. Judge Hussain, highlighted the  presenting  officer,  did  not  make  a
    finding that the sponsor was not  credible.   I  agree.  Judge  Hussain
    ascribed less weight  to  the  account  the  sponsor  provided  of  the
    circumstances  of  the  appellant  in  Sri  Lanka  on  account  of  his
    misunderstanding of Judge Munonyedi's decision.  In contrast  to  Judge
    Hussain's understanding of her  judgment,  rather  than  having  simply
    recalled the evidence  she  heard,  Judge  Munonyedi  reached  positive
    findings, as set out at paragraphs 14 to 18, above.  She did so without
    expressing significant reservations,  nor  emphasising  that  she  only
    reached those findings as a  result  of  being  subject  to  the  lower
    standard of proof applicable to protection appeals.

27. Certain of the findings of fact Judge Hussain were not tainted  by  the
    error of law outlined above. Those findings I can adopt.  It was common
    ground at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that Article 8 was
    engaged as regards the sponsor and the appellant. I raised  this  issue
    with the parties, and both confirmed that no issue was taken  with  the
    question of whether Article 8 is engaged, either then  or  now.   Judge
    Hussein's finding at [28] that the appellants were "part and parcel" of
    the sponsor's household before he  left  Sri  Lanka  was  not  impugned
    before me during the error of law hearing,  and  I  see  no  reason  to
    depart from it. Judge Hussain also made similar findings in relation to
    the appellant at [34].  As such, although the original  refusal  letter
    from the Entry Clearance Officer highlighted concerns about the absence
    of evidence concerning a familial relationship  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor, it is clear from the findings of fact  made  by  Judge
    Hussain, which I preserve, that the appellant is related to the sponsor
    as claimed.  Judge Hussain's operative  reasoning  for  dismissing  the
    appeal was not that family life for the purposes of Article 8  did  not
    exist between the appellant and the  sponsor,  but  that,  despite  the
    existence of family life, there were no exceptional circumstances  such
    that a refusal to grant entry clearance would be unjustifiably harsh.

28. In order to reach the finding that Article 8 was engaged, Judge Hussain
    would have to have been satisfied that the criteria for adult dependent
    relatives were met pursuant to Article  8  directly  (see:  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31),  rather
    than  the  narrower  version  of  the  doctrine  articulated   by   the
    Immigration Rules.

29. It was also common ground that, if the appellant were  to  succeed,  it
    could not be by reference to Article 8 as  it  is  articulated  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant does not meet the requirements of the
    rules, either on a family union basis (for his category of relationship
    is not catered for by the family reunion provisions of the  rules),  or
    as an adult dependent relative (in common with  the  position  advanced
    before Judge Hussain - see [37] - the case was not put before me on the
    basis that the adult dependent relative provisions are  met).   Rather,
    the appellant could only succeed pursuant to an analysis of  Article  8
    outside the rules, initially in the context of the respondent's  policy
    concerning family reunion, which does address this issue,  as  outlined
    in paragraph 5, above.

30. Judge Munonyedi's findings are significant to this  remaking  decision.
    Those findings were, of course, pursuant to the lower standard of proof
    applicable to asylum proceedings.  This  is  an  appeal  brought  under
    Article 8 ECHR, and so must be determined by  reference  to  the  civil
    standard of proof, namely the balance of probabilities. While that is a
    higher standard of proof than applied in the appellant's asylum appeal,
    the fact that Judge  Munonyedi  made  findings  in  the  context  of  a
    protection appeal that the Sri Lankan authorities retained an  interest
    in the sponsor's wife, and would place his father and daughter at  risk
    if his wife or to leave the country, represents a significant  starting
    point for my assessment of the facts.  I recall  that  Judge  Munonyedi
    found that the appellant  had  been  harassed  by  the  authorities  on
    account of his son (see [63]) and had required to  report  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities regularly, for the same reason (see [85]),  although
    presently had a dispensation on account of his  age.  While  I  am  not
    bound by those findings, it is open to me to adopt them.

31. Nothing submitted by the presenting officer at the  hearing  before  me
    provided any basis to impugn Judge Munonyedi's findings, at all  or  to
    such an extent that it would not be possible for them to be adopted  by
    me,  given  sufficient  additional  analysis,   to   the   balance   of
    probabilities standard.  Given the clarity with which  Judge  Munonyedi
    reached her findings, I consider  that  it  would  take  a  significant
    amount of evidence to the contrary in order for me to reach findings at
    odds with them.

32. The sponsor's evidence before Judge Hussain, both in written  form  and
    orally as recorded by the judge,  was  that  his  father  continues  to
    experience difficulties at the hands of the authorities in  Sri  Lanka.
    Although his age means that, at present, he is not required  to  report
    to the authorities, the sponsor fears that, once  his  wife  no  longer
    continues to tend to her father-in-law in the way that she is doing  at
    the moment, his father will become the subject of the renewed attention
    of the authorities.

33. It is clear that Judge Hussain  accepted  a  significant  part  of  the
    sponsor's narrative about his daughter and father remaining of interest
    to the authorities in Sri Lanka.  So much is clear from Judge Hussain's
    references at [30] to the likely vulnerability of  his  daughter,  were
    she to remain, at the hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities.   At  [32],
    Judge Hussain used the terminology of the  sponsor's  daughter  needing
    her mother to "guard" her.  The Judge accepted that  it  would  not  be
    "reasonable" to expect her mother, the appellant's wife, to  remain  in
    Sri Lanka, for to do so would defeat the object of family reunion.

34. Judge Munonyedi found the sponsor to be a credible and truthful witness
    (see [62] of her decision).  The sponsor's credibility was not impugned
    before me and I have no reason other than to treat him  as  a  credible
    witness.

35. I consider the evidence that was before Judge Hussain, taken  with  the
    findings of Judge Munonyedi, and the  presenting  officer's  acceptance
    that it would be open to me to remake  this  decision  without  hearing
    live evidence, to merit the  conclusion  that  the  findings  of  Judge
    Munonyedi can be adopted for the purposes of these proceedings.

36. The medical conditions outlined at paragraph 20  of  my  error  of  law
    decision, above, demonstrate that the elderly appellant's health is  in
    a poor state.   While  it  has  not  been  suggested  that  his  health
    conditions are such as to engage Article  3  of  the  ECHR,  such  poor
    health can be a factor when assessing whether maintaining  the  refusal
    of entry clearance  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh,  when  taken  with
    alongside the additional family life factors outlined above.  Article 8
    is not a proxy for Article 3 "near miss" cases, but, in the context  of
    the wider family life which is present in this case,  and  the  ongoing
    adverse attention of the authorities, the health of the appellant is  a
    factor to be taken into consideration.

37. In light of the above, I find that the appellant in  these  proceedings
    is in need of the continued assistance of  his  daughter  in  law,  the
    sponsor's wife, in order to avoid unjustifiably harsh consequences.   I
    find for the purposes of these proceedings that the appellant has  been
    cared for by the sponsor's wife in Sri Lanka, and  that,  but  for  him
    being granted entry clearance, that arrangement will have  to  continue
    indefinitely, subjecting the sponsor's wife to  the  likely  threat  of
    continued reporting requirements.  Alternatively,  the  sponsor's  wife
    will  have  to  relocate  permanently  to  this  country,  leaving  the
    appellant in isolation.  By definition,  that  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh to the sponsor, as well  as  to  the  appellant.   The  sponsor's
    position is  a  relevant  consideration:  see  the  family  unification
    guidance for Home Office staff; exceptional circumstances entail  those
    in which it, "would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
    applicant or their family" (emphasis added).

38. Drawing this analysis together, I find  that  there  are  compassionate
    factors within the meaning of  the  respondent's  policy  meriting  the
    grant to the appellant of family reunion leave outside  the  rules.  In
    contrast to what judge Hussain observed at [35], this is not merely the
    consequence of "migration". The sponsor did not have the choice  as  to
    whether to return to Sri Lanka; this  was  not  a  decision  concerning
    "migration".

39. The choice that awaits the wider family if the appellant is not granted
    entry clearance is an invidious one: either the  appellant  remains  in
    Sri Lanka alone, without the assistance of his daughter in law, or  his
    daughter in  law  must  reside  there  with  him,  placing  herself  at
    continued  risk  of  the  authorities'  adverse  attention.   In  these
    circumstances, what amounts to "unjustifiably" harsh must be calibrated
    by reference to  the  wider  context  of  the  scenario  in  which  the
    appellant would find himself alone. The non-admission of the  appellant
    would entail him having to endure the unjustifiably harsh  consequences
    of spending his final days in the absence of all other  former  members
    of his household, who have been required to move to this country due to
    the  well-founded  fear   of   persecution   held   by   the   sponsor.
    Alternatively, it would require the sponsor's wife's continued presence
    in Sri Lanka, placing her at continued risk of harassment - or worse  -
    at the hands of the authorities, thereby defeating the object of family
    unification being granted to those  family  members  who  have  already
    succeeded in their applications.

40. If it were simply the case that the remainder of his family had  chosen
    to pursue  "migration",  to  adopt  judge  Hussein's  terminology,  any
    harshness which would flow would be "justifiable" for the  purposes  of
    Article 8. The same may not be  said  in  the  present  situation;  the
    sponsor has been forced to flee Sri  Lanka;  against  that  background,
    what  amounts  to  an  "undue"  amount  of  harshness  is  a  different
    consideration.   I  consider  that  the  position  recognised  by   the
    respondent's family reunion  policy  articulates  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 of the convention in the present circumstances; they are such
    that the members of sponsor's household are entitled to  relocate  with
    him, given the unique circumstances of the family unit,  the  invidious
    choice outlined above, and the importance  of  family  reunion  to  the
    Refugee Convention  (see,  for  example,  Article  23(1)  of  Directive
    2004/83/EC). In  the  circumstances,  were  it  not  possible  for  the
    appellant to be admitted to the United Kingdom, the enforced separation
    which would flow from such a decision would be unjustifiably harsh.

41. In light of the fact that the appellant's continued exclusion from  the
    United Kingdom would have  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant,  the  sponsor,  and  the  wider  family,  I  find  that  the
    respondent's policy on granting  leave  outside  the  rules  in  family
    unification cases is met.

42. That being so, the engagement of  the  policy  is  dispositive  of  the
    proportionality assessment for the fifth stage  of  the  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 reasoning.  The continued refusal of  entry  clearance  to  the
    appellant would be a disproportionate interference with the  Article  8
    rights of the sponsor and the appellant.

43. I consider this resolution of the  case  to  reflect  the  considerable
    public interest that lies in the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls (section 117B(1),  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002).  The Secretary of State's view as  to  where  the  balance  lies
    between the public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration
    controls, on the one hand, and the rights of  the  individual,  on  the
    other, is a uniquely insightful view, informed by his special expertise
    and the constitutional responsibility with which he is charged in these
    matters.  The Secretary of State's view as to where that  balance  lies
    is articulated both by his rules and by his  policies;  see  Agyarko  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11  at  [3]  and
    [4].

44.  Resolving  the  case  in  this  manner  respects  the  policy  of  the
    respondent, as the approach I have adopted is taken directly  from  the
    relevant policy, as set out above.

45. This appeal is allowed.

Notice of decision

Judge Hussain's decision is set aside, subject to the preserved findings  of
fact outlined above.

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      [pic]               Date 11 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



Fee award

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The appellant has been successful in  the  proceedings.   Judge  Munonyedi's
decision was available to the respondent when the  sponsor  applied  on  his
behalf for entry clearance, and that should have  been  a  sufficient  basis
upon which to grant the application.

Signed    [pic]                 Date 11 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

