

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/03654/2016

                                                   HU/03656/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27th June 2017                         |On 28th June 2017                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                              ARSEN BARTIA (1)
                               NINO EJIBIA (2)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Karbani, of Counsel, instructed by Turpin
Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The first appellant is a citizen of Georgia born in January 1972 and
       the second appellant is his wife, who is also a citizen of  Georgia,
       who was born in  March  1973.  They  entered  the  UK  illegally  in
       February 2009. On 2nd July 2015 they applied to  remain  in  the  UK
       outside of the Immigration Rules due  to  their  membership  of  the
       London Church of Jesus Christ and on the basis that return would  be
       in contravention of the UK's obligations  under  Article  9  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights. This application was refused on
       22nd January 2016. Their appeal against the decision  was  dismissed
       by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  J  Pacey  in   a   determination
       promulgated on the 13th December 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to address how
       the appellants would be able to continue their  religious  practices
       if removed. It was further arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law in refusing to admit  a  previous  decision  which  was
       relevant to the issue in accordance with AS &  AA  (Somalia)  [2006]
       UKAIT 5. It is also arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       apply the law properly as set out in Hamat ( Article 9 - freedom  of
       religion) [2016] UKUT 00286 or properly consider background evidence
       about discrimination against minority religions in Georgia.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the appellant's grounds and in oral submission by Ms Karbani  the
       following is argued for the appellant.

    5. It is contend that  firstly  the  applicant  erred  in  law  in  not
       applying Hamat (Article 9 - freedom of  religion)  [2016]  UKUT  286
       because the judge failed to apply Article 9 in a free  standing  way
       without a requirement of exceptionality, and also by applying s.117B
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  not  making
       it clear  that  information  was  needed  on  English  language  and
       finances. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  the
       particular church, London Church of  Jesus  Christ  (henceforth  the
       LCJC), requires regular congregational worship. The  judge  did  not
       make a finding as to whether he accepted that  communal  prayer  was
       central to the LCJC, and how the  appellants  would  continue  their
       religious practices if removed and whether any interference would be
       proportionate. The appellants would not see their  pastor  again  if
       they were removed as they would not be allowed to visit him  due  to
       their immigration records and he could not  return  to  Georgia  for
       asylum reasons. There was also a failure to  look  at  the  way  the
       religion operated now as opposed to the past as it was a  young  and
       developing religion. The evidence was that separated from the pastor
       the appellants would lose their religion.

    6. Secondly it is argued by the appellant  that  the  judge  failed  to
       considered material facts relevant to Articles 8 and 9 ECHR.  It  is
       argued that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider  evidence  from
       the appellants that separation from  their  pastor  and  deputy  had
       detrimentally affected the practice of their faith, and incidentally
       that the second appellant is the sister of the  pastor.  The  First-
       tier Tribunal also referred to the LCJC as a cult when it was  clear
       from letters that they are registered charity. It was  not  for  the
       state or Tribunal to define whether it was a religion, see  decision
       of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Genov  v   Bulgaria
       (application no 40524/08), where it was held that it was  wrong  for
       the Bulgarian authorities to refuse  to  register  a  new  religious
       association.  The evidence was also that the LCJC was largely stable
       with few joining or leaving, and that there was no  public  interest
       in preventing large numbers of people coming to the UK to join it as
       it was  not  a  growing  religion.  There  was  also  a  failure  to
       acknowledge that the group, although now in part British citizens by
       naturalisation, mostly emigrated with the pastor  to  this  country,
       and to give weight to the rights of the community as a whole as well
       as the appellants.

    7. Thirdly it is argued by the appellant that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       did  not  take  into  consideration  background  evidence  regarding
       discrimination in Georgia. The LCJC does  not  regard  itself  as  a
       Christian  church  although  it  has   some   common   ground   with
       Christianity, and the First-tier Tribunal failed to look properly at
       evidence of discrimination against minority  religions  in  Georgia,
       and wrongly discounted it as the targets of such discrimination  had
       been Jehovah's  witnesses  and  Islamic  groups  in  the  background
       reports. There was evidence that one Georgian asylum claim had  been
       successful  from  the  LCJC.  The  decision  of   Mr   DR   Garratt,
       Adjudicator, promulgated on 24th June 2004 allowing an asylum appeal
       on behalf of Miss L K is appended at page  204  of  the  appellant's
       First-tier Tribunal bundle. In this case there was evidence,  and  a
       finding at paragraph 28 of the decision, that non-traditional faiths
       were not allowed to practice their religion and that  the  appellant
       had a well founded fear of persecution,

    8. Fourthly it is said that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
       refusing  to  permit   the   appellant   to   rely   upon   previous
       determinations in accordance with AS and AA Somalia [2006] UKAIT 52.



    9. In a Rule  24  notice  and  in  oral  submissions  by  Mr  Nath  the
       respondent argues that in fact the First-tier Tribunal did  consider
       the problems the appellant may have on return to Georgia,  including
       practising their faith and how they coped when their leader was  not
       present. It was an inherent contradiction in  the  appellants'  case
       that they required to be  in  close  regular  communion  with  their
       pastor but that they had followed that same faith for  a  number  of
       years after he left Georgia, and for a period  of  time  whilst  the
       first appellant was in prison in the  UK.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       also looked at the relevant background  information  which  did  not
       support there being  any  Article  3  ECHR  risk,  and  applied  the
       decision in Hamat. It was open lawfully for the First-tier  Tribunal
       not to allow reliance upon the unreported decisions,  which  in  any
       case were related to Lithuania and  Ethiopia,  and  given  that  the
       grounds give no reasoning as  to  how  they  would  have  materially
       affected the outcome of the decision had they been admitted.

   10. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I did not find
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons argued
       but that I would put my decision in writing. These as  are  now  set
       out below.





Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. With respect  to  Ground  4  the  appellant  has  not  provided  any
       explanation as to why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       misapplying the Practice Direction at 11.2(c) in refusing  to  admit
       the unreported decisions as set out at paragraph 10 of the decision,
       or why if admitted these decisions would have material affected  the
       outcome of the appeal particularly given that in fact note was taken
       of the one case in which a  Georgian  national  following  the  LCJC
       faith was successful in an asylum appeal. I do  not  therefore  find
       that this was a material error.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal does consider whether  the  LCJC  should  be
       seen as a cult rather than a religion but accepts in any  case  that
       Article 9 ECHR  covers  a  belief  and  not  just  a  religion,  see
       paragraph 12 of the decision, and  consideration  is  given  to  the
       appeal under Articles 8 and 9 outside of the  Immigration  Rules  at
       paragraph 21 -28 of the decision.

   13. S.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  is  only
       relevant to Article 8 ECHR proportionality considerations. There  is
       no evidence that this was wrongly applied  to  the  Article  9  ECHR
       consideration at paragraph 24 of the decision, as this clearly is  a
       conclusion to the Article 8 ECHR consideration  in  this  paragraph.
       There is mistaken reference to s.117B of the 2002 Act  at  paragraph
       27 of the decision,  when  Article  9  ECHR  was  being  considered,
       however this does not constitute a material error in law considering
       that the issues (the importance of immigration control, and evidence
       relating to finance and ability in English language)  are  all  ones
       which were entitled to be given weight in a Razgar analysis which is
       correctly found to be relevant to assessing the proportionality of a
       contended Article 9, as well as an Article 8, violation.

   14. The consideration of the  Article  9  ECHR  appeal  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules is informed by Hamat  at paragraphs 26 -28 of  the
       decision, and also  reveals  no  legal  errors  whatsoever.  In  the
       assessment cogent reasons are given as to why any interference  with
       the  practice  of  faith  of  the  appellants  and  their  religious
       community is proportionate with reference to the country  of  origin
       background  materials  showing   no   evidence   of   penalties   or
       discrimination to minority religions, and  in  light  of  the  other
       European Court  of  Human  Rights  cases  drawn  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's attention.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal clearly  records,  at  paragraph  3  of  the
       decision, the key aspects of the case as argued for in  the  grounds
       by the appellants: the reliance on Articles 8 and 9  ECHR,  and  the
       importance of remaining with the LCJC congregation, which is seen by
       the appellants as a core aspect of their religion,  and  the  argued
       for likelihood of discrimination in Georgia. It is  clear  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal understood the case put to it by the appellants.



   16. Acceptance is given by the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  importance
       that LCJC gives to  leadership  from  the  pastor  and  regular  and
       frequent congregational worship, see paragraph 14 of  the  decision.
       However, there is not an acceptance that these can be seen as  core,
       vital, aspects of this religion as the appellants both survived  for
       many years without  the  pastor  and  their  group  worship  between
       2003/2004 and 2009 when they  entered  the  UK,  as  the  First-tier
       Tribunal finds at paragraphs 11 and 17,  and  this  is  inconsistent
       with  the  appellants'   contention   that   separation   from   the
       congregation and pastor would "suffocate" their faith.  Further  the
       First-tier Tribunal finds that they are not assisted by the lack  of
       any external objective evidence about the church and by  a  lack  of
       relevant detail in the church letters, as noted at paragraph  13  of
       the decision.

   17. Consideration was given to the background country of origin evidence
       at paragraphs 18 -20. The conclusion that  it  did  not  evidence  a
       contention of discrimination generally against minority religions  I
       find to be entirely  rational  in  light  of  the  content  of  that
       evidence. This country of origin evidence is  specifically  referred
       to when considering Article 9 ECHR at paragraph 27 of the  decision.
       It is accepted that there was one grant  of  asylum  to  a  Georgian
       national with a LCJC background at paragraph 14 of the decision, but
       as this decision was made in 2004, and therefore 12 years  prior  to
       the date of decision for these appellants, I do not find that it was
       a material error not to consider the detail of that decision and the
       evidence on which it relied, particularly given the  lapse  of  time
       and the fact that these appellants do not contend that they face any
       persecutory risks if returned to Georgia.

   18. Consideration was given by the First-tier Tribunal to the fact  that
       the appellants contribute to their religious community, and thus  to
       this community's Article 9  ECHR  rights  at  paragraph  26  of  the
       decision, in the context of the proportionality of  the  appellants'
       removal. It was noted however that there was no  evidence  that  the
       community suffered when the first appellant was imprisoned for a few
       months, and thus was not part of the LCJC, and  once  again  I  find
       that this aspect has been dealt with in a lawful  and  proportionate
       fashion.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  27th June 2017
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


