





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03663/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12 August 2019                   |On: 02 September 2019                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mrs Dodo Dadiani
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Georgia, born on 7 February  1948.  She
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 10 April 2019,  dismissing  her  appeal
      against the  decision  of  the  respondent,  dated  22  January  2016,
      refusing her human rights claim.

   2. The appellant applied on 2 July 2015 for leave to  remain  on  grounds
      outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  application  was  considered  in
      accordance with the appellant's right to respect for her private  life
      under paragraph 276ADE(1)(i-vi) of the Rules [3].

   3. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies
      noted that the grounds have substance when taking  into  account  that
      the hearing of the appeal took place on 19 December 2018 but that  the
      decision was only promulgated on 10 April  2019.  No  explanation  was
      given by the Judge for the delay. Taking  that  into  account,  it  is
      arguable that the Judge did not properly  consider  the  evidence.  He
      found that the grounds prepared by Ms Radford were arguable.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant's claim that in
      order to be able to practice and maintain her faith  she  must  remain
      living in the same community with her church members, and that  it  is
      only the Pastor who can administer communion or anoint an  individual,
      does not explain how she was able to continue to practise her religion
      in the years prior to  2009  when  there  was  nobody  in  Georgia  to
      administer such rites.

   5. He found that this fundamentally undermined her claim that it  is  not
      possible for her to pursue her faith in Georgia, especially  where  he
      found that there  is  no  evidence  of  harassment  or  discrimination
      suffered by her prior to her departure in 2009 [89].

   6. He did not give weight to the conclusions of Professor  Barker  as  he
      found the evidence of the appellant and her witnesses  to  be  neither
      credible nor reliable. It is  open  to  the  appellant  to  return  to
      Georgia and continue her religious practices there. On the balance  of
      probabilities,  given  her  past  experiences,  she  will   not   face
      discrimination or harassment simply by following her faith.

   7. Where there is no evidence of her proselytising her faith, and in this
      respect, it was not the case that she was openly preaching  her  faith
      on the streets of Georgia prior to coming to the  UK,  he  found  that
      this informed him that she will not face problems [90].

   8. He stated that taking into  account  the  decision  in  AR  (Vasiginas
      Church) Lithuania [2003] UKAIT 0024, which considered this  particular
      religion, there was clear reference to members of the church  pursuing
      their faith through video links [91]. No evidence was put  before  him
      which would suggest that this could not be a means or method by  which
      the appellant can maintain contact with her community  who  remain  in
      the UK. They have no specific church building and in regard as to  how
      they as a community profess their faith, he found that  they  have  no
      focal point, and there is an ad hoc arrangement, and  that  being  the
      case, it is possible for the appellant to maintain  contact  with  her
      church members in the UK after she returns to Georgia, and can do  so,
      at the very least through video conferencing or other  modern  methods
      of communication [91].

   9. He found that the refusal of her application, considered in the public
      interest pursued by the respondent, is lawful and reasonable and is  a
      proportionate response to the appellant's  immigration  circumstances.
      The refusal cannot amount to a breach of  the  UK's  obligation  under
      s.13 of the Human Rights Act 1998 or under  Article  9  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention [92].

  10. Ms Radford, who represented the appellant at the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, relied on the grounds of appeal. She set out  the
      contextual and factual background to the appeal in  some  detail:  The
      appellant is a member of a church, which  believes  that  its  leader,
      Pastor Edjibia is the prophet of the  end  of  days.  It  is  a  small
      community of around 100 adults and 100 children who believe they  have
      been chosen as a select few who must live close to  their  pastor  and
      receive communication from him and him only. The genuineness of  these
      beliefs has already been established in AR, supra. The Upper  Tribunal
      accepted  that  Pastor  Edjibia's  congregation  had  no  interest  in
      remaining in the UK save for the purpose of being close to  him.  Were
      he to leave the UK, they would follow him.

  11. Pastor Edjibia received his revelation in 1997. In 1999 the Lithuanian
      authorities refused to allow him to re-enter  Lithuania.  He  and  his
      congregation sought refuge in various countries and eventually arrived
      in the UK in 2000. They claimed asylum.

  12. The Georgian congregation initially  remained  in  Georgia  under  the
      ministry of their Deacon, Mr Kakhaberi Keburia, but  then  moved  with
      him to the UK. The family started moving in 2003 and  the  appellant's
      family was one of the last families to follow suit, in 2009  after  Mr
      Keburia. Their departure was also prompted by problems in Abkhazia and
      they claimed asylum on arrival in the UK.

  13. The appellant's account of persecution was accepted as credible but it
      was concluded that she had internally relocated  to  Zugdini  and  was
      safe there. It was accepted that her family had suffered  insults  and
      "minor harassment" in Zugdini because of their non-conformist religion
      and Abkhazian heritage,  but  this  on  its  own  did  not  amount  to
      persecution. Her son's evidence of targeted persecution in Zugdini  on
      political grounds was rejected as incredible.

  14. Mr Keburia left the  LCJC  and  has  not  been  replaced.  The  entire
      congregation  live  together  in  London,  and  all  apart  from   the
      appellant's family, have lawful status in the UK on  various  grounds,
      including religious grounds. There is no LCJC in any other country.

  15. The appellant, her family,  Nona  Khvichia  and  another  family  (the
      Javashvillis) were the last ones to seek leave to  remain  on  Article
      8/9 grounds in May 2015. Each  was  unsuccessful  and  each  appealed.
      Their cases were separated. The Javashvillis family were granted leave
      to remain  on  Article  8  grounds  after  the  refusal  decision  was
      withdrawn by the respondent.

  16. Ms Khvichia's appeal was allowed by Judge Morron on 30 June  2017.  He
      found  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   her
      integration into Georgia as  she  would  be  unable  to  practice  her
      religion in that country [35].

  17. By contrast, the appellant's son and grandson lost  their  appeals  on
      the same issue.

      Submissions

  18. Ms Radford submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  his
      conclusion at [79] that it was not impossible for  the  appellant  "to
      pursue" her faith without the practices in question, namely, receiving
      the Eucharist and being directed in daily life by her  pastor,  seeing
      that she had been deprived of communion before.

  19. That, she submitted, was not the relevant question for  assessing  the
      claim under Article 9: Hamat (Article 9 - freedom of  religion)  2016]
      UKUT 00286 at [49]. Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan referred to a decision
      before the European Court of Human Rights in the case  of  Eweida  and
      Others v UK [2013] ECHR 37. There the court referred to the fact  that
      freedom of religion also encompasses the  freedom  to  manifest  one's
      belief, alone and in private, but also to practice in  community  with
      others and in public. In order to count as  a  "manifestation"  within
      the meaning of Article 9, the  act  in  question  must  be  intimately
      linked to the  religion  or  belief.  However,  the  manifestation  of
      religion or belief is not limited to an act  of  worship  or  devotion
      which forms part of  the  practice  of  a  religion  or  belief  in  a
      generally recognised form, the existence of a sufficiently  close  and
      direct nexus between  the  act  and  the  underlying  belief  must  be
      determined on the facts of each case.

  20. Reference was made to an earlier case where the Court held that  if  a
      person is able to take steps to circumvent a limitation placed on  his
      or  her  freedom  to  manifest  religion  or  belief,  there   is   no
      interference with the right under Article 9.

  21. Ms Radford submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  ask  the  relevant
      question before assessing the claim under Article 9 as set out at [49]
      of Hamat. The appellant is the only member of her church who has  been
      refused leave to remain. Her church believes  that  the  Pastor  is  a
      prophet and is the only person who can provide  communion.  They  live
      close together in London. The various acts of manifestation cannot  be
      achieved by a video  link.  The  relevant  test  is  whether  you  can
      continue to manifest your religion  with  the  close  ties  which  are
      necessary for that religion. In the appellant's case, the question  is
      whether receiving communion is a sufficiently  closely  connected  act
      intimately linked to her religion, and if so, whether she can  receive
      this in Georgia.

  22. Ms Radford also contended that the Judge gave  weight  at  [81-82]  to
      previous determinations relating to Mr Arsen Bartia and the appellant,
      who is Mr Bartia's mother. Immigration Judge Dickson  dismissed  their
      appeal on 17 July 2009. However, she submitted that the  Judge  failed
      to have regard to the previous determination for Nona  Khvichia  where
      the Judge came to the opposite conclusion and allowed her  appeal.  He
      gave no reasons for preferring the 2009 decision over  the  successful
      appeal in Khvichia.

  23.  Further,  the  Judge  erred  in  his  conclusion  at  [83]  that  the
      congregation of the LCJC moved to the UK for  reasons  unconnected  to
      their faith.  However,  the  AIT  accepted  in  AR,  supra,  that  the
      congregation are in the UK because they wish to be with  their  Pastor
      and would leave the UK if he did.

  24. She further submitted that the Judge erred at [86] when  assessing  Dr
      Barker's opinion which concluded that  physical  proximity  to  Pastor
      Edjibia, is of vital importance to the religious beliefs of LCJC.  The
      Judge stated that her opinion is to be viewed  in  the  light  of  the
      evidence in this case and the appellant's claim  that  she  fears  she
      will face problems on return to Georgia on account  of  her  religious
      beliefs.

  25. The Judge concluded at [86], that aside from  generalised  and  wholly
      unsubstantiated claims that she suffered discrimination on account  of
      her religious beliefs in Georgia, she provided no specific evidence of
      any particular incident of  harassment  or  discrimination,  prior  to
      coming to the UK. Her evidence in that regard was vague and completely
      unreliable. He found that on this core issue, the appellant failed  to
      demonstrate on a balance of probabilities that in the first  instance,
      as Judge Dickson  found  in  2009,  she  suffered  discrimination  and
      harassment in Georgia on account of her  religious  beliefs  and  that
      even in 2018 there is no evidence to support her  claim  that  she  is
      unlikely to face discrimination or harassment on return to Georgia.

  26. Ms Radford submitted however that Judge Dickson had in  fact  accepted
      the appellant's general credibility and that included her  account  of
      suffering from harassment and insults in Georgia. That she  maintained
      constitutes a material mistake of fact.

  27. She also submitted that it  is  apparent  from  [80]  that  the  Judge
      misunderstood the evidence as  to  whether  LCJC  is  an  evangelising
      church which in turn contributed to his concerns about the reliability
      of the witnesses. However, the written evidence  from  Jeremy  Bachtin
      explained that the LCJC was established as an evangelising church  and
      later abandoned evangelism for doctrinal reasons. That, she submitted,
      was an error of the Judge's own making.

  28. Further, she submitted that the Judge gave  irrational  or  inadequate
      reasons for placing no weight on  the  expert  opinion  of  Dr  Eileen
      Barker who had concluded that physical proximity to Pastor Edjibia was
      of vital importance to the religious belief of the LCJC. That  was  on
      the basis  that  Professor  Barker  relied  on  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant and her witnesses as to what the beliefs of the  LCJC  were.
      Those witnesses the Judge found not to be reliable.

  29. However, the Judge also recorded that Professor Barker spoke to a  key
      member of the church, Mr Bachtin, regarding the beliefs of  the  LCJC.
      He made no criticisms of Mr Bachtin's evidence and  did  not  describe
      him as unreliable.

  30. Ms Radford also submitted that the Judge erroneously  stated  at  [73]
      that she neither addressed him in her skeleton  argument  nor  in  her
      oral submissions, in relation to the appellant's Article 8 rights  and
      that the submission concentrated solely upon issues pertaining to  the
      appellant's Article 9 rights. He went on to state at [83] that  it  is
      understandable that the appellant was not seeking to pursue an Article
      8 claim.

  31. In fact, however, she stated that the appellant did pursue  Article  8
      claims both orally and in counsel's skeleton argument and this  is  in
      fact "alluded to" at the opening  of  the  determination.  Ms  Radford
      contended that the Judge does not appear to  have  read  the  skeleton
      argument or alternatively had no proper regard to her representations,
      at the time that he turned to make findings on the appeal,  which  was
      procedurally unfair.

  32. She submitted that she informed the Judge at the commencement  of  the
      hearing as recorded at [15], that she relied on the skeleton  argument
      prepared by counsel who had earlier represented the  appellant  before
      the Tribunal in February 2018.  The  submissions  were  identified  in
      paragraph 1 of  the  skeleton.  This  included  both  the  appellant's
      Article 8 as well as Article  9  rights  under  the  Convention.  (The
      skeleton argument referred to is  in  the  Tribunal's  bundle.  It  is
      signed and dated 8 February 2018).

  33. Finally, Ms Radford submitted that the Judge at [92],  applied  s.117B
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to  an  Article  9
      claim where it had no proper application.

  34.  There  the  Judge  stated  that   he   considered   the   appellant's
      circumstances in line with the guidance given in Hamat.  He  concluded
      that the refusal of her application cannot amount to  a  breach  under
      s.13 of the Human Rights Act 1998 or  under  Article  9  of  the  1950
      Convention.  He  found  that  when  considering  the  refusal  of  the
      application in the context of  the  public  interest  pursued  by  the
      respondent, that it was not only entirely lawful  and  reasonable  but
      was  a  proportionate  response   to   the   appellant's   immigration
      circumstances. He stated that the refusal of  her  application  cannot
      amount to a breach of her rights under Article 8 or under Article 9.

  35. In reply, Ms Jones submitted that in  Hamat,  the  appellant  was  the
      leader but this appellant is not a leader. Judge Jordan  has  set  out
      the activities performed by the appellant at [9]. This was referred to
      by the Judge at [75]. I pointed out to her that this was a  submission
      made by the presenting officer on behalf of the respondent. The  Judge
      noted in the same paragraph, that the appellant does not  in  any  way
      profess to be a leader of her religion but  in  fact  is  someone  who
      follows the faith and is part of a very small community.

  36. Included in that community are some 200  people,  as  members  of  her
      church, including her son, daughter in law and grandson. At  [79]  the
      Judge noted that where it was said by Pastor Edjibia  and  Mr  Bachtin
      that it was essential that only  the  Pastor  administered  communion,
      this did not explain how  it  was  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
      continue to pursue her religion in isolation in Georgia  during  those
      five years.

  37. Ms Jones noted from [86], that what the appellant had to say regarding
      alleged discrimination and harassment prior to coming here  was  vague
      and unreliable. She provided no specific evidence  of  any  particular
      incident of harassment or discrimination.

  38. Ms Jones submitted that the decision must be assessed  "holistically".
      The decision was based on an acceptance that  the  appellant  was  not
      credible and  that  nobody  assisted  her  in  Georgia.  The  question
      therefore as to whether she can continue with the manifestation of her
      religion would in the circumstances not matter, having regard  to  the
      credibility finding.

  39. She submitted that at  [39]  of  the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge
      Dickson, he stated that the appellants and  their  family  "may"  have
      suffered insults because they were  evangelical  Christians.  He  also
      noted at [40] that the  appellants  agreed  that  they  were  able  to
      worship at their church.

  40. She repeated that a holistic approach must be undertaken  against  the
      background as a whole, without 'picking out points'.

  41. She contended that the reference at [83] to the fact that the majority
      of the members  of  the  church  present  in  the  UK  originate  from
      countries within the European Union, shows that they have  EU  status.
      This is not a matter which is material to the outcome. It amounts to a
      disagreement and nothing more.

  42. With regard to grounds (e) and (f),  she  submitted  that  Immigration
      Judge Dickson at [30]  found  that  even  if  the  appellant  suffered
      harassment and insults regarding the family worshipping as evangelical
      Christians, they would not have established a  well  founded  fear  of
      persecution [29]  and  [30].  This  however  does  not  amount  to  an
      acceptance that the events in fact did happen.

  43. With regard to ground [i] Ms Jones noted that  the  appellant  pursued
      her appeal on private life grounds [20], as already noted.

  44. She submitted that it is not correct  that  the  Judge  did  not  have
      regard to the skeleton submissions.  She  pointed  out  that  this  is
      expressly referred to at [92] where  the  Judge  stated  that  he  has
      considered everything in the context  of  the  skeleton  argument  and
      submissions. There has been no procedural unfairness.

  45. She submitted finally that the main thrust  regarding  Holy  Communion
      and manifestation of her religion must be read in the context  of  the
      credibility points made in Judge Dickson's decision.

  46. In reply, Ms Radford accepted that Judge Dickson did  not  accept  the
      appellant's account, but her credibility was  not  challenged  by  the
      Home Office. The appellant's case is different from that in Hamat.

  47. The proportionality assessment was affected by  the  misdirections  of
      fact. The appellant's case is that it  is  not  possible  for  her  to
      conduct the practices in issue, including receiving the Eucharist  and
      being directed in daily life by Pastor Edjibia. The issue was  whether
      this went to the core of the religious belief in question.

      Assessment

  48. I have had regard to the detailed submissions made by the parties.

  49. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in a very lengthy decision,
      did not distinguish between the right to maintain a faith on  the  one
      hand  and  the  right  to  manifest  it  in  specific  practices.   In
      particular, the practices identified in this case, were receiving  the
      Eucharist and being directed in daily life by the Pastor.

  50. At [79] he concluded that the contention that the only way someone can
      practice their faith is to be part of the community  did  not  explain
      why the appellant spent the last five years in Georgia without  anyone
      providing her with communion. As already noted, the genuineness of the
      LCJC beliefs had already been established  in  AR,  supra.  The  Upper
      Tribunal noted that Pastor Edjibia's congregation had no  interest  in
      remaining in the UK save for the purpose of being close to  him.  They
      would follow him were he to leave the UK.

  51. The relevant issue to be determined accordingly was not whether it was
      impossible for the appellant to pursue her faith without the practices
      in question,  but  the  right  to  manifest  that  faith  in  specific
      practices. The Tribunal considered what counted as a manifestation  in
      the meaning of Article 9. The  act  in  question  must  be  intimately
      linked to the religion or belief. The manifestation of religion is not
      limited to an act of worship or  devotion  which  forms  part  of  the
      practice of a religion, but the existence of a sufficiently close  and
      direct nexus between  the  act  and  the  underlying  belief  must  be
      determined on the facts of each case. If a  person  is  able  to  take
      steps to circumvent a limitation placed on  her  freedom  to  manifest
      religion, there is no interference with the right under Article 9.

  52. In that respect, the Judge also failed to have regard to the  presence
      and subsequent departure of the Deacon in Georgia who  had  previously
      administered communion. He has since left the LCJC.

  53. It was also not correct that the congregation of the LCJC moved to the
      UK for reasons unconnected with their faith [83]. In AR, the  Tribunal
      concluded that the congregation are in the UK because they wish to  be
      with their Pastor and would leave the UK if he did.  It  appears  that
      that is the inference that the Judge drew at [83]  when  referring  to
      the relevance of the EEA nationality of the congregation.

  54. The Judge incorrectly found that Judge Dickson had concluded  in  2009
      that  the  appellant  failed  to  establish  that  she  suffered  from
      harassment and discrimination in Georgia on religious grounds.  He  in
      fact accepted the appellant's  general  credibility  as  well  as  her
      accounts of suffering from harassment and  insults  in  Georgia.  That
      included her assertions of suffering from harassment and  insults.  He
      concluded that even if the events had happened, they  would  not  have
      established a well  founded  fear  of  persecution.  Accordingly,  the
      appellant's asylum claim was dismissed.

  55. At [39] he accepted that  the  appellants  before  him,  including  Ms
      Dadiani and her family, may have suffered insults  because  they  were
      evangelical Christians. This included  insults  and  minor  harassment
      from neighbours and the police.

  56. I find that the Judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's  evidence  as
      unreliable at [86], is a material error of law  in  the  circumstances
      [86].

  57. It is evident from  the  written  evidence  of  Mr  Bachtin,  that  he
      explained that the LCJC was  established  as  an  evangelising  church
      which they later abandoned for doctrinal reasons.  The Judge  has  not
      explained why no weight was given to the  opinion  of  Dr  Barker  who
      concluded  that  the  physical  proximity  to  their  Pastor  was   of
      importance to their religious beliefs. Although stating that Dr Barker
      had relied on the evidence of the appellant and her witnesses in  that
      regard, whom he did not find reliable, Dr Barker had also spoken to Mr
      Bachtin, a key member of the church. No criticisms were  made  of  his
      evidence and the Judge did not find him to be unreliable.

  58. I am  accordingly  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of errors on a point of law. The  parties
      agreed that if that were the conclusion, the decision  should  be  set
      aside. Further, both agreed that  having  regard  to  the  credibility
      issues involved, it is appropriate for the matter to  be  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

  59. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be re-made is extensive. I find
      that it is appropriate in the circumstances to remit it.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. It is set aside and remitted  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for  a  fresh  decision  to  be  made  by
      another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 23 August 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





