
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2018                    |26th January 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            mr Mohammed Suhel Kha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Marrington, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15th July  1979.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom as  a
    partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   That  application
    was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  on  29th  July  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed under Article 8 and the appeal came before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Dearden sitting at Bradford  on  22nd  February
    2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  8th  March  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the
    Upper Tribunal on 30th March 2017.  On 7th  September  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  granted  permission  to  appeal.    Judge
    Chamberlain noted that the grounds asserted that the judge had erred in
    failing to make a clear finding on the credibility of the  Sponsor,  in
    taking into  account  relevant  factors,  namely  the  failure  of  the
    Appellant to apply for a visit visa in order to visit the  Sponsor  and
    in failing to consider relevant  factors,  namely  the  visits  by  the
    Sponsor to the Appellant, the medical evidence, the phone cards and the
    Sponsor's witness statement.  Judge Chamberlain considered that it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in her consideration of the  evidence
    and that she had failed to give reasons for why she attached no  weight
    to the Sponsor's evidence.  The judge appeared to have focused  on  the
    documents before her and had arguably not considered  the  evidence  in
    the round.  Judge Chamberlain considered it was arguable that the judge
    had taken into account irrelevant factors, in particular the fact  that
    the Appellant had not applied for a visit visa to come to  the  UK  and
    had made no reference to the visits made by  the  Sponsor  to  see  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent had refused the Appellant's  application  on
    one ground only, namely  the  genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of  the
    relationship and the judge's failure to give  proper  consideration  to
    the Sponsor's evidence in these circumstances was arguably an error  of
    law.

 2. On 13th October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It was submitted  therein  that  the  judge  had
    assessed the claim holistically and had taken into account all relevant
    factors.

 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    legal representative, Mr Marrington.  Mr Marrington  is  familiar  with
    this  matter.   He  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    understand he is the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.



Submission/Discussion

 4. It was pointed out to me at the outset  by  the  legal  representatives
    that the only Ground of Appeal is one  based  upon  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human  Rights.   Mr  Marrington  relies  on  the
    grounds put forward.  He accepts that the First-tier Judge is  entitled
    to make factual findings.  He submits that at paragraph  18  the  judge
    has taken into account all factors and has made  findings  against  the
    lack of a visit visa application.  He submits that this would have been
    a pointless exercise and is therefore irrelevant and that the judge had
    made findings paragraph 18(3) that the Appellant did not wish  to  come
    to the UK.

 5. Further at paragraph 18(5) of the judge's reasons he has said

         "The photographs could all have been  taken  during  the  Sponsor's
         visit between 15th July 2013 and 30th August 2013 for all  I  know,
         but the Sponsor seems unable or unwilling to give a date to any  of
         the photographs produced."

    In making this finding Mr Marrington submits that the judge  failed  to
    take into account  the  evidence  before  him  and  that  although  the
    photographs were not individually dated  on  the  instructions  of  the
    Appellant the  photographs  were  grouped  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    according to the year taken.  He submits that  the  general  principles
    set out in TK (Burundi) have been misapplied.

 6. Mr Bates relies on the Rule 24 response.  He submits that the  lack  of
    phone cards does not amount to a disagreement with the  application  of
    TK (Burundi).  He submits that the Sponsor may not be relying on  phone
    cards but if it come out in the hearing that one card existed by way of
    corroborative evidence then therefore the judge was entitled to make an
    adverse credibility finding.

 7. At paragraph 18(4) it had been accepted by the judge that  the  Sponsor
    had been to Bangladesh and that the Secretary of State  is  not  saying
    there should have been a later visit  visa  application  but  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor had been married for some three  and  a  half
    years and he had never made an application to visit his wife.

 8. Mr Marrington responds that the issue of the visit visa must be seen in
    context of the 2017 hearing, pointing out that the original refusal was
    in 2017 and most of the time has been taken up post-refusal.



The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. This case turns entirely under Article 8 as to whether or not there was
    a valid subsisting marriage.  The starting point for this  decision  is
    to look at paragraph 20 of the judge's decision where she has concluded



         "It would be very unusual for a husband and wife not to have family
         life together but for the reasons  given  above  I  simply  do  not
         accept that this couple do have family life together;  that  drives
         me to dismiss the appeal under Article 8.   The  first  two  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 27 questions are not satisfied.".

12. For the reasons given below I find there is no material  error  of  law
    and that the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  these  findings.   It  is
    contended by Mr Marrington on behalf of the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    that the judge has failed to give due and proper consideration  to  the
    fact that there have been visits by the Sponsor to Bangladesh  and  has
    put far too much emphasis on the failure of the  Appellant  to  make  a
    visit  visa  application  to  see  his  spouse.   With  respect  to  Mr
    Marrington that is actually not the case.  At paragraph 18(4) the judge
    has stated

         "I accept that the Sponsor has been to Bangladesh on two  occasions
         since the marriage".

    The judge has looked at all the evidence in the  round.   He  concluded
    that there was no cogent explanation as to why the  Appellant  has  not
    sought to make a visit to the UK and whilst appreciating  that  at  the
    date of refusal of the application the duration  of  the  marriage  was
    substantially less than it was at date of hearing, the judge  has  made
    findings which I am satisfied she was entitled to.  Further  the  judge
    has made findings with regard to the issue of the photographs that were
    produced.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  make  those  findings.   No
    evidence was produced as to when the photographs were taken and it  was
    open to the Sponsor to give oral evidence to the judge.  Further  there
    were no witness statements from any other family members and the  judge
    was not asking for any issues of intimate  knowledge.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take a view in the manner in which  she  did.   Whilst  the
    issue of phone cards is acknowledged by the legal representatives to be
    of limited relevance to this appeal the  judge  was  entitled  to  make
    findings that they were not detailed nor provided albeit that  that  in
    itself may not be determinative.

13. The judge was entitled to make the findings in the manner in which  she
    did looking at the matter in the round to make  an  assessment  of  the
    Sponsor's credibility.  Further reference is made to TK (Burundi).   In
    TK (Burundi) v the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal held that the failure of the  Appellant
    to produce supporting evidence that the Tribunal considered should have
    been readily available was a sustainable reason for not  accepting  the
    credibility of the overall account.  That  seems  to  be  part  of  the
    judge's reasoning in  this  case  and  reasoning  that  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to make.

14. This is a well constructed and well put together decision.   The  judge
    has quite properly at paragraph 19 assessed where the burden  of  proof
    lies and at paragraph 20 made findings she herself admits  are  unusual
    but based on the evidence and an assessment thereof which she has quite
    properly undertaken are findings that she was  entitled  to  make.   In
    such circumstances the decision contains no material error of  law  and
    the appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The Appellant's appeal is consequently dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 22nd January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 22nd January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


