


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/03324/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2018                     |On 20th September 2018     |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                  RAVINATHA CHATURANGA DESHAPRIYA NAOTUNNA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Uddin, instructed by York, solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Birk  promulgated  on  4  April  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 11 April 1986 and is a national of  Sri  Lanka.
The appellant arrived in the UK on 4 September 2019 as a  Tier  4  (General)
Student. He was granted successive periods of leave until 23 February  2016.
On 3 November 2015 he applied for further leave to remain in  the  UK.  That
application was refused by the respondent on 7 February 2017.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Birk ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  7  August  2018  Judge  Gibb
gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  was  refused  leave  on
      07/02/2017, and his appeal against removal was dismissed by  Judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Birk (promulgated on 04/04/2018)


      2. The grounds, which were in time, complaint that the Judge erred  in
      refusing to  adjourn  the  appeal  to  allow  the  appellant  and  his
      representatives to prepare and obtain evidence.


      3. The grounds are arguable. In refusing the adjournment the Judge, at
      [5], focuses on whether the appellant  should  have  been  capable  of
      preparing fully without legal assistance, and whether he  should  have
      appointed representatives earlier. As a result it is arguable that the
      Judge did not consider whether the refusal to  adjourn  would  deprive
      the appellant of a fair hearing, thus not addressing the fairness test
      (Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

The Hearing

5.(a) For the appellant, Mr Uddin moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that this appeal raised two questions

      1. Did the refusal of an application to adjourn deprive the  appellant
      of a fair hearing, and


      2.Was the appellant prevented form presenting material evidence to the
      tribunal

(b) Mr Uddin told me that the procedural history  set  out  in  [3]  of  the
decision is correct. He then took me to  [4]  of  the  decision.  There  the
Judge accepts the appellant  instructed  solicitors  two  weeks  before  the
hearing. The grounds of appeal narrated that the notice of hearing was  sent
three weeks before the date of hearing. He told me that  at  [5]  the  Judge
speculates that the appellant has had the benefit of legal advice.

(c) Mr Uddin drew my attention to the final sentence of  [5]  in  which  the
Judge concedes that the evidence  the  appellant  would  like  to  leave  is
relevant, and then took me to [20] of  the  decision  where,  in  the  final
sentence, the Judge appears to find that the financial  evidence  which  the
appellant  said  he  would  obtain  if  an  adjournment   was   granted   is
determinative of the appeal.

(d) Mr Uddin reminded me that Article 8 ECHR is the sole  ground  of  appeal
and told me that if  the  Judge  granted  the  application  to  adjourn  the
appellant would have  (i)  had  the  opportunity  to  produce  the  evidence
necessary for the proportionality assessment, and (ii) the  appellant  would
have had the benefit of legal representation.  He  urged  me  to  allow  the
appeal, to set the decision aside and to remit this case to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

6. (a) For the respondent Ms Willocks-Briscoe  told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain an error. She told me that  the  Judge's  decision  not  to
adjourn the case must be  viewed  against  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
application was refused under paragraph 322(1)  of  the  immigration  rules,
which is a mandatory refusal. She told me that the  appellant's  appeal  had
no realistic prospect of success anyway, and that the only  fair  course  of
action was to refuse the application to adjourn and reach a decision in  the
appellant's outstanding appeal.

(b) Ms Willocks-  Briscoe  relied  on  Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)
[2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC),  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  New  Rules  -  correct
approach)[2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72  and
Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014]  UKUT  00063  (IAC),  and
told me that article 8 is not a general dispensing power. She told  me  that
refusing the adjournment, in the particular circumstances of this case,  was
not unfair.

Analysis

7. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn  a
hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules  which
the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any  power  under
the Rules. It follows that they are  the  issues  to  be  considered  on  an
adjournment application. The overriding objective  is  to  deal  with  cases
fairly and justly.  This is defined as including


      (a) dealing with the case in  ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
      importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the  anticipated
      costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
      (b) avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
      proceedings;
      (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the parties are  able  to
      participate fully in the proceedings;
      (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively;
      (e) avoiding delay so far as compatible with proper  consideration  of
      the issues.

8. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  it  was  held
that if a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
to a fair hearing?

9. The Judge deals with the adjournment  request  at  [4]  and  [5]  of  the
decision.  The  Judge's  focus  appears  to  be  on   avoiding   delay.   No
consideration is given to the question of  fairness.  The  Judge's  decision
not to adjourn focuses on the procedural history of the  case.  At  [4]  the
Judge acknowledges that the appellant  has  instructed  solicitors  and  has
further evidence to produce, but the Judge's decision renders the  appellant
unrepresented and deprives him of an opportunity to produce  evidence  which
the Judge appears to regard at [20] of the decision as being central to  the
appellant's case.

10. I do not consider the merits of this case, I look only at  the  question
of fairness. The refusal of the application to adjourn put the appellant  in
a position where he had to represent himself  and  prevented  the  appellant
from producing evidence which he regarded as important. The  Judge  did  not
take guidance from Nwaigwe, and did not consider the question  of  fairness.
The manner in which the application to adjourn was dealt with is a  material
error of law.

11. I therefore find that the decision promulgated on 4 April 2018  contains
a  material  error  of  law,  because  the  proceedings  were   tainted   by
unfairness. I set the decision aside.

12. I cannot substitute my own decision because a new fact-finding  exercise
is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

16. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Birk.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  04  April  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 19 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

