
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2016                |On 18th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                           Mr. Benny Kayata Maiti
                        (NO ANONYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


An Anonymity Direction is NOT made. There has been no request and  there  is
no apparent need.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Parkview Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing  in  these  proceedings,
    for convenience, I will continue to refer to  the  parties  as  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Zambia born on 28 December 1978. He came
    to the United Kingdom as a student on 27  July  2004.  He  subsequently
    made a series of applications for further leave to remain as a student,
    some of which were in time and some were not. His last leave expired on
    19 March 2016.

 3. On 28th of April 2015 he made an application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of paragraph 276B of the  immigration  rules.  This
    provides as follows:

         The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are
         that:

         (i)(a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the United Kingdom.

         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
         it should be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain...

         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days
         or less will be disregarded...

 4. His application was refused on 17 July 2015.  The  reason  was  because
    there were periods in excess of 28 days when he was here without leave.



The First tier Tribunal

 5. His appeal was heard before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup  at
    Manchester on 7 April 2016. Both parties were represented.  Submissions
    were made to the judge about the length of time when the appellant  was
    not in the United Kingdom lawfully. An argument was advanced  upon  the
    Home Office policy guidance in relation to long residence  and  private
    life whereby decision-makers are to  have  regard  to  any  exceptional
    circumstances as to why the person overstayed more than  28  days.  The
    judge concluded that the respondent had  not  properly  exercised  this
    discretion and consequently, that the decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law. The appeal was allowed to this extent,  with  the  lawful
    decision awaited. Because of this conclusion the judge did not go on to
    consider the appellant's private and family life.

The Upper Tribunal

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis the appeal  was
    limited to human rights grounds. This was because the  application  was
    made on 28 April 2015 and the appeal was a `new' appeal under the  2014
    Immigration Act. Consequently the judge had no jurisdiction to consider
    whether the decision was otherwise in accordance with the law.  It  was
    also contended that the judge  was  incorrect  in  the  calculation  of
    lawful residence. Furthermore, the judge was  wrong  to  say  that  the
    respondent had not exercised her discretion and this was referred to in
    the refusal (see under `Discretion for breaks in lawful  residence'  in
    the Refusal letter).

 7. Leave was granted on this basis.

 8. At hearing, it was  accepted  by  both  parties  that  the  appeal  was
    restricted to human rights grounds.

 9. The appellant's representative sought  to  argue  that  the  First-tier
    decision could still be maintained on the basis of the slip rule as set
    out in Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT  00228.
    The Upper Tribunal there said that  the  slip  rule  contained  in  the
    procedural rules is aimed at clerical mistakes and accidental slips. It
    cannot be used to reverse  the  material  effect  of  a  decision.  The
    appellant's  representative  contended  the  issue  with  the   present
    decision could be resolved if at paragraph 28 `I find that the decision
    of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  its  own  policy
    guidance (my emphasis) ...' were  read as `not in accordance  with  the
    law '.

10. I find the  submission  from  the  appellant's  representative  is  not
    correct. What he is suggesting goes beyond  correcting  and  accidental
    error such as a typo where the meaning is clear. What he would  propose
    means a complete change in the underlying issue. This  is  exactly  the
    point made in Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's general powers) [2016]  UKUT
    00228.

11. At paragraph 6 of the decision  the  judge  appreciated  the  statutory
    changes to rights of appeal but the conclusion that there  was  a  full
    right of appeal against the immigration and human  rights  aspects  was
    incorrect. Consequently the judge materially erred in law. The error is
    fundamental and the decision cannot stand.

12. I direct that the matter be remitted to the Erst-tier Tribunal for a de
    novo hearing. At that hearing the periods of  time  the  appellant  has
    spent lawfully and unlawfully will be relevant in the assessment of his
    private life and the provisions of section 117.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Pickup allowing the appeal to  the  limited
extent expressed materially errs in law. That decision is set aside and  the
matter remitted for a de novo hearing before the first-tier Tribunal.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



Directions.

      1. The decision of First tier Judge Pickup is set aside as  materially
         erring in law.

      2. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
         hearing.

      3. The appeal is limited to consideration of whether the  decision  is
         unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

      4. In preparing for the appeal the appellant and  his  representatives
         should seek to provide evidence in relation to his private and  any
         family life here.

      5. An assessment of his human rights claim would  involve  looking  at
         his situation through the prism of the relevant  immigration  rules
         and policy. (See for e.g., Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)
         [2015] UKUT 00112 and Kaur (visit appeals: Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT
         00487. A schedule of times when  he  was  lawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom and times when he was here unlawfully  should  be  prepared
         with explanations given for periods of unlawful presence.

      6. If there is a need for an interpreter for any of the witnesses  the
         appellant's representatives should advise the tribunal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

