
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03928/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2020                      |On 22 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MEHAK MEHAK
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 15 October 1990  and  is  a  female
    citizen of India. Her human rights claim was refused by the  respondent
    by decision dated 19 February 2019; the  appellant  is  subject  to  an
    automatic deportation order having been, on 22 November 2013, sentenced
    at the Crown Court, Canterbury  to  a  period  of  imprisonment  of  12
    months. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  15  January  2020,  allowed  the  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This appeal has been subject to the Covid-19 provisions  instituted  in
    the Upper Tribunal in March 2020. Directions were  issued  on  3  April
    2020, the Upper Tribunal having taken  the  provisional  view  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine matters error  of  law/setting  aside
    First-tier  Tribunal  decision  without  hearing.  Both  parties   have
    responded to those directions and the appeal is been put before me  for
    determination or further directions.

 3. In my view and having careful regard to the written representations  of
    both parties, I have concluded that it is appropriate to determine  the
    matters referred to above without a hearing. First,  in  my  view,  the
    errors in the First-tier Tribunal decision are so serious  and  obvious
    that the setting aside of the decision is the only possible  course  of
    action. Secondly, counsel for the  appellant  in  her  helpful  written
    submissions, acknowledges [7] that the correct  legal  tests  were  not
    applied by the judge when assessing whether and, if so, how Exception 2
    of section 177C(5)  of  the  2002  Act  applied  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant. The argument advanced by the appellant that  the  judge  did
    not fall into error by failing to follow the principles  of  two  Upper
    Tribunal authorities because  these  post-dated  his  decision  has  no
    merit. The Upper Tribunal decisions did not seek to alter the  existing
    law but only to clarify its proper meaning. Therefore,  the  judge  did
    fall into error by failing to follow those principles. Thirdly, at  the
    end  of  her  submissions,  counsel   for   the   appellant,   possibly
    anticipating that the decision would be set aside,  proposes  that,  if
    that course of action is followed, the appeal should be returned to the
    First-tier Tribunal and the decision made de novo. For reasons I  shall
    get below, that is the course of action which I do intend to follow.

 4. I find that the judge fell into error for the following reasons. First,
    I agree with the respondent that is not open to the judge to go  behind
    the reasoning and decision of the sentencing judge in the Crown  Court.
    At [75], the judge appears to take  into  account  mitigation  for  the
    criminal offence which the Crown Court judge had failed or  chosen  not
    to consider. However, the judge goes further  than  that  and  descends
    into  a  discussion  of  the  probable  motivation  for  the  appellant
    offending (' unhappy  circumstances...',  'Extreme  emotional  pressure
    having been the subject matter  of  an  abusive  relationship...')  and
    appears to criticise the Crown Court judge  for  having  sentenced  the
    appellant without the benefit of a pre-sentence report. The  impression
    left by the judge's comments is that, had the Crown Court judge had the
    benefit of a report and had he taken to account the difficulties  which
    the appellant had been experiencing at the  time  of  the  offence,  he
    would not have sentenced the appellant to  such  a  lengthy  period  of
    imprisonment. The judge has gone beyond his duty to take account of all
    the circumstances by trespassing  upon  matters  which  were  the  sole
    concern of the Crown Court.

 5. Secondly, whilst the judge's decision is  long  on  lengthy  quotations
    from caselaw, the reasoning which appears under the  heading  'Findings
    and Conclusions' is brief and consists to a large extent of  assertions
    unsupported by any detailed reasoning. Much of the reasoning which  has
    been provided is legally flawed. At [82], the judge finds that it would
    be 'an unduly harsh result on the children [for  the  appellant  to  be
    deported] given the nature of the offence committed in the  appellant's
    previous good character.' It is not clear why nature of the offence and
    their mother's character should render the effect  of  her  deportation
    unduly harsh upon her  children.  Further,  the  judge  concludes  that
    paragraph with the simple statement, 'I considered the  best  interests
    of the children.' Absolutely no particulars of that consideration  have
    been provided. Further, at [84], I agree with the respondent  that  the
    mere fact that the appellant's children are British citizens  has  been
    central to her concluding that it would be unduly harsh for them to  be
    expected live in India. The Upper  Tribunal  found  in  Patel  (British
    citizen child - deportation) [2020] UKUT 45 (IAC) that 'nationality (in
    the form of British citizenship) is a relevant  factor  when  assessing
    whether the 'unduly harsh' requirements of  section  117C(5)  are  met.
    However, it is not necessarily a weighty factor;  all  depends  on  the
    facts...The possession of British citizenship by a child  with  whom  a
    person (P) has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship does  not
    mean that P is exempted from the  'unduly  harsh'  requirements.  Even
    though the child may be British, it has to be unduly harsh both for him
    or her to leave with P or to stay without P; not just harsh. Thus, some
    substantial interference with the rights  and  expectations  that  come
    with being British is  possible,  without  the  position  becoming  one
    of undue harshness to the child.'

 6. I find that the decision of the  judge  is  seriously  flawed  for  the
    reasons which I have given above. However,  whilst  I  acknowledge  the
    respondent's comments regarding the largely uncontroversial  nature  of
    the appellant's evidence, I do consider it necessary for the appeal  to
    be returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  particular,  the  judges
    intrusion upon matters which were solely the concern of the Crown Court
    and which, in turn, has undermined a proper assessment of the  relevant
    evidence  make it appropriate that the fact-finding exercise should  be
    conducted again and that exercise is better conducted in the First-tier
    Tribunal than in the Upper Tribunal.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The decision will be remade in the First-
    tier Tribunal following a hearing de novo.




    Signed                              Date 13 July 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
