
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/04257/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On:14 March 2018                  |                  On: 09 April 2018      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                          miss selbi Guchgeldiyeva
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, counsel (instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Turkmenistan, born on 11 November 1998.
      She  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision dated 1 February 2016 refusing her human  rights
      claim.

   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 13 June  2015  as  a  visitor.  She
      applied for leave to remain during the currency  of  her  leave  based
      upon paragraph 298 of the  Immigration  Rules.  Her  mother,  who  has
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK, was her sponsor [2].

   3. Judge Norton-Taylor noted  that  the  only  ground  available  to  the
      appellant was  that  the  respondent's  decision  breached  her  human
      rights. He referred to the respective bundles of evidence  before  him
      which he set out at [8-9].

   4. He found that the appellant had failed to show that  the  sponsor  has
      had sole responsibility for her upbringing[27]. He had regard  to  the
      decision in  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e))  "Sole  responsibility"  Yemen
      [2006] UKAIT 00049.

   5. He found that between 2000 and 2009 the appellant's parents had shared
      responsibility for her upbringing [31]. The sponsor left  Turkmenistan
      for the UK in 2009. The appellant went to live with her father [32].

   6. He had regard to two letters from the appellant's father. In his first
      letter dated 8 September 2015 he stated  that  since  the  appellant's
      mother left the country, he has  continued  to  cover  her  costs  and
      "maintained custody" of  her,  taking  over  the  main  decisions  and
      representing her at school. The appellant  accepted  during  her  oral
      evidence that key  decisions  had  been  made  by  both  parents.  The
      evidence fits in with what the sponsor said in her  witness  statement
      and also the contents of the first letter [34].

   7. Despite submissions to the contrary, he found that the first letter is
      reliable  as  to  the  contents.  It  was  clearly  written  with  the
      appellant's latest application in mind. This was a letter  in  support
      of the application, 'candidly written' [36].

   8. He noted that at some point the appellant left her father's house  and
      went to live with her maternal grandmother. Her father stated that she
      moved out some six months prior to the writing the letter in September
      2015. The appellant confirmed  that  she  had  been  living  with  her
      grandmother  for  a  few  months  before  arriving  in  the  UK.  That
      contrasted with the sponsor's evidence  which  changed  from  being  a
      period of one year to that of eight months during the  course  of  her
      oral  evidence  [39].   During  the  period  of   residence   at   the
      grandmother's  house,  shared  responsibility  continued.  Her  father
      continued "as her guardian" [40].

   9. Judge Norton-Taylor stated that he is 'willing' to accept that it  was
      the sponsor's idea for the appellant to come to the UK [41]. He  found
      that her father had been on assignment in Turkey and was likely to  be
      based there until autumn. He has worked abroad in the  past  and  this
      has not prevented him from  maintaining  shared  responsibility  [42].
      The father had not abdicated  all  responsibility  for  the  appellant
      since her arrival in the UK. He had  regard  to  the  father's  second
      letter dated 20 May 2017.

  10. It struck him that the letter was written at the behest of the sponsor
      who sought to downplay his involvement in the appellant's life and  to
      resile from what he said in the first letter. He did not  accept  that
      there has been an absence of communications, nor that  the  father  is
      now entirely "disinterested" in the appellant's upbringing [44].

  11. He found that shared responsibility has continued whilst the appellant
      has been in the UK, albeit that the  division  of  the  responsibility
      shifted towards the sponsor [45].

  12. He accordingly found that the sponsor had not, and does not, have sole
      responsibility for the appellant's upbringing. Paragraph 298(i) of the
      Rules cannot be satisfied [52].

  13. He had regard to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules as  "time  fixed".  The
      appellant had not been in the UK for seven years. She could  therefore
      not rely on paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv). As she was under 18 at the  date
      of the application, she could not rely on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) [53]

  14. He considered the claim under  Article  8,  taking  into  account  the
      factors set out in s.117B of the 2002 Act. The  appellant  is  now  an
      adult  but  this  did  not  mean  that  the   family   is   "cut   off
      automatically." He found that there is family life with her mother and
      younger sister. The appellant also has private life based  in  the  UK
      over the last two years [59-60].

  15. He considered the proportionality of the decision from [69]. Returning
      to the country would involve a degree of upset and difficulty in terms
      of re-establishing herself there. He considered the country  situation
      in  Turkmenistan.  He  had  regard  to  the  2017  US  Commission   on
      International Religious Freedom indicating that the government holds a
      tight grip on society. Of particular relevance is  the  2016  religion
      law which, it is said, prohibits the  wearing  of  religious  garb  in
      public except by clerics. There is nothing further on how or  if  this
      law is enforced or what the implications of non-observance  might  be.
      [70]

  16. He noted at [71] that the appellant has been wearing a hijab for about
      18 months. On the face of it the law in Turkmenistan would  appear  to
      interfere with her wish to wear religious clothing in public [71].

  17. At [74] he took into account  the  appellant's  re-establishment  into
      Turkmenistan. He found that  she  is  a  healthy  individual  who  has
      benefited from aspects of the  UK  educational  system.  There  is  no
      evidence that  women  cannot  obtain  employment  or  go  into  higher
      education in Turkmenistan. She would continue to receive financial and
      emotional support from her mother, at least in respect of funding  and
      from her father as well. She has not been in the UK for very long. She
      could  go  and  live  with  her  grandmother  in  a  stable   domestic
      environment. The appellant's exams will now have finished  removing  a
      possible objection to having to leave "at this moment in time" [74].

  18. He  had  regard  to  the  "religious  clothing  issue."  There  is  no
      protection claim before him. Nor did counsel who appeared for her rely
      on Article 9. There is no evidence as to how, or whether, the  law  is
      actually enforced. There is  no  persecution  there  and  insufficient
      evidence to show a flagrant denial of religious freedoms. He concluded
      that the appellant could either wear the hijab  in  public  and  there
      would on the evidence  before  him  be  no  significant  consequences.
      Alternatively she could choose not to wear  it  and  comply  with  the
      letter of the law [75].

  19. He rejected the submission  raised  about  the  possibility  that  the
      appellant might not be permitted to leave Turkmenistan in  the  future
      [76].

      Permission to appeal

  20. On 31 December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted the  appellant
      permission to appeal. She  saw  no  merit  in  the  grounds  that  the
      appellant's mother did not have sole responsibility for her. That  was
      soundly reasoned and based on the evidence.

  21. However, she found that there is merit in the ground  that  the  Judge
      failed to consider specifically section 55 or the  best  interests  of
      the appellant who was a minor at the date of the decision.

  22. Mr Briddock who did not represent the appellant at the hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal, accepted at the outset, that as at  the  date
      of hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant had been over
      18 years of age and thus was no longer a child. Accordingly there  was
      no error of law on that discrete ground.

  23. Mr Briddock did however seek to  rely  on  ground  4  of  the  grounds
      seeking permission where it was contended that  the  Judge  failed  to
      correctly address the appellant's rights under Article 8 and failed to
      apply the correct criteria "for the same."

  24. He submitted  that  although  the  appellant  had  not  been  able  to
      "technically" rely on paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi), the Rules  constitute
      the prism through which the Article 8 claim should be considered.

  25. He noted that at [64] the Judge took into account the  fact  that  the
      appellant was unable to meet the Rules as they bear on Article  8.  He
      submitted that the Judge should have looked at Article 8  through  the
      prism of the Rules. There was no consideration  as  to  whether  there
      would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   her   integration   into
      Turkmenistan. In the proportionality assessment he  did  not  consider
      this at all.

  26. Mr Briddock submitted that the main reasons why it  was  claimed  that
      there would be very significant obstacles is because of the  issue  of
      wearing the hijab. He accepted that  this  is  'straying  into  asylum
      law'. However, a person cannot be expected to change the way they are.
      He submitted that the findings at [75] constitute a significant error.
      The Judge should have assessed her  evidence  in  considering  whether
      there were significant obstacles that she faced if returned. There was
      evidence that she would not be able to wear that clothing.

  27. Mr Briddock also referred to ground 3 where it was contended that  the
      Judge  erred  in  failing  to  apply  the  correct   test   for   sole
      responsibility. He submitted that as noted in ground 2 the Judge  made
      various assumptions about the appellant's father without any  kind  of
      evidence substantiating  the  assumption  which  led  to  "a  perverse
      decision". The grounds were thus connected.

  28. Mr Briddock referred to the  findings  at  [36]  regarding  the  first
      letter, namely, that it was a letter in support  of  the  application,
      candidly written and that it was improbable that  he  was  unaware  of
      what he was writing or what the purpose of his letter  was  aimed  at.
      That, he submitted was a  "bare  assertion."   Moreover,  the  Judge's
      findings at [42] amount to "pure speculation." These constitute errors
      of law.

  29. On behalf of the respondent Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant  has
      not been granted permission beyond the s.55 issue. In any  event  they
      were nowhere identified in the grounds. The generic challenge does not
      encompass the assertion in respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
      Rules.

  30. Further, it was not even in the notice of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal contained in his letter from Lighthouse Solicitors  dated  14
      February 2016. Although there  was  a  s.120  notice,  there  were  no
      consequent variations, amendments or enlargement of the grounds.

  31. Mr Kotas referred to the manner in which  the  case  was  put  at  the
      hearing. At [23] it was simply asserted that the  appellant,  being  a
      religious  person,  would  find  it  difficult  to  re-integrate  into
      Turkmenistan society.

  32.  With regard to the contention that the Judge did  not  properly  deal
      with  the  issue  of  very  significant  obstacles   under   paragraph
      276(1)(vi) Mr Kotas submitted that the findings  at  [74]  have  never
      been  challenged  and  this  contention  cannot   "prosper"   in   the
      circumstances.

  33. He submitted that the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  the
      appellant had arrived on a visit visa in the summer  of  2015.  Before
      that, her life had been spent in Turkmenistan. That is the context  in
      which the human rights claim had to be assessed. There  have  been  no
      specific challenges to the findings of  fact  at  [30-33].  The  first
      letter from the appellant's father stated that during the  appellant's
      stay with her grandmother he  maintained  custody  of  her  since  the
      sponsor  left  the  country.   That  "destroys  her  case"   on   sole
      responsibility.

  34. The submissions advanced by Mr Briddock amount to a mere  disagreement
      with the decision and the findings at [36].

  35. Nor was there any challenge to the Judge's findings of fact  at  [43],
      that her father had not abdicated all responsibility for the appellant
      since her  arrival  in  the  UK.  His  finding  at  [45]  that  shared
      responsibility continued whilst the appellant  has  been  in  the  UK,
      albeit that the division of responsibility  has  shifted  towards  the
      sponsor, is sustainable and rational.

  36. With regard to the issue of  the  hijab,  Mr  Kotas  referred  to  the
      decision of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. Lord Justice  Sales  in
      considering a foreign criminal's "integration" into the country  where
      he is to be deported, stated at [14] that the idea "integration" calls
      for a  broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to  whether  the
      individual will be enough of a insider in terms of  understanding  how
      life in the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity
      to participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
      accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in  that
      society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety  of  human
      relationships to give substance to the individual's private or  family
      life.

  37. Mr Kotas submitted that the suggestion that the appellant would not be
      able to operate on a day to day basis is misconceived. The  Judge  did
      have proper regard to the relevant 2016 Religion Law [70].  There  has
      been no reliance on Article 9 of the Human Rights Convention. There is
      no evidence as to how, or if, the law is actually enforced [75].

  38. In the circumstances the findings at  [75]  that  there  would  be  no
      significant consequences on the evidence is a rational.

  39. In reply Mr Briddock submitted  that  not  every  point  needs  to  be
      raised. The arguments put forward  can  accordingly  be  raised  under
      ground 4.

  40. The Judge was aware of paragraph 276ADE(vi) at [52-55]. However he did
      not consider them. The challenges that are now made are in respect  of
      errors of law.  The Judge did  not  consider  the  hijab  in  a  broad
      evaluative judgment. There has been no conflation  between  an  asylum
      and private life claim in this respect. The issue of the  hijab  is  a
      relevant factor under private life.

  41. He referred to the US Commission on International  Religious  Freedom:
      Annual Report 2017 at pages 65-67 of the appellant's bundle.  The  law
      is  enforced.  There  accordingly  was  evidence  which  goes  to  the
      appellant's private life claim.

      Assessment

  42. Judge Martin granted the appellant permission to appeal on  the  basis
      that the Judge did not  specifically  consider  s.55  in  the  appeal.
      However, as noted, the appellant was over 18 years of age at the  date
      of hearing. Accordingly, it is accepted by the parties that there  has
      been no error of law in that respect.

  43. Mr Briddock has however  contended,  albeit  without  permission  from
      Judge Martin, that there are various findings by the Judge with regard
      to the sole responsibility issue that simply amount to  assertions  by
      the  Judge.  This  includes  the  underlying   assumptions   for   his
      conclusions set out at [41-44].

  44. However, I find that the Judge has properly  taken  into  account  the
      evidence as a whole relating to  sole  responsibility  and  has  given
      sustainable reasons for his findings that  shared  responsibility  has
      continued even whilst the appellant has been in the UK, albeit that it
      has shifted towards the sponsor. He  has  had  proper  regard  to  the
      decision in TD (Yemen), supra.

  45. The current submissions amount to a  disagreement  of  those  findings
      which are neither irrational nor perverse as claimed in ground  2.   I
      agree with Judge Martin that there is no merit in the grounds relating
      to the conclusion that  the  appellant's  mother  did  not  have  sole
      responsibility.

  46. Mr Briddock also contends that the Judge failed to  properly  evaluate
      the Article 8 claim through the prism of the Rules. In particular,  he
      failed to make a proper evaluative  assessment  as  to  whether  there
      would be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration
      into Turkmenistan. The Judge did not properly grapple with  the  issue
      raised by the appellant concerning the wearing of a hijab.

  47. I find that the Judge properly followed the  Razgar  steps.  He  found
      that the appellant has family life with her mother and younger sister.
      She has also established a private life in the UK over  the  last  two
      years or so. He took into account the factors under s.117B(1)  of  the
      2002 Act.

  48.  He  has  set  out  the  factors  both  in  the  appellant's  and  the
      respondent's favour from [63] onwards. He acknowledged that  returning
      her to the country would involve a degree of difficulty in terms of re-
      establishing herself.

  49. The Judge has had regard to the conclusions and  observations  of  the
      Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at [56-60].  The  consequences
      of removal would need to be shown to be very significant [72].

  50. He had express regard to the  country  situation  in  Turkmenistan  at
      [70]. The appellant claimed to have been wearing a hijab for about  18
      months now. He considered that this would appear to interfere with her
      wish to wear religious clothing in public having regard  to  the  2016
      religion law [70-71].

  51. Mr Briddock submitted that the finding at [75] amounted to  an  error.
      This is particularly  so  with  regard  to  his  conclusion  that  the
      appellant could either wear the hijab in public and there would be  no
      significant consequences for her, or in  the  alternative,  she  could
      choose not to wear it in public, thus complying with the letter of the
      law. He submitted that evidence produced in the report to which I have
      referred indicates that there is a prohibition  on  wearing  religious
      garb in public except by clerics.

  52. I note in the report referred to  in  the  annual  report  of  the  US
      Commission on international Religious Freedom, at page  67,  regarding
      punishment for religious activities" that unregistered and  registered
      religious groups face frequent raids by the  secret  police,  ordinary
      police (especially from anti terrorism  and  organised  crime  units),
      local officials and local CWRO officials. The government continues  to
      hand down harsh  penalties  such  as  imprisonment,  involuntary  drug
      treatment and torture,  for  religious  activities  and  human  rights
      advocacy, including for religious freedom. In  recent  years  Muslims,
      Protestants  and  Jehovah's  Witnesses  have  been  detained,   fined,
      imprisoned  or  internally  exiled  for  their  religious  beliefs  or
      activities.

  53. There is however no  indication  in  the  report  of  any  prosecution
      arising out of the prohibition on wearing religious garb in public. As
      noted by the Judge there is no evidence as to how or whether  the  law
      is actually enforced.

  54. The Judge noted that no protection claim had been placed  before  him.
      Nor was Article 9 relied on. There was thus insufficient  evidence  to
      show a flagrant denial of religious freedoms [75].

  55. In her statement relied on before the First-tier Tribunal dated 19 May
      2017 the appellant did not even raise the issue of wearing a hijab.

  56. The Judge had regard at [74] to the  appellant's  re-integration  into
      Turkmenistan. He found that she is healthy; she has benefited from the
      UK educational system; there is no suggestion that women cannot obtain
      employment or go into higher education there. She  would  continue  to
      receive support, both financial and emotional, from her mother and  at
      least funding from her father. Nor had she been in  the  UK  for  very
      long. She could go on  to  live  with  her  grandmother  in  a  stable
      environment without having to care for her. This arrangement could  be
      short, medium or longer term. The appellant's examinations  will  have
      now been 'finished'.

  57. Those are sustainable  findings  based  on  the  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal.

      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 30 March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

