
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04244/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                         MR MD RASHADUL HASSAN RAZU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Malik, Kuddus Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    August 2006 as a student with leave to enter until 31st  October  2009.
    He was granted further leave to remain as a student until 29th February
    2012.  On 27th August  2011,  the  appellant  was  married  to  an  EEA
    national in a proxy marriage in Ghana, and on 29th August 2012  he  was
    granted an EEA Residence Card.  The appellant separated from  his  wife
    in March 2015.  On 22nd June 2017 he made an application for indefinite
    leave to remain  in  the  UK.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent for the reasons set out in a  decision  dated  25th  January
    2018.  The appellant's appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by
    FtT Judge Kaler for the reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on
    26th March 2019. It is that decision that is the subject of the  appeal
    before us.


 2. The appellant accepts that he does not qualify for a right to reside in
    the UK under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.   He
    also accepts that he cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on family life grounds, as set out in Appendix  FM  of
    the immigration rules.  The appellant relies upon the private life that
    he has established in the UK.


 3. The evidence received by the Tribunal from the appellant is recorded at
    paragraph [5] of the Judge's decision:


         "... He said his marriage fell apart and he was to blame for  that;
         he had behaved badly by drinking alcohol and taking drugs.  He  not
         (sic) applied for a divorce as he had hoped to reconcile  with  his
         wife but it was too late. He confirmed  that  he  had  parents  and
         siblings in Bangladesh. His parents lived in their own  home,  were
         aged over 60 and his father,  who  used  to  work  for  the  United
         Nations, has retired. He did not want to be a burden upon them.  He
         had no experience of working in Bangladesh  and  he  did  not  have
         enough money to set up his own business. He had not been there  for
         12 years. He would find it difficult to get a  job  and  Bangladesh
         had a high crime rate. He had a diploma in Business  Administration
         and he was managing the restaurant where he was currently  working.
         He relies on the private life he has established in the UK.


 4. At paragraphs [9] and [10] of the decision, the  FtT  Judge  summarises
    the claim as follows:


         "9.  The facts are that the appellant has been in the UK since 2009
         and has not returned to Bangladesh since. He has always  been  here
         with leave, although it has not been  shown  that  his  spouse  was
         exercising treaty rights since 2011, when the couple married.  They
         separated in 2015 and so only lived together for 4 years  at  most.
         Leave was not curtailed and the circumstances were not drawn to the
         attention of the respondent.


         10.   The  appellant  has  not  established  family  life.  He  has
         established private life; he works. I do not know of  any  property
         or  assets  that  he  owns.  He   talks   about   his   "meaningful
         relationships" here but provides no details of them.  He  does  not
         have a partner or children. I accept he probably  has  friends  and
         work colleagues."


 5. At paragraph [11], the FtT Judge sets out paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    immigration rules and at paragraph [12], she states;  "The  application
    does not meet the requirements  of  sub  paragraphs  (iii)  -(v).   The
    Appellant  argues  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to   his
    integration back to India.".


 6. The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge are set out at paragraphs
    [13] to [21] of the decision.  Having considered the evidence, the  FtT
    Judge found, at [15], that "There are no "very significant obstacles to
    the applicant's integration" to  Bangladesh.   The  conditions  in  the
    immigration rules have not been met.".   Having  established  that  the
    appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the
    immigration rules, the Judge addressed the Article 8 claim outside  the
    rules.  The Judge found that the appellant has established some form of
    private life.  In considering whether the decision to refuse  leave  to
    remain is proportionate,  the  FtT  Judge  had  regard  to  the  public
    interest  considerations  set  out  in  s117B   of   The   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  concluded,  at  [21],  that  the
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 7. The appellant claims that the FtT Judge made factual  errors  that  are
    fundamental, and overlooked important evidence relevant to the question
    of whether there are "very significant obstacles"  to  his  integration
    back to Bangladesh.   The  appellant  identifies  two  factual  errors.
    First, at paragraph [12] of the decision, the Judge proceeds  upon  the
    premise that the appellant claims there are very significant  obstacles
    to his integration back to "India", when in fact, the  appellant  is  a
    national of Bangladesh.  Second, at paragraphs [2] and [9],  the  Judge
    refers to the appellant having been in the UK since 2009, when in fact,
    the appellant entered the UK in August 2006. The appellant claims  that
    in reaching the decision, the  FtT  Judge  overlooked  the  appellant's
    evidence that his mother is a housewife, and his father is retired.  He
    claims that the Judge also overlooked the evidence  that  his  parents'
    only source of income is from state pensions, which is barely enough to
    cover their own expenses, and failed to  take  into  account  the  very
    limited contact that the appellant has with his family in Bangladesh.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Hollingworth on 21st  May
    2019.  The matter comes before us to determine whether the decision  of
    the FtT Judge contains a material error of law, and if  so,  to  remake
    the decision.


 9. At the conclusion of the hearing before us we informed the parties that
    we are not satisfied that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the FtT Judge, and that we dismiss the appeal. We  informed
    the parties that our written reasons for doing so will follow.  We  now
    provide our reasons.


10. Taking his lead from the observations made by  FtT  Judge  Hollingworth
    when permission to appeal was granted, Mr  Malik  submits  that  it  is
    unclear whether the Judge has exclusively considered  the  totality  of
    the factors relevant to integration in Bangladesh, in contradistinction
    to any factors appertaining  to  integration  in  India,  and  that  in
    reaching his decision, the FtT Judge has not taken full account of  the
    chronology.  Mr Malik submits that the  FtT  Judge  proceeds  upon  the
    premise that the appellant has established a private life  in  the  UK,
    over a period of almost  10  years,  since  August  2009,  whereas  the
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom and established a private life
    over a period of almost 13 years.


11. Although it is right to note that the FtT Judge  refers,  at  paragraph
    [12], to  the  appellant  claiming  that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration to India, there is no doubt in our minds
    that the Judge  addressed  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the applicant's integration into  Bangladesh.   Throughout
    the decision, at paragraphs [2], [5], [6], [9], [13],  and  [14],  when
    referring to the background facts, the evidence, and  the  submissions,
    the FtT Judge refers to "Bangladesh".  The summary of  the  appellant's
    claim as set out in paragraph [5] of the decision correctly  refers  to
    the connections that the appellant has to  Bangladesh.  Importantly  in
    her final analysis, at paragraph [15], the Judge states "There  are  no
    "very  significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's   integration"   to
    Bangladesh...".  The reference in paragraph [12] to "India", is in  our
    judgement, immaterial.


12. Similarly, the reference by the Judge to the appellant having  been  in
    the  UK  since  2009,  is  in  our  judgement,  immaterial.   Paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the rules recognises the significant private life that  an
    individual who has continuously lived in the UK for at least  20  years
    (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment),   is   likely   to   have
    established. There is no doubt here that on any view,  the  requirement
    at paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) cannot be met by the appellant.  The  focus
    under 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules that is relied upon by the  appellant,
    is whether there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Bangladesh if he is required to leave the UK.  Whether
    the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2006 or 2009,  does  not
    assist in the determination of that issue. It was open to the FtT Judge
    to conclude, having considered all of the evidence, that there  are  no
    very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's   integration   to
    Bangladesh.


13. The claim made by the appellant that the FtT Judge overlooked important
    evidence is simply not borne out by a careful reading  of  the  Judge's
    decision.  At paragraph [5] of the decision, the Judge  refers  to  the
    appellant's parents and siblings in  Bangladesh,  and  noted  that  the
    appellant's parents are aged over  60,  and  that  his  father  is  now
    retired. The Judge clearly considered the appellant's claim that he has
    no experience of working in Bangladesh, and  he  did  not  have  enough
    money to set up his own business. The Judge noted that the appellant is
    in contact with his family in Bangladesh. Mr  Malik  submits  that  the
    appellant only speaks to his sister very occasionally.  That cannot  in
    any way undermine the finding by the FtT Judge that the  appellant  has
    family in Bangladesh. In any event, that submission is contrary to  the
    information provided by the  appellant's  solicitors  in  the  covering
    letter, dated 22 June 2017, to the application. In that  letter  it  is
    said that their client "... does not have much family  support  network
    or friends in Bangladesh other than his parents and sister.".


14. It is now well established that the obligation on a Tribunal is to give
    reasons in sufficient detail  to  show  the  principles  on  which  the
    Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
    reasons need not be  elaborate,  and  do  not  need  to  address  every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision. If  a  Tribunal
    has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there  are  grounds  on
    which the argument could properly have  been  rejected,  it  should  be
    assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds. It is sufficient  that
    the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


15. It is clear in our judgement that the FtT Judge considered the  private
    life claim advanced by the appellant. It is difficult to  identify  any
    exceptional circumstances capable of establishing a breach  of  Article
    8, where the Judge has properly found  that  the  requirements  of  the
    rules  cannot  be  met  by  the  appellant.  The  Judge  rejected   the
    appellant's claim for the reasons set out in the decision, and  in  our
    judgement it was open to her to do so. The claim  that  the  FtT  Judge
    overlooked material evidence is nothing more than a  disagreement  with
    findings that were properly made, and open to the Judge.


16. It follows that in our judgment, the decision of the FtT Judge  is  not
    infected by a material error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


17. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT Judge Kaler stands.






    Signed                                  Date          5th July 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


We have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.

