
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04050/2016
     HU/04046/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2018                            |On 9th May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              mr Dhanendra Rana
                             miss Samundra Rana
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jaja of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  Appellants  born  on  4th  March  1982  and  5th  February   1975
    respectively are both nationals of Nepal and are related as brother and
    sister.  They appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  15th
    January 2016 to refuse to grant them entry clearance as the  dependants
    of a former Gurkha soldier.

 2. Their appeal had been heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mace
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 16th November  2017.   He  had  allowed  the
    appeals on human rights grounds.

 3. The Respondent had made  application  for  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision on 3rd January 2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boyes on  6th  February  2018  on  the
    basis it was arguable that the judge had  reached  conclusions  outwith
    any evidential basis.



Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Duffy submitted in terms of the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  had  been
    advanced by the Respondent  and  said  that  this  was  essentially  an
    extension of family life beyond a normal point.



Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. It was said that when looking at the  case  of  Rai  that  it  was  not
    essential that the parties should be living in  the  same  country  for
    family life to be applicable.  The judge had to  some  extent  followed
    the previous judge's decision that there was family life  applying  the
    principles of Devaseelan.   It  was  submitted  that  family  life  was
    enduring at the time the Sponsor left Nepal and had endured beyond  and
    to that extent the judge had followed the guidance in  Rai  that  there
    was family life prior to the parents leaving and that family life still
    endures.  It was further said that this was a case  where  the  Sponsor
    had demonstrated that he had made application as soon as possible.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the submissions in
    evidence.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.



Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had recognised that there had been a  previous  appeal  which
    had been dismissed.  He correctly applied the principles in  Devaseelan
    and regarded those findings made by the judge on the earlier appeal  as
    his starting point.  He correctly noted that in terms of Gurkha  cases,
    that appeal had been based on the interpretation of the law as it  then
    stood.  He provided at paragraph 20 his reasons for departing from that
    starting point given the changes in the law and case law.  That  was  a
    decision that he was entitled to make.

 8. Both Appellants are adult dependent children.  They did not fall within
    Annex K.  The judge had correctly looked at the existence and  strength
    of any family life.   He  had  considered  amongst  other  matters  the
    following:

   a) The Sponsor Gurkha father had made application for the  Appellants  to
      join him in 2007 together with his wife.  That was  shortly  after  he
      had arrived in the UK.  He had pursued an appeal in  that  matter  and
      had then made a further appeal in 2010.




   b)  The Appellants have been financially dependent upon him  their  whole
      life.  Firstly, he having funded their education including  continuing
      further education and secondly continuous  financial  support  to  the
      current time by remittances from his pension.

   c) There had been evidence of the financial ongoing support  provided  to
      the judge.




   d) There was evidence of frequent visits to Nepal to visit the Appellant.






   e) Neither Appellant was married, had children or had set  up  their  own
      independent family unit.




   f) He heard and accepted the evidence of the  parents  of  the  depth  of
      emotional support and family life that existed.

 9. The judge had applied the correct law and taken account  of  the  cases
    pertinent to  Gurkha  cases.   Significantly  at  paragraph  31  having
    identified for  reasons  provided  that  family  life  existed  in  his
    assessment of proportionality he referred to the Court of  Appeal  case
    of Rai and applied those principles; namely that having found Article 8
    was engaged and but for the historic  wrong  an  Appellant  would  have
    settled in the UK long ago that would ordinarily determine the  outcome
    of the proportionality assessment where the matters relied upon by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer consisted solely  of  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining a firm immigration policy.  The  Respondent  does  not  and
    cannot point to any other factors.  The  judge  had  noted  they  spoke
    English, were well-educated and it should also be noted that they  have
    a brother currently serving in the British Army like his father  before
    him.

10. In summary the judge heard the evidence, considered it carefully,  made
    findings of fact backed by reasons and followed the  guidelines  within
    case law that applies to the adult dependent children of former  Gurkha
    soldiers.  He had exercised his discretion not  inconsistent  with  the
    direction of travel in such  cases.   He  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that he did and it is incorrect to assert  as  was  asserted
    within the Grounds of Appeal "no right-minded person could  reach  that
    conclusion" because it cannot be said that in exercising his discretion
    the judge had strayed beyond case law or had reached  a  conclusion  so
    unreasonable that no other judge hearing the case  would  have  reached
    that conclusion.  There was no material error of law in this case.



Notice of Decision

11. I find no material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
