
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04784/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th April 2019                            |On 1st May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Jafferji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India.

 2. Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  2nd
    August  2018,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
    Respondent made on the 30th January 2018 to refuse his application  for
    leave to remain.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on the 15th October 2018.

 5. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    determination at paragraph 4. It can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  the  26th  October  2009  with
    leave as a working holiday maker until October  2011  and  subsequently
    made applications for leave to remain. He began a relationship with his
    partner in 2013.  He was found to be working in 2015

 6. The Appellant was served with a notice of immigration decision  (notice
    of removal) and a statement of additional grounds was completed on  the
    28th July 2015 for leave to remain on the basis of his family life with
    his partner, an Indian national who had  permanent  residence  and  his
    child, a British Citizen.

 7.  This was treated as an Article  8  (human  rights)  application  which
    resulted in a refusal decision dated 30th January 2018.

 8. The decision letter  was  summarised  at  paragraph  5  and  6  of  the
    determination. The Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules under
    Appendix FM as a partner as he could not meet the requirements  because
    he had not demonstrated that he had been in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner for 2 years.  Furthermore, he  could  not
    meet the eligibility requirements as a parent because he did  not  have
    sole responsibility for the children. As to EX1, it was considered that
    he could not meet the requirements although he  was  the  parent  of  a
    child under 18 years of age because he had not provided  evidence  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

 9. No assessment was made of the issue of reasonableness as  the  decision
    maker did not accept  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the applicant and the British Citizen child.

10. As to private life under  Paragraph  276ADE,  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements given his length of residence since September 2009. As  to
    whether there were any very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
    into India, it was not accepted that there would  be  such  significant
    obstacles given that he had spent the first 22 years  of  his  life  in
    India nor would he have lost all ties to his country of origin. He  had
    continuing cultural, linguistic and social  ties  and  would  still  be
    familiar with the culture language and social customs of India.

11. At paragraph 79 - 99 the decision  letter  made  reference  to  whether
    there were any "exceptional circumstances" for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside of the Rules, taking into account the  presence  of  the
    relevant child but that as he was not the primary care  giver  and  had
    not demonstrated that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
    either his partner or the child, it would not be  disproportionate  for
    him to return to India.

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and the  appeal  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on the  20th  July  2018.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on the 2nd August 2017 the Judge dismissed the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds (Article 8).

13. Grounds of appeal were submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  which
    principally challenge the legal test applied as to  the  issue  of  the
    assessment of reasonableness and whether the judge applied the  correct
    test and the evidential foundation for the Chikwamba  principle.  Other
    issues also arose as to the adequacy and relevancy of the  findings  of
    fact made (see paragraphs 11 of the grounds).

14.  Before the Upper Tribunal, the advocates agree that  the  decision  of
    the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law.  Mr  Tufan,
    in his submissions accepted that it was a material error and that given
    the changed circumstances of the appellant's partner  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re hearing, and for
    further findings of fact to be made.

15. Given that the parties are in agreement, I need only set out  in  brief
    detail why that concession was properly  made.  It  is  plain  for  the
    decision letter that the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his child.

16. In assessing whether the public interest considerations are
    sufficiently serious to outweigh the best interests of the child the
    judge was required to take into account the statutory provisions
    contained in section 117B (6), which states that the public interest
    will not require the person's removal where he has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a 'qualifying child' and it would not be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

17. There is no dispute that Z is a 'qualifying child' for the  purpose  of
    section 117B (6) as she is a British Citizen. The judge expressly found
    that contrary to the decision letter, that the appellant has a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship  with  the  child  (see  paragraph
    [34]), having assessed the evidence and the ISW report.

18.  The issue identified is whether it would be 'reasonable' to expect the
    child to leave the UK within the meaning of section  117B  (6).  In  MA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the  Court  of  Appeal  expressed
    some doubt as to  whether  the  'reasonableness'  test  should  include
    consideration of public interest factors but declined  to  depart  from
    the earlier decision in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  450,  which
    concluded that it did. There can  be  no  criticism  of  the  FtTJ  who
    applied the decision of MA (Pakistan) and who did not have the  benefit
    of the Supreme Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  UKSC  53
    (see paragraphs 63 and 64 of the decision). In that decision the  Court
    held that the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in  MM(Uganda)  was
    wrong and endorsed the approach Elias LJ would have taken at  paragraph
    36 (see the judgment of Lord Carnwath at paragraph 17 and at paragraphs
    12 -19.

19. In light of that decision and also the recent decision of the Secretary
    of State v AB (Jamaica and AO (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  661,  which
    upholds the reasoning set out in the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    JG (s117B(6): reasonable to leave UK ) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72, there are
    two errors of law  which  the  advocates  agree  was  material  to  the
    outcome. Firstly, the judge  expressly  took  into  account  the  wider
    public interest considerations when purporting to assess the  issue  of
    reasonableness but more importantly, at paragraph 64 the judge did  not
    go on to consider the issue of whether it would be reasonable  for  the
    child to leave the UK because the judge found that the child would  not
    be required  to  leave  (see  paragraph  64).  This  is  an  error  and
    unarguably applies the wrong test - the correct test  being  identified
    and summarised in AB (Jamaica) at paragraphs 72- 75; the question  that
    the statute requires to be  addressed  is  a  single  question;  is  it
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

20. The Court stated:

          1. I respectfully agree with the interpretation given by the UT
             to section 117B(6)(b) in JG.


          1. Speaking for myself, I would not necessarily endorse
             everything that was said by the UT in its reasoning, in
             particular at para. 25, as to the meaning of the concept "to
             expect". However, in my view that does not make any material
             difference to the ultimate interpretation, which I consider
             was correctly set out by the UT in JG. In my view, the concept
             of "to expect" something can be ambiguous. It can be, as the
             UT thought at para. 25, simply a prediction of a future event.
             However, it can have a more normative aspect. That is the
             sense in which Admiral Nelson reputedly used the word at
             Trafalgar, when he said that "England expects every man to do
             his duty." That is not a prediction but is something less than
             an order. To take another example, if a judge says late in the
             day at a hearing that she expects counsel to have filed and
             served supplementary skeleton arguments by 9 a.m. the
             following morning, so that there is no delay to the start of a
             hearing an hour later: although she may not be ordering the
             production of that skeleton argument, that is what she
             considers should happen. That is not a prediction of a future
             occurrence. It carries some normative force.


          1. Finally, in that regard, I agree with and would endorse the
             following passage in the judgment of UTJ Plimmer in SR
             (Subsisting Parental Relationship - s117B (6)) Pakistan [2018]
             UKUT 00334 (IAC), a case which was decided before decision of
             the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), at para. 51:


                  "... It is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can be
                  said to be of no application or to pose a merely
                  hypothetical question. Section 117B (6) dictates whether
                  or not the public interest requires removal where a person
                  not liable to deportation has a genuine and subsisting
                  parental relation with a qualifying child. The question
                  that must be answered is whether it would not be
                  reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. That
                  question as contained in statute, cannot be ignored or
                  glossed over. Self-evidently, section 117B (6) is engaged
                  whether the child will or will not in fact or practice
                  leave the UK. It addresses the normative and
                  straightforward question - should the child be 'expected
                  to leave' the UK?"


          1. I respectfully agree. It is clear, in my view, that the
             question which the statute requires to be addressed is a
             single question: is it reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the UK? It does not consist of two questions, as suggested by
             the Secretary of State. If the answer to the single question
             is obvious, because it is common ground that the child will
             not be expected to leave the UK, that does not mean that the
             question does not have to be asked; it merely means that the
             answer to the question is: No."


21. The judge found that as the child could  remain  in  the  UK  with  her
    mother (at [61]) that she would not be required to leave the  UK.  This
    was the wrong test to apply.

22. Further issues arise as to the consideration of the separation  of  the
    family. The judge considered that the appellant could return  to  India
    and make an application for entry clearance and therefore any severance
    of  the  relationship  between  the  child  and  her  father  would  be
    temporary. However, as Mr Jafferji submits there were no findings as to
    whether the appellant could meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  nor
    whether it would entail a temporary separation. There did not appear to
    be any consideration as to the evidence as to the length  of  a  likely
    separation or how long it would take for  such  an  application  to  be
    considered and whether such an application would in fact  succeed.   It
    is unclear whether the judge applied the Chikwamba principles and where
    this was case where there is a good reason to expect the  appellant  to
    go to India.

23. Consequently, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge involved the making of an error of law and therefore the
    decision cannot stand and shall be set aside. I  preserve  the  finding
    made  at  paragraph  34  that  there  is  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and his daughter.

24. Having heard the submissions of the advocates who both agree that  this
    is an appeal which will require further evidence and findings made upon
    that evidence and that the circumstances have changed in the interim, I
     have therefore reached the decision that  the  appropriate  course  is
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal when  all
    matters relevant to the issue of reasonableness  of  return,  including
    any evidence from her parents and the ISW should be considered.  It  is
    necessary for there to be the opportunity to hear  up-to-date  evidence
    concerning  her  best  interests  when   considering   the   issue   of
    reasonableness of return.

25. Thus, the appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where  it
    is anticipated further evidence will be given and factual findings made
    on all outstanding issues applying the correct legal framework.




    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Signed
                                Date: 29th April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

