


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04830/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                               |On 8 November 2019            |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                           HER HONOUR JUDGE STACEY

                                   Between

                                JAMIAL HASAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Syed-Ali, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh,  who  arrived  in  the
          United Kingdom ('UK') in January 2008 as a student.

       2. In a  decision  sent  on  1  February  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
          ('FTT') Judge  Fox  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
          rights  grounds.   The   appeal   turned   on   the   respondent's
          allegation, as contained in a letter dated 4 February  2018,  that
          the appellant used deception when relying upon TOEIC  certificates
          dated 21 March 2012 and 17 April 2012  respectively,  said  to  be
          taken from  tests  at  New  College  of  Finance.   The  appellant
          refuted the allegation of deception by advancing evidence that  he
          did not rely upon a TOEIC certificate  dated  17  April  2012  and
          never took a test at New College of Finance.   The  FTT  concluded
          that  the  respondent  displaced  the   burden   of   establishing
          deception.


       3. The appellant appealed  against  the  FTT's  decision,  submitting
          inter  alia,  that  the  FTT  failed  to  assess   his   "innocent
          explanation" and its conclusion was irrational.

       4. In a decision dated 26 July  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')  Judge
          Stephen  Smith  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT.   He
          observed, inter alia, that the  FTT's  decision  is  difficult  to
          follow.  The respondent has not submitted a rule 24 notice.

       5. At the beginning of the hearing Ms  Everett  conceded  that  there
          are errors of law in the FTT's decision, requiring it  to  be  set
          aside in order for the decision to be remade de novo.

       6. We are satisfied that this concession was properly  made  and  can
          state our reasons briefly.  The FTT has not provided  adequate  or
          rational reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  explanation  that
          the  SSHD's  had  not  established  deception.   The   appellant's
          explanation was straightforward: the  SSHD  relied  upon  evidence
          that could not relate to him as the test centre  relied  upon  was
          inaccurate.  Having accepted that errors could have been  made  on
          the part of ETS at [38],  the  FTT  failed  to  expressly  address
          whether errors were made in relation to this appellant.

       7. Both representatives agreed that  entirely  new  factual  findings
          were required and this should be done in the  FTT.   We  have  had
          regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement, and the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision, and have decided  that
          this is an appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  FTT.    This  is
          because completely fresh findings of fact are required.

Decision

       8. The appeal against the decision of the  FTT  is  allowed  and  the
          FTT's decision is set aside.

       9. The decision shall be remade in the FTT by a FTT Judge other  than
          Judge Fox.




Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 5 November 2019
