
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04172/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 17th December 2018                 |On 25 January 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                               mr Mahbub Hasan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    I. M. Scott dismissing his appeal against the refusal of an application
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  having  completed  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence under paragraph 276B giving rise  to
    the Appellant's Article 8 private life under the European Convention of
    Human Rights.  Judge Scott's decision promulgated on 25th June 2018 was
    appealed against and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Hanson in the following terms:

         "There is arguable merit in  the  submission  the  Judge  erred  in
         proceeding on the basis that the principle of res judicata  applied
         to this appeal and that the issue of the  marriage  of  convenience
         cannot be reopened when the correct approach  would  have  been  to
         apply the Devaseelan principles and take into account evidence  and
         facts set out in the witness statement and documents in the  appeal
         bundle which were not before the decision maker in June 2016.

         The need to determine the  issue  of  whether  the  marriage  is  a
         marriage of convenience  is  highly  material  to  the  success  or
         otherwise of the appeal for had the  appellant  succeeded  on  this
         point  he  would  have  established  10  years  continuous   lawful
         residence in the United Kingdom entitling him to a grant  of  leave
         on the basis of long residence under the Immigration  Rules  or  if
         assessing the proportionality of the decision.

         Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds which raise arguable
         issues requiring further consideration by the Upper Tribunal."

 2. I was not provided with the Rule 24 response from  the  Respondent  but
    was given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the decision I indicated I would  reserve  my  decision
    which I shall now give.  I do find that there are errors of law in  the
    decision such that it should be set aside.  My reasons for  so  finding
    are as follows.

 4. In respect of the Grounds of Appeal as framed Mr  Kotas  accepted  that
    the grounds correctly identified that the judge had erred at  paragraph
    28 of the decision in stating that:

         "I  find,  however,  that  the  time  spent  here   following   the
         appellant's marriage to  an  EEA  national  cannot  be  taken  into
         account in addition because, quite simply, the First-tier  Tribunal
         dismissed his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  that  the
         marriage was one of convenience.   That  matter  has  already  been
         determined against the appellant; the First-tier  Tribunal  refused
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal; an  attempt  to  obtain
         permission from the Upper Tribunal itself was withdrawn; and I find
         that the matter cannot be reopened in the present appeal."

 5. As such it was accepted that the proper starting point for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that identified in the starred decision of Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 and the principles espoused at [39] to [42] of  that
    authority.  Given the starred nature of this authority it is plain that
    there was an error in the approach taken by the  judge  in  considering
    that the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell from the hearing
    on 15th June 2016 could not be reopened in the present appeal.

 6. Mr Kotas sought to persuade me that  the  error  was  immaterial  as  a
    consequence of the materials that were before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Maxwell.  I shall turn to this momentarily.

 7. I pause to note that this is an extremely unhappy appeal  in  that  the
    representation  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  in  this  matter   is
    substandard and below what one would expect of a professional  firm  of
    solicitors.  Albeit a separate issue, accurate  instructions  were  not
    provided to counsel in that Mr Malik was not  told  that  there  was  a
    previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  when  this  matter  came
    before Judge Scott, and equally it appears that the bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which I have before me consisting of 44 pages, does
    not mirror the bundle which Mr Malik was  provided  with  when  he  was
    instructed to appear before the First-tier Tribunal (which  contains  a
    far greater number of documents).  Equally Judge  Scott  had  not  been
    provided with a any of the paperwork or evidence  or  that  was  before
    Judge Maxwell so that Judge Scott could have known  what  documentation
    was contemporaneous to Judge Maxwell's decision, and what was new,  and
    thereby apply the Devaseelan principles accordingly.  The  only  excuse
    given by the instructed solicitors in this matter fro these lapses  are
    that some of the earlier documents relating to the Appellant  had  been
    "misfiled" and the unnamed 'person' who gave  instructions  to  counsel
    did not have the benefit  of  those  earlier  documents  including  the
    earlier appeal determination.  Thus, it is plain that  the  incompetent
    handling of the file has led to the predicament that  this  appeal  has
    reached and the unnecessary time and expense to which the  parties  and
    the Tribunal has been put.

 8. It was also stated by Mr Malik  in  his  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the
    Appellant had apparently also  confirmed  that  there  was  no  earlier
    appeal determination  where  the  marriage  of  convenience  issue  was
    determined.   Mr  Malik's  written  explanation  for  the   Appellant's
    ignorance of the determination of the marriage of convenience issue  is
    that - as Judge Maxwell recorded in his decision of 22nd June  2016  at
    paragraph 2 - "neither  the  Appellant  nor  his  spouse  attended  the
    hearing of the  appeal.   Neither  had  made  statements  nor  had  any
    documents been served in accordance with directions".  Consequently  Mr
    Malik submitted that the Appellant was  ignorant  of  the  marriage  of
    convenience findings.

 9. This submission was passionately refuted by Mr Kotas  who  argued  that
    the Appellant must have known about the decision of Judge Maxwell given
    that Judge Maxwell's decision was challenged by way of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and also on renewal to the Upper Tribunal.   Whilst
    there is inherent sense and force in  that  submission,  on  the  other
    hand, Mr Kotas could not point to the  precise  basis  upon  which  the
    Appellant had appealed against Judge Maxwell's decision as he  did  not
    have any of that paperwork to hand.

10. Clearly, the Appellant  may  very  well  have  appealed  against  Judge
    Maxwell's decision on the premise that an adjournment was  not  granted
    (as sought by the representative from Universal Solicitors who attended
    on that occasion), but equally the appeal may have been  challenged  in
    terms of the findings on the marriage  of  convenience  issue.   Either
    way, there is  no  evidence  before  me  that  would  point  to  either
    conclusion and given the lack of any evidence at present,  I  give  the
    Appellant the benefit of the doubt in the absence of evidence  pointing
    either way.  Naturally, if the Respondent obtains the  previous  appeal
    file and discovers matters which reveal the  Appellant's  knowledge  of
    the previous determination and contradict  his  evidence  that  he  was
    unaware of it, the Respondent is entitled to file and serve the same at
    a further hearing.

11. Returning to the materiality of the error identified, Mr  Malik  sought
    to argue that by way of example, the witness statement  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal bundle which was before Judge Scott was  not,  and  could
    not have been, before Judge Maxwell as  indicated  by  paragraph  2  of
    Judge Maxwell's decision, and given that no other documents were served
    in accordance with directions there  would  have  been  in  essence  no
    documentation going to show the marriage was not one of convenience put
    by the Appellant.  Thus Mr Malik prayed in aid reliance upon [40(4)] of
    Devaseelan and submitted that the Tribunal was entitled to  treat  with
    "the greatest circumspection" the evidence regarding facts personal  to
    the Appellant which were not brought  before  the  attention  of  Judge
    Maxwell.

12. However, as I pointed out to the parties the matter did not end  there,
    as the Appellant would still need to show "a very good reason"  why  he
    had failed to adduce relevant evidence before  Judge  Maxwell  and  why
    that  failure  should  not  be  held  against  him  (see   [42(7)]   of
    Devaseelan).  In terms of whether there was a very good reason  or  not
    Mr Malik argued that no very good  reason  had  been  put  forward  yet
    because neither the Appellant nor he were alive to the need to  address
    the principles under Devaseelan.  Mr Malik submitted that if the matter
    is remitted, the First-tier Tribunal would be provided with a very good
    reason for the failure to adduce relevant evidence that  was  available
    to the Appellant at the time of the hearing before  Judge  Maxwell.   I
    accept that the Appellant has  not  had  such  an  opportunity  to  put
    forward a "very good reason" (owing to his  alleged  ignorance  of  the
    previous determination of Judge Maxwell).

13. Mr Kotas further sought to argue that even if  Judge  Scott  had  found
    that the marriage of convenience issue was to be decided in  favour  of
    the Appellant the facts underlying this appeal showed that there was no
    evidence that the EEA Sponsor exercising treaty  rights  other  than  a
    previous letter of  employment  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    exercise of those treaty rights since the date of the  Appellant's  and
    his EEA Sponsor's wedding, and in any event the EEA  Sponsor  had  left
    the United Kingdom in 2015 for an indeterminate period and  the  couple
    had in any further event separated before the hearing in June 2016.  In
    reply Mr Malik submitted that these matters had not been raised by  the
    Respondent by way of a supplementary or amended refusal letter pursuant
    to  Rule  24(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 which  specified  that  the
    Respondent must, if he intended to change or  add  to  the  grounds  or
    reasons relied upon in the notice of decision, provide the Tribunal and
    the other parties with a written statement of whether of the opposition
    to the Appellant's case.  In that light given that the matter  was  not
    live before the First-tier Tribunal, it is not a matter which  can  now
    be raised at an error of law hearing by the Respondent.  However if the
    matter is to be remitted  (as  I  find  it  should  and  will  turn  to
    shortly), the Respondent is of course at liberty to amend or supplement
    her refusal letter by way of a further written statement in  accordance
    with Rule 24(2) of the 2014 Procedure Rules should he be so advised, in
    relation to the issues which Mr Kotas now attempted to take, in respect
    of (a) the Appellant's evidence not meeting the Devaseelan  principles,
    and (b) whether the EEA Sponsor was separately exercising treaty rights
    at the relevant time.  Thus, I accept Mr Malik's submission that  these
    matters cannot be relied upon now by Mr Kotas as they are not raised in
    the refusal letter that the Respondent for the time being.

14. Mr Kotas further sought to argue that the Grounds  of  Appeal  did  not
    challenge the Article 8 findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.  Even
    though I find this is so, the Article 8 assessment and the marriage  of
    convenience issues are intrinsically connected  and  one  cannot  stand
    without the other being reheard.  Mr Malik also pragmatically  accepted
    that if the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  if  the
    marriage of convenience issue is decided in  favour  of  the  Appellant
    then his Article 8 private life claim may have  a  chance  of  success,
    however, conversely if the marriage of convenience  issue  still  falls
    against the Appellant, it would not be possible for  the  Appellant  to
    succeed in a private life claim where he  has  been  party  to  a  sham
    marriage.

15. Consequently, in light of the above findings and having considered this
    matter at great length, I find that the decision of Judge Scott  should
    be set aside in its  entirety  for  the  fundamental  reason  that  the
    principles in Devaseelan were not  followed  at  paragraph  28  of  his
    decision.

16. In light of the above findings, I set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in  its  entirety.
    This matter is to be remitted to be heard by a differently  constituted
    bench.

Directions

19. The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Taylor House.

20. No interpreter is required.

21. At present, only the Appellant proposes to be called to give  evidence.



22. The time estimate for this appeal is two hours.

23. No special directions have been sought, however I formally record  that
    should the Respondent seek to  amend  or  supplement  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter, he must do so in writing in accordance with Rule 24  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's 2014 Procedure Rules so  that  the  Appellant
    can engage with them in his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  at
    the further hearing.

24. I direct that the Appellant serve a new Appellant's  bundle  containing
    any and all evidence that he seeks to rely upon.

25. I further direct that that bundle be clearly  subdivided  into  several
    sections including (i) a section containing any evidence  before  Judge
    Maxwell, (ii) a further section containing any contemporaneous evidence
    that was not before Judge Maxwell (but which was in  existence  at  the
    time of Judge Maxwell's  decision  or  could  have  been  but  was  not
    obtained at that time), (iii) a further section including any  evidence
    that was not before Judge Maxwell which could not  have  been  obtained
    and provided before Judge Maxwell and is wholly new evidence  that  was
    unavailable at the relevant time of the hearing in  June  2016  (iv)  a
    supplementary Appellant's witness  statement  providing  "a  very  good
    reason" why the Appellant had failed to adduce relevant evidence before
    Judge Maxwell and why that failure  should  not  be  held  against  him
    (pursuant to [42(7)] of Devaseelan).

26. I further direct that a copy of Judge Maxwell's decision be included in
    the Appellant's bundle.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested and none is made.


Signed                                                 Date 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini




