
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04873/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Typed version promulgated      |
|On 15th January 2018                       |On 8th February 2018           |
|Decision & Reasons given orally            |                               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr Sunnat Rasulov
                       (anonymity direction Not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Rasulov, the Respondent, in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen  when  the  Respondent's  (claimant)
    appeal had been allowed on human rights grounds at Taylor House on 18th
    July 2017.

2.    The original grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were  relied
    upon in the Upper Tribunal as well and in summary it had been said that
    the judge had applied the wrong standard of proof because it  was  said
    there was a  "higher  burden  of  proof"  which  was  placed  upon  the
    Secretary of State and secondly, it was said that  when  following  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in MA  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  450  that  even
    though  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  satisfied  as   to   the
    Appellant's ability to speak English there may be other reasons  why  a
    person who was able to  speak  English  to  the  required  level  would
    nonetheless call or permit a proxy candidate to undertake an  ETS  test
    on their behalf.

3.    In brief but clear submissions today, Mr Duffy said he relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal  to  both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal and that the use or relevance of the ability to speak  English
    was erroneous  in  the  circumstances  of  this  particular  case  when
    referring to the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

4.    The claimant was previously represented but he appeared without  legal
    representation today.  Sitting beside him is his  former  partner,  the
    mother of their children.  The claimant had  said  he  had  passed  his
    English test and any questions could be asked of  him.    He  explained
    that the judge was right  to  make  the  decision  that  he  did.   The
    claimant did not seem to comprehend the nature of  the  hearing,  so  I
    sought to explain this to him in clearer terms, and I think one of  the
    phrases used by his partner was "could we have  that  explained  to  us
    jargon-free?" referring to the submissions which Mr Duffy had  made.  I
    therefore sought to do that but it appeared to  me  that  the  claimant
    still did not understand the basis of the Secretary  of  State's  case.
    Mr Duffy then assisted the claimant by providing him  with  a  copy  of
    Judge Cohen's  decision  and  then  I  referred  to  and  read  out  in
    particular paragraph 23 of the judge's decision.

5.    It appeared to me the claimant may not have seen the judge's  decision
    recently. He did not have a copy with him. Therefore, I  adjourned  the
    matter for a period of time to enable the claimant  to  read  carefully
    the judge's decision and also to digest what  had  been  said.   Having
    returned to consider the matter further and  when  I  asked  him  about
    paragraph 23 of the decision, the claimant said there was  really  very
    little that he could say about it.

6.    Now, insofar as paragraph 23 of Judge Cohen's  decision  is  concerned
    it says as follows:

         "In the light of the evidence provided by the  Appellant,  which  I
         find  to  be  compelling,  I  find  that  the  Respondent  has  not
         discharged the higher burden of proof placed upon her in respect of
         an allegation of deception and find that this has been rebutted  by
         the Appellant in this case.  I therefore find that the Respondent's
         refusal of the Appellant's application for leave to remain on  this
         basis was wrong in all the circumstances."


7.    The Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal had said at  paragraph
    2:

         "The judge found that the Respondent had not discharged  the  legal
         burden.  He states, 'I find that the Respondent has not  discharged
         the higher burden of proof placed upon her'.  It is submitted  that
         the judge errs in applying too  high  a  standard  of  proof.   The
         relevant burden of proof is the balance of probabilities."
    In my judgment that is a compelling ground of appeal.   There  is  only
    one standard of  proof  which  applies  and  that  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Where the judge was seeking to apply a higher standard,
    in my judgment, it is clear that there is no such higher standard which
    could have applied.  I note that the  judge  in  an  otherwise  careful
    decision explained and set out why he was making the findings  that  he
    did but unfortunately, I simply cannot  ignore  the  quite  fundamental
    error at paragraph 23 of the  decision  relating  to  the  standard  of
    proof.


8.    I have also considered the decision in MA Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450  and
    that also has some relevance but, in my judgment, the material error in
    respect of the standard of proof fundamentally undermines  the  judge's
    decision.  It means thereby that the decision of Judge Cohen has to  be
    set aside.  There will have to be a rehearing and that  rehearing  will
    take place at the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other  than  Judge
    Cohen and any other directions  will  be  provided  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

9.    As I have explained to the claimant, the effect of my decision is  not
    that he is being asked immediately or otherwise  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, nor does it mean that he has succeeded in his appeal.  What  I
    am finding, and I am explaining this for his  purposes  again  is  that
    there was an error in Judge Cohen's decision. There will have to  be  a
    complete rehearing and at that rehearing Mr Rasulov  will  be  able  to
    explain the basis of his case, the Secretary of State will be  able  to
    explain her case and the judge will  make  a  decision.  Judge  Cohen's
    decision on the law was wrong and is set aside. A different judge  will
    decide the matter again. That will be at the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
and it is therefore set aside.
The Secretary of State's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is allowed.
There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed; A Mahmood                                  Date; 15 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

