
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04399/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2019                          |On 23rd April 2019            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                              mr Muhammad Asad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 4th August 1982.

 2. He first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  23rd  September  2006  as  a
    student.  There were various extensions to his leave until  28th  March
    2016.  On 24th March 2016 he made an in-time application for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur but on 19th May 2016 that was  refused.
    On 3rd June 2016 he applied for  administrative  review.   The  initial
    decision was maintained.  On 5th July 2016, leave under section  3C  of
    the Immigration Act 1971 expired.

 3. On 19th July 2016 he made application, out of time, for leave to remain
    in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his  private  life.    He
    subsequently varied that application for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of long residency; that application being made  on  31st  August  2016.
    The application of  July  2016  was  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had no extant leave when made and  had  only  completed  nine
    years, nine months and eleven days' continuous lawful residence and not
    acquired ten years' continuous lawful residence.

 4. As to the exact amount of time that the Appellant had lawfully been  in
    the United Kingdom was concerned, there is an issue.  Mr Turner submits
    that in fact the Appellant was entitled to benefit from  a  further  28
    days credited to him on the basis that an application can  be  made  28
    days in advance.  The amount of time by which the Appellant fell  short
    of the ten years in this matter, whether it be  the  nine  years,  nine
    months and eleven days, or the extra 28 days contended for, in my  view
    are not material to my consideration of the merits of the appeal.

 5. The Appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of  State  and  on
    18th October 2018 the matter was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hawden-Beal sitting at Birmingham.  It was common ground  that
    the Appellant could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant however advanced  his  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  wider
    application of Article 8 ECHR.  Judge Hawden-Beal dismissed the appeal.



 6. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 12th November  2018  the
    Appellant made application for permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.
    On 12th February 2019 permission was granted.

 7. In the grounds which run to 47 paragraphs it was  submitted  under  the
    first ground that the judge had erred in  law  in  the  proportionality
    assessment.  Reliance was placed on delay in the grounds with reference
    made to the guidance in the case of EV (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 40.

 8. The second ground makes reference to paragraph 276ADE of the  2002  Act
    but Mr Turner helpfully accepted that he was not pursuing the appeal on
    that basis but in the lengthy submissions which he made to me he relied
    heavily upon his submission that the Appellant, having been so close to
    the ten years which would have otherwise qualified him for  the  relief
    being sought, was entitled to succeed in this appeal because  of  other
    factors which Mr Turner submitted weighed in the Appellant's favour and
    therefore outweighing the public interest.

 9. At the outset I reminded the parties of the guidance  in  the  case  of
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  That case was concerned principally with whether
    an  Appellant  who  came  close  to  meeting  the  requirements  of  an
    Immigration Rule ought to be allowed to succeed on the basis of a "near
    miss".  The lead judgment was given  by  Lord  Carnwath.   He  said  as
    follows:

         "53. Faced with the conflict between the approach  taken  in  these
             authorities and that of Pankina Burnton LJ had 'no difficulty'
             in preferring the former, which he regarded as binding on  the
             court (paras 21-25).  He could see  no  principled  basis  for
             distinguishing, as Sedley LJ had proposed,  between  rules  to
             which the near-miss principle  did  and  did  not  apply.   In
             particular he  disagreed  with  Sedley  LJ  that  a  financial
             criterion 'has in itself no meaning' and  could  therefore  be
             distinguished from other rules,  such  as  those  relating  to
             academic qualifications, in respect of which  'a  miss  is  as
             good as a mile'.  In conclusion he said at paras 25-26:

                  'Finally,  quite  apart  from  authority,  I  prefer   the
                  approach stated in Mongoto's case ... and Rudi's case  ...
                  A rule is  a  rule.   The  considerations  to  which  Lord
                  Bingham referred in Huang's case ... require rules  to  be
                  treated as such.  Moreover, once an apparently bright-line
                  rule is regarded as subject to a near-miss penumbra, and a
                  decision is made in favour of  a  near-miss  applicant  on
                  that basis, another applicant will appear claiming to be a
                  near miss to that near miss.  That would be a steep  slope
                  away from predictable rules, the efficacy and  utility  of
                  which would be undermined.  For  these  reasons,  I  would
                  dismiss  the  appeal  in  relation  to   the   'near-miss'
                  argument.   In  my  judgment,  there  is  no   'near-miss'
                  principle  applicable  to  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
                  Secretary of State,  and  on  appeal  the  Tribunal,  must
                  assess the  strength  of  an  Article  8  claim,  but  the
                  requirements of immigration control are  not  weakened  by
                  the degree of non-compliance with the Immigration Rules.'

         54.  The difference between the two positions may not be  as  stark
             as  the  submissions  before  us  have  suggested.   The  most
             authoritative guidance on the correct approach of the Tribunal
             to Article 8 remains that of Lord Bingham in  Huang.   In  the
             passage cited by Burnton LJ Lord  Bingham  observed  that  the
             rules are designed to identify those to whom 'on grounds  such
             as kinship and family relationship and  dependence'  leave  to
             enter  should  be  granted,  and  that  such  rules   'to   be
             administratively  workable,  require  that  a  line  be  drawn
             somewhere'.  But that was no more than the starting point  for
             the consideration of Article 8.  Thus in Mrs Huang's own case,
             the most relevant rule (rule 317) was not satisfied, since she
             was not, when the decision was made, aged 65 or over  and  she
             was not a widow.  He commented at para 6:

                   'Such a rule, which does not lack a  rational  basis,  is
                   not to be stigmatised as arbitrary or objectionable.  But
                   an applicant's failure to qualify under the rules is  for
                   present purposes the point at which to  begin,  not  end,
                   consideration of the claim under Article 8.  The terms of
                   the rules are relevant to that  consideration,  but  they
                   are not determinative.'"

10. The judgment went on to cite with approval Mr Justice Collins' words in
    Lekstaka v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2005] EWHC 745 (Admin):

         "Collins  J's  statement,  on  which  the   court   relied,   seems
         unexceptionable.  It is saying no more, as I read it, than that the
         practical or compassionate considerations which underlie the policy
         are also likely to be relevant to the cases of those who fall  just
         outside it, and to that extent may add weight to their argument for
         exceptional treatment.  He is not  saying  that  there  arises  any
         presumption or expectation that the  policy  will  be  extended  to
         embrace them."

11. In his submissions Mr Turner  accepted  that  there  was  no  near-miss
    principle but contended that the  judge  had  failed  to  look  at  the
    quality of the private life relied upon by the Appellant in support  of
    his claim.

12. At paragraph 11 of the Decision and Reasons the  judge  set  out  those
    factors submitted by Counsel who appeared for the Appellant below:

         "11. Mr Ali submitted that the difference between the time  he  has
             been here and the time he should have been  here  is  marginal
             and it cannot be proportionate to remove him after he has been
             here legally for so long.  He has invested in his studies  and
             his business, he is fluent in English, has contributed to  the
             economy, has not claimed benefits, has no previous convictions
             and had integrated into English  society.   He  was  a  highly
             skilled migrant and was in one of the shortage occupations and
             it was obviously of benefit to the United  Kingdom  if  he  is
             allowed to stay here.  He submitted that  the  fact  that  the
             refusal in July 2016 gave him 14 days to correct his  position
             may be said to have given him  an  expectation.   Finally,  he
             submitted that the act that he has his  wife  and  parents  in
             Pakistan  does  not  automatically  mean  that  he   has   not
             established a private life here and accordingly  asked  me  to
             allow the appeal."

13. It is unlikely in my judgment that by  the  time  the  judge  got  from
    paragraph 11 to his consideration  of  proportionality,  this  decision
    being only 28 paragraphs long, that the judge had lost  from  his  mind
    those factors set out at paragraph 11.  The  judge  considered  whether
    there were significant obstacles to integration in  Pakistan;  that  is
    dealt with at paragraph 25.  The judge then went on at paragraph 26  to
    note that the Appellant was 24 years of age when he came to the  United
    Kingdom. He was satisfied that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to be able to understand how life there  is  carried  on  and
    participate in it.  He also noted that the Appellant had been  back  to
    Pakistan on two recent occasions when he got married and then again  in
    2016.  The Appellant's wife was working  there  and  his  parents  were
    still there.

14. The judge clearly gave anxious  consideration  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was only two and a half months or so short  of  the  required
    ten years because he dealt with it specifically at paragraph 27.

15. He went on, as he was required to do, to consider  Section  117B.   The
    judge clearly  weighed  in  the  balance  the  private  life  that  the
    Appellant had in the United Kingdom and indeed said so at paragraph 27.
     He noted, "He has established a private life here  by  virtue  of  the
    length of time he had been here". That relates, I find  on  any  proper
    reading, to those matters which are set out  just  a  couple  of  pages
    before at paragraph 11.  I do not accept that the judge  did  not  take
    those matters into account.  The judge came to a decision that was open
    to him.  Those additional factors appear to me to be little  more  than
    the ordinary incidences of life, which of themselves only lead  to  the
    relief being sought after 10 years lawful residence.

16. As to the point taken on delay, that was not a matter  that  was  taken
    below.  Mr Turner  was  unable  to  provide  any  evidence  to  suggest
    otherwise, a point that was taken by the Respondent, but in  any  event
    it seems to me that the delay in making the decision in this  case  was
    not material notwithstanding the  guidance  in  EV  (Kosovo).   At  all
    material times the Appellant's position was precarious as a  matter  of
    law and less weight was to be given to it.

17. Standing back from this decision  I  asked  myself  whether  there  was
    anything perverse or irrational in the Decision made below.  There  was
    not.  I asked myself whether this was a decision that was open  to  the
    judge on the basis of the evidence that was before  him  and  I  answer
    that in the affirmative.  It follows that the appeal is dismissed.




No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 23 April 2019









Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


