











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04395/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 25 January 2018               |On : 21 February 2018                    |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                            Mr Ebenezer Dele Ojo
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J Bezzam, counsel (instructed by London South Law
     Chamber)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  born  22  August  1962.  His
      appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  4  August  2015
      refusing him leave to remain in the UK was dismissed under  the  Rules
      and on human rights (Article 8) grounds, by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Cockrill.  His decision was promulgated on 6 March 2017.

   2. The Judge noted that the respondent refused his application under  the
      partner  and  parent  routes.  He  did  not  show  that  he  had  sole
      responsibility for his daughter, Blessing Ojo  who  had  been  granted
      discretionary leave and had an outstanding application. She had  spent
      more than seven years in the UK prior to the human rights  application
      made by her  father.   His  immigration  situation  was  not  settled.
      Blessing was 17 at the date of the refusal  and  was  thus  nearly  an
      adult. It was a matter for her where she chooses to live and  how  she
      manages her life [12].  There were no insurmountable  obstacles  under
      paragraph 276ADE of the Rules to the appellant being  integrated  into
      Nigeria - [13].

   3. Judge Cockrill heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  as  well  as  Ms
      Blessing Ojo. He did not accept that the appellant had exercised  sole
      responsibility in relation to Blessing. She had not been  living  with
      the appellant for a number of years, but with her mother.  It  is  her
      mother who is 'quite clearly' the person who has been  influential  in
      her life [31].

   4. The very highest that could be said is that  responsibility  has  been
      shared between them.  It  is  more  likely  however  that  given  that
      Blessing  has  lived  with  her  mother  since  2008,   the   latter's
      relationship is a stronger one than that with her father [32]. He sees
      Blessing reasonably frequently. He was not able to name the church she
      attends with her mother.

   5. Judge Cockrill found that the situation with Blessing is that  she  is
      on the threshold of adulthood. She is hoping to go  to  university  in
      September (2017) and although she looks to her father for some sort of
      guidance  and  support,  he  has  not  been  the  person   with   sole
      responsibility. She can choose to go out and see the appellant when he
      has to go back home to Nigeria [32].

   6. The Judge assessed the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      current wife. Her daughter is an adult now and  there  is  nothing  to
      suggest that there is anything particularly close in the  relationship
      between the appellant and his stepdaughter [33].

   7. As regards the appellant' wife, she has made the  UK  "very  much  her
      home" [33]. She has been here for a substantial period.  Her  daughter
      lives here as a young adult. As far as she is concerned she would very
      much hope to continue living in the UK. She is faced with a dilemma as
      the appellant has not demonstrated that by returning to Nigeria  there
      would be a breach of a protected human right [33].

   8. He found that there would not be insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
      life continuing between the appellant and his present wife in  Nigeria
      [34]. He consequently found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
      requirements under the Rules.

   9. In considering the matter outside the rules on Article 8  grounds,  he
      came to the same conclusion having  regard  to  the  totality  of  the
      circumstances. He followed the Razgar  guidance.  He  noted  that  the
      critical issue is proportionality. He found that the decision would be
      proportionate. He took into account the factors set out  under  s.117B
      of the 2002 Act [35].

  10. He stated at [36] that it should not be forgotten that  the  appellant
      had been in the UK for some time with a precarious status. He  entered
      into a  relationship  with  his  present  wife  when  his  immigration
      situation was not settled. He cannot rely on that  relationship  which
      she enjoys with Blessing to provide a basis  for  being  permitted  to
      remain in the UK given Blessing's age and circumstances. The fact that
      he is married now to a British citizen does not itself  mean  that  he
      should be prevented from being returned to Nigeria, a country of which
      he is a national. In the  circumstances  he  was  satisfied  that  the
      respondent's decision is proportionate to the need for the maintenance
      of effective immigration control [36].

  11. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal it was contended that  the
      key issue was whether the appellant had sole  responsibility  for  his
      daughter. The  Judge  did  not  properly  consider  all  the  relevant
      factors. It is also contended that the Judge applied the wrong test in
      relation  to  whether  the  appellant's  wife  faces   an   issue   of
      insurmountable obstacles.

  12. On 25 October 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley found  that  it  was
      arguable that the Tribunal did not lawfully determine the appeal under
      Article 8. It should have been first considered whether the  appellant
      could meet the requirements of the Rules which arguably had not  taken
      place.

  13. She stated that 'in this instance', EX.1 of Appendix  FM  is  arguably
      the most pertinent provision, particularly where the appellant  has  a
      genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  at  the  date  of  his
      application with a child who is either a British citizen  or  who  has
      lived in the UK for a period of seven years. It is arguable that these
      requirements  are  met  in  the  relationship  with  the   appellant's
      daughter, Blessing, having regard to what is set out at  [32]  of  the
      decision where it was apparently accepted that responsibility  of  the
      daughter was shared with the mother.

  14. She stated  that  it  should  have  been  considered  whether  it  was
      reasonable to expect her to leave the UK. It was arguable that it  was
      not as she had been granted discretionary leave by the respondent.

  15. Ms Bezzam adopted and relied on paragraphs 4 and 5 of Judge Lindsley's
      decision granting permission to appeal. She did not seek to  make  any
      further submissions after Mr Kotas completed his submissions.

  16. Mr Kotas contended in his oral  and  written  submissions  that  on  a
      proper construction, EX.1 was not applicable to the appellant's case.

  17. This is a human rights appeal and whilst  the  appellant's  child  may
      have just been short of the age of 18 at the date of  application  she
      was over 18 at the date of the decision.

  18. The appellant could not succeed under EX.1(a).  EX.1 requires that the
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the
      child who is under 18 years, "or" was under 18 when the applicant  was
      first granted leave on the basis that this paragraph applied.

      Assessment

  19. As noted by Mr Kotas, EX.1 is not a free standing  provision  -  Sabir
      (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 63.

  20. In Sabir, Upper Tribunal Coker was  considering  the  "partner"  route
      under Appendix FM. She found  at  [15]  that  it  is  plain  from  the
      architecture of the Rules that EX.1 is "parasitic" on  a  Rule  within
      Appendix FM that  otherwise  grants  leave  to  remain.  If  EX.1  was
      intended to be a free standing element irrespective of R-LTRP it would
      have been identified as  R-LTRP.1.1(e)  or  some  other  mechanism  of
      identification which would have been used. The structure of the  Rules
      as presently drafted  requires  it  to  be  a  component  part  of  R-
      LTRP.1.1(d).

  21. I accept Mr Kotas's contention that it is therefore necessary to  work
      "methodically" through the Rules within Appendix FM in  order  to  see
      whether or not EX.1 can apply.

  22. With regard to the requirements for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
      parent as set out  at R-LTRPT 1.1, this includes the requirement at R-
      LTRPT 1.1(d)(i) that the applicant must not fall for refusal under  S-
      LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and (ii)  that the  applicant  meets
      the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2 - 2.4 and E-LTRPT.3.1;  and
      (iii), paragraph EX.1 applies.

  23. E-LTRPT.1.1, which relates to the eligibility  for  limited  leave  to
      remain as a parent provides that  to  qualify  for  limited  leave  to
      remain as a parent, all the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2  to
      5.2 must be met.

  24.  The  relationship  requirements  are  set  out  at  E-LTRPT.2.2   and
      accordingly the applicant's child must be under the age of 18  at  the
      date of application or  where  the  child  has  turned  18  since  the
      applicant was first granted entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  a
      parent under this appendix, must not have formed an independent family
      unit or be leading an independent life; the child must  be  living  in
      the UK and is a British citizen or settled in the UK; or has lived  in
      the UK continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the
      date of application and EX.1 applies.

  25. E-LTRPT.2.3 provides that either

      (a) the applicant must  have  sole  parental  responsibility  for  the
      child, or the child normally lives with  the  applicant  and  not  the
      other parent (who is a British citizen or settled in the UK)  and  the
      applicant must not be eligible to apply  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      partner under this Appendix; or

      (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be

           (i)    a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

           (ii)   not the partner of the applicant (which here  includes  a
           person who has been in a relationship  with  the  applicant  for
           less than two years prior to the date of application); and

           (iii)  the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave  to
           remain as a partner under this Appendix.

  26. I accept Mr Kotas's submission that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
      requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3 which is a necessary  prerequisite  before
      there can be reliance on EX.1 which, as he notes, is made clear by  R-
      LTRPT.1.1(d)(ii) where the operative word "and EX.1 applies."

  27. In this respect the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  at  [31-32]  that
      the appellant is  unable  to  demonstrate  either  that  he  has  sole
      responsibility for his child or that the child normally lives with him
      as required at E-LTRPT.2.3 (a).

  28. Nor can the appellant show that the parent  or  carer  with  whom  the
      child normally lives with is either British or settled in the UK -  E-
      LTRPT.2.3(b)(i). The child lives with her mother, a Nigerian national,
      with limited leave to remain.

  29. Further, it is evident that the appellant is  eligible  to  apply  for
      leave to remain as a partner under Appendix  FM  and  therefore  falls
      foul of E-LTRPT.2.3 (b)(iii).

  30. I have considered whether, as contended,  the  appellant  can  succeed
      under EX.1(a) as he satisfies the requirements  which  enable  him  to
      rely on EX.1 via the partner route.

  31. Mr Kotas has very  properly  referred  the  Tribunal  to  Home  Office
      guidance contained in the Immigration Directorate Instruction:  Family
      Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0(b), Family Life (As  a  partner  or
      parent) and Private life: Ten Year Routes.

  32. At 11.2.1 it is noted that where the application is  being  considered
      under paragraph EX.1 (a) in respect of the ten year partner or  parent
      routes, the decision maker must decide whether  the  applicant  has  a
      "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with  the  child.  This
      will be particularly relevant to cases where the child is the child of
      the applicant's partner, or where the parent is not  living  with  the
      child.

  33. It is however further provided at paragraph 3.5 that a ten year parent
      route is available to those who are in the UK and who meet all of  the
      suitability and eligibility requirements at every stage.

  34. It is made clear at page  37  of  the  guidance  which  provides  that
      applicants being considered under the ten year parent route must  meet
      the requirements set out at EX.1(a). They cannot qualify for leave  to
      remain under the parent route on the basis of EX.1(b).

  35. Even if the requirements in EX.1(a) are met, the  applicant  will  not
      qualify for leave to remain as a parent  under  the  ten  year  parent
      route if they do not also meet all the other requirements of paragraph
      R-LTRPT.1(a)(b) and (d) of the Immigration Rules, including  both  the
      suitability requirements set out in  paragraph  R-LTRPT.1.1(d)(i)  and
      the eligibility requirements set out at paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1(d)(ii).

  36. The guidance thus confirms that EX.1 is not a free standing  provision
      and even if the appellant gets gets to EX.1 he  must  still  meet  the
      eligibility requirements for the "parent" route  which  is  consistent
      with the analysis of the Tribunal in Sabir supra.

  37. Accordingly the assessment of "reasonableness" within the framework of
      EX.1 cannot be assessed in isolation of the preceding suitability  and
      eligibility requirements. As noted by  Mr  Kotas,  if  that  were  the
      position, the requirements under the parent route  would  be  rendered
      otiose.

  38. Further, under the partner route EX.1 only applies  if  the  child  is
      under 18 or was under 18 when the applicant was first granted leave on
      the basis that EX.1 applied.  In the  appellant's  case  however,  the
      relevant child was over 18 at the date of hearing  and  the  appellant
      was never been granted leave under  EX.1  and  he  thus  cannot  place
      himself within EX.1.

  39. I also accept the contention of Mr Kotas, that in an in country appeal
      Article 8 is to be assessed at the date of hearing. The relevant Rules
      applicable in this case expressly refer to the facts which must  apply
      as at the date of the application. A child who turns 18 at the date of
      the appeal will have their position preserved. The wording of EX.1 has
      no similar provision.

  40. Accordingly as at the date of hearing the child was over  18  and  the
      appellant cannot succeed under EX.1(a) nor as submitted by  Mr  Kotas,
      under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

  41. Judge Cockrill has considered the  Article  8  claims  and  has  given
      sustainable reasons for concluding that the respondent's decision  was
      proportionate.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed  Date 15 February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

