
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/04492/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decisions & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19th April 2017                    |      On 9th May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        Josephine Nwanyieze Kemakolam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Frans Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Keith Norton (Senior HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Twydell, promulgated on 12th September 2016, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 18th August 2016.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, who was born  on  23rd  December
    1973, and is a female.   She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 10th August 2015, refusing her application  to  remain
    in the UK outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.
     She has four children.  They were born on 30th May 2013, on 19th March
    2005, on 18th November 2009, and on 30th  June  2011.   Of  these,  the
    first two were born in Nigeria and the remaining two were born  in  the
    UK.  All are citizens of Nigeria.  A feature of this appeal is that the
    Appellant's immigration status has always been  precarious  since  29th
    September 2008 when she became an overstayer  on  her  visitor's  visa.
    Her claim is that she should be allowed to remain in the  UK  primarily
    on the basis of her oldest two children who have lived with her in this
    country for at least seven years at the date of  the  application,  and
    she has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  all  her  children,
    such that there would be very significant obstacles to her  integration
    into Nigeria, were they forced to return back to that country.

The Judge's Findings

 3.  The  judge  set  out,  first  the  Appellant's  claim,  and  then  the
    Respondent's case against that claim, before making her own findings of
    fact.  She was clear in that the Appellant was  currently  residing  in
    the UK with her children as a result of overstaying her visitor's  visa
    granted on  24th  April  2008  until  28th  September  2008.   She  had
    originally come to the UK with her husband, Ray Ihe Kemakolam, and  her
    two oldest children.  These two children were at the time aged 5  years
    and 3 years.  Two further children were then born in the UK, and  after
    that her husband "without trace of his whereabouts" left the Appellant,
    and "the Appellant has not sought to find her husband or  to  formalise
    her  separation  by  way  of  divorce  or  other  appropriate  judicial
    separation" (paragraph 15).  If there is a hint here of the unexplained
    separation  being  without  a   proper   explanation   then   this   is
    understandable, although no issue was taken in relation to this at  the
    hearing before me.

 4. The judge having set out the background  facts,  went  on  to  conclude
    that, "when considering the Rules, I come to the conclusion it would be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant and her children to leave the UK and
    integrate into Nigeria" (paragraph 24).  She then went on  to  consider
    Article 8 separately outside the Rules and applied the well-known  case
    of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, noting  that  the  Appellant  plainly  had  a
    family life in the UK, that  Article  8  was  engaged,  and  what  this
    eventually came down to  was  the  issue  of  proportionality,  and  in
    relation  to  the  children's  best  interests,  she  applied  the  law
    correctly (see paragraph 25).   The  judge  eventually  concluded  that
    given that the Appellant was "resourceful" and the  children  would  be
    looked after by a  "caring  and  protective  mother"  their  return  to
    Nigeria was  not  disproportionate  to  their  interests  and  was  not
    something that  could  be  impugned  on  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    reasonable.

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of  application  stated  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    findings on material matters and gave proper  no  reasons  for  finding
    that there would be no interference with the  Appellant's  private  and
    family life and the judge had not considered the best interests of  the
    children.

 7. In a decision dated 11th January 2017, the First-tier Tribunal rejected
    the application for permission on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  at
    paragraph 13 "explicitly addressed Section 55  and  gave  a  series  of
    reasons for the findings made, none has been addressed in the  grounds"
    (paragraph 4).

 8. However, the Upper Tribunal in a  decision  dated  23rd  February  2017
    granted permission to appeal on the grounds that the  Section  55  duty
    had not been properly carried out, in  that  the  judge  may  not  have
    conducted an evaluative assessment of the ties the children might  have
    established in the UK after seven years.  Second, that it would  appear
    that the judge focused on whether it was practicable for  the  children
    to return to Nigeria, rather than whether it would be  "reasonable"  to
    do so.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me on 19th April  2017,  Mr  Khan,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that the main issues were as follows.
     First, there was the question of the best interests  of  the  children
    because they had grown up in  this  country,  and  the  first  two  had
    already been living in this country for seven years, at the date of the
    application and they were well integrated into their studies at  school
    and had never been to Nigeria.  Second,  paragraph  276ADE  would  have
    applied in these circumstances given that the children had been in  the
    UK for seven years.  Indeed, it was accepted by the  Home  Office  that
    all three children are integrated into British society  and  are  doing
    well at school.  Third, the children had no  experience  of  living  in
    Nigeria.  Fourth, they were supported  by  a  Jewish  charity  in  this
    country and had no recourse to any other funding or sustenance  because
    the Appellant's husband had left her  destitute.   Fifth,  it  was  not
    reasonable in these circumstances to expect them to leave  the  UK  and
    return to Nigeria.  Fifth, the case  of  PD  (Sri  Lanka)  [2016]  UKUT
    00108, was put before the judge, and what this states (at paragraph 12)
    is that the ministerial statement in relation  to  children  was  clear
    that, "the key test for a non-British  citizen  child  remaining  on  a
    permanent basis is the length of residence in  the  UK  of  the  child,
    which the Immigration Rules set at  at  least  the  last  seven  years,
    subject to countervailing factors".  The judge, argued Mr Khan, had not
    adequately engaged with this.  Sixth, the Section 55 duty is clear from
    the case of JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT  00517  where  it  is  stated  (at
    paragraph 12) that, "children should be consulted and  the  wishes  and
    feelings of children  taken  into  account  wherever  practicable  when
    decisions affecting them are made".  Mr Khan reasoned that the children
    were of sufficient age to express an opinion.

10. For his part, Mr Norton relied upon his Rule 24 response.  He submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had refused permission  for  a  very
    good reason.  It used to be the  case  under  the  Home  Office  policy
    DP5/96 that a child who had remained in the UK for  seven  years  could
    stay here permanently  but  this  policy  was  revoked  in  2008.   The
    essential issues here were the best  interests  of  the  children,  the
    impact on  them  on  their  return  to  Nigeria,  and  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect them  to  go,  and  all  these  matters  had  been
    adequately addressed by the judge in her determination.  Permission had
    been granted on the basis that the judge appears to  have  concentrated
    on whether it was practicable for the family to return but this is  not
    so given that at paragraph 24 the judge expressly states that it  would
    be reasonable to expect the Appellant and her  children  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  Indeed, from paragraph 25 onwards the  judge  gives  detailed
    consideration to the merits of the Appellant's claim.  Finally, we  now
    had the decision in Treebhavon [2017] UKUT 13, and this makes it  quite
    clear that where the case of a foreign national, who is not an offender
    does not satisfy the requirements of Article 8, "the test to be applied
    is that of compelling circumstances".  There were simply no "compelling
    circumstances" in this case.

11. In reply, Mr Khan submitted that the judge had accepted that there  was
    limited family in Nigeria, and this consisted of  an  aged  grandmother
    who was ill and ill-equipped  to  look  after  the  Appellant  and  her
    children.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. Whereas it is plainly the case that the judge here  has  engaged  in  a
    detailed and comprehensive determination of the issues, and has applied
    the law correctly and diligently, the judge does  not  ventilate  fully
    the integration of the Appellant's children into  UK  society  and  the
    ties that they have formed here.  The case of JO (Nigeria) [2014]  UKUT
    00517 makes it clear that these matters are relevant.

14. Thus, a letter from [                                    ],  dated  7th
    June 2016, refers to three of the children at this church  school,  and
    it records the fact that the children's "attendance is  excellent  with
    the children achieving 100% so far this year" (see document  F  in  the
    Appellant's     bundle).      Another     letter     from     the     [
            ] refers to the first child, who was born on 30th May 2013, who
    had her birth in Nigeria, and  this  states  that  this  child  "is  an
    amazing young lady of exceptional  character.   She  has  a  very  good
    relationship with staff in school and is highly spoken of."  It goes on
    to say that she "will be choosing her options in  preparation  for  her
    major exams in year ten and eleven any interruptions in  her  education
    due to extenuating circumstances would be detrimental to  her  academic
    progress" (see F1 in the bundle).

15. These are matters that go to the proportionality  exercise  and  should
    have been taken into account.  Another letter for  the  child  born  on
    19th March 2005, who was also born in Nigeria,  refers  to  her  as  "a
    conscientious pupil who wants to do well.  He is a determined character
    who brings an energetic approach to all aspects of  his  learning.   He
    has made good progress since joining the school  in  the  spring".   It
    states that he "has been a pleasure to  teach.   He  is  courteous  and
    dependable and a popular member of the class" (see F4 in  the  bundle).
    A similar report also exists for the first child, already referred  to,
    born on 30th May 2003 (see bundle F6 to F7), and this states  that  she
    "has made great progress in the time she has been at the  school.   She
    seems to enjoy all subjects and takes great pride in her presentation."
     It goes on to say that she "has lots  of  friends  in  the  class  and
    always tries to cheer up anyone who is sad.  She is very  reliable  and
    has been a classroom monitor on a number of occasions".

16. Although these matters have not been taken into account, the fault  for
    that cannot  be  laid  entirely  at  the  door  of  the  judge  because
    remarkably there are no witness statements from the children, which one
    would expect at least from the older  two,  and  had  there  been  such
    witness statements, these matters could have been further set  out  for
    consideration by the judge.  The case of JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517
    states that the opinions of the children should be sought  where  their
    interests are affected.  It does not, however, mean that  the  children
    are not required to put forward their position for consideration by the
    decision maker.  That this has been the case  is  regrettable  and  the
    shortcoming doubtless lies  at  the  door  of  those  representing  the
    Appellant.

17. Second, and regardless of these matters, the  fact  here  is  that  the
    eldest two children had both been in the UK for seven years at the date
    of the application.  The oldest of these children is now  17  years  of
    age and the one after her is 12 years of age.   They  are  considerably
    removed from their infant years.  They are  likely  to  have  developed
    ties and private life rights of their  own  and  these  matters  should
    properly be put before the decision maker for  consideration.   In  the
    circumstances, the matter needs to be remitted back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for reconsideration of  evidence  which  really  needs  to  be
    properly put for a correct decision.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge
    other than Judge Twydell, under practice statement 7.2(b) in  that  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision and the appeal to be remade is such that  having
    regard to the overriding objective it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. No anonymity direction is made.  This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th May 2017


