
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04978/2015
                                                               HU/05867/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2017                       |On 18 December 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               1) OA (Nigeria)
                               2) YA (nigeria
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Springfield
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, who are irregular migrants, appeal from the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Brewer sitting at  Taylor  House  on  23
    June 2017), dismissing  their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant them and their children leave  to
    remain in the UK on family or private life grounds.     The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, but as the central  issue
    in their appeals is the potential impact on  their  young  children  of
    being required to relocate to their home country, I consider that it is
    appropriate  that  the  appellants  and  their  children  should  enjoy
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellants and their children are nationals of Nigeria.  The  first
    appellant, "OA", claims to have arrived in the UK in November 2004, but
    Home Office records show that  he  was  refused  entry  clearance  from
    Nigeria on 30 August 2006.  The second appellant, YA, was refused entry
    clearance on 31 March 2004, but nonetheless claims to have  arrived  in
    the UK in 2005.

 3. On [ ] 2008, YA gave birth in the UK to a son, "EA".   In  early  2010,
    the appellants made  separate  applications  for  leave  to  remain  on
    compassionate grounds.  The applications were refused with no right  of
    appeal.

 4. On 4 April 2011, the appellants made a joint request through their then
    legal representatives for reconsideration of the refusals.  While  this
    reconsideration request was pending, the second appellant gave birth to
    a daughter, "TA", on [ ] 2014.

 5. On 7 July 2015, all  four  members  of  the  family  were  served  with
    individual RED0001 notices as overstayers.

 6. On 20 August 2015, the respondent gave her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellants' human rights applications for leave to remain on the  basis
    of family and private life, which were deemed to have been made  on  14
    July 2015.

 7. The appellants did not qualify for leave to  remain  under  either  the
    Partner or Parent routes specified in Appendix FM.  Both EA and TA  had
    been present in  the  UK  for  less  than  seven  years.   Nonetheless,
    consideration had still been given to EX.1 as it was accepted that  the
    appellants  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  their
    children.  It was not accepted that it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the children to leave UK with  their  parents.   They  were  not  at  a
    critical stage of their education, and they would be able adapt to life
    in Nigeria with the help of their parents who were  familiar  with  the
    culture and customs of their home country, having spent the majority of
    their lives there.

 8. On the topic of exceptional circumstances, OA had previously raised the
    fact that his son EA suffered  from  acute  bronchitis.   However,  the
    appellants had not raised any ongoing concerns about EA's health in the
    most recent representations of 14 July 2015.  It  was  considered  that
    EA's health had improved since 2011.  The evidence submitted in support
    of the application indicated that the parents and  their  children  had
    been living within a Nigerian community whilst in  the  UK:  they  were
    therefore "somewhat familiar" with the customs, culture,  language  and
    social norms of Nigeria, and thus they would  be  able  to  adapt  more
    easily to life in Nigeria.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Brewer.   The
    appellants were represented by Ms Miszkiel  of  Counsel.  As  noted  by
    Judge Brewer at paragraph [36] of his subsequent decision, the evidence
    before him included "a  number  of  other  documents  provided  by  the
    appellant in 3 paginated bundles."

10. One of the bundles ran to over 300 pages. Most of  it  was  devoted  to
    medical evidence relating to EA. In an additional witness statement  at
    page 276-277, which she signed on 9 December 2016, YA said that she had
    lost her mother and a child in this country.   They  regularly  visited
    the graves of both.  If they were removed, they would not  be  able  to
    visit and lay flowers.  Her father was alone and she cared for him.  If
    her son, EA, was sent to Nigeria, he would  not  be  able  to  get  the
    medical facilities like here.  The medicines were fake and  there  were
    no good transport facilities to  take  a  child  during  the  emergency
    period.  No amount of financial support that would be sent to  them  in
    Nigeria by her family here could save EA's life.

11. In a report dated 8 December 2016, at pages 278  to  310  of  the  same
    bundle, Charles Musendo, Independent Social Worker, said  that  he  had
    been asked to undertake an independent social work  assessment  on  the
    family, commenting in particular on the following areas:

        -     Would it be reasonable to expect EA to leave the UK and settle
         in Nigeria in the light that he has spent most  of  his  formative
         years in the UK?

        -     In his  expert  opinion,  how  would  the  second  appellant's
         removal impact on her son and the family unit as a whole?

        -     Whether it would be in the best interests of EA to be  removed
         from the UK with his parents.

        -     Where  the  best  interests  of  the  children  lay  in  these
         circumstances.

12. In order to carry out this task, he had  spent  three  hours  with  the
    family at their home in Grove Park,  London   SE12,  and  he  had  also
    "relied" on various documents which  had  been  given  to  him  by  the
    appellants' legal representatives, which he went on to list.

13. Mr Musendo established from speaking to YA that she had given birth  to
    a son, [J], on [ ] 2012, who had died within a few hours of being born.
     She also "emotionally" explained to him that she had lost  her  mother
    in January 2013, when she had passed away in Manchester due to  ovarian
    cancer.  YA said that [J]'s grave was five minutes from their home, and
    they visited the grave "yearly" (paragraph 22).

14. At paragraphs 24 to 30 of  his  report,  Mr  Musendo  gave  a  detailed
    account of his conversations with EA and TA.  They presented  as  happy
    and thriving. He deliberately did not ask  them  how  they  felt  about
    going to Nigeria.  He also did not ask them about [J], or  about  their
    deceased maternal grandmother.

15. Nonetheless, as part of conclusions given at paragraph 63  onwards,  Mr
    Musendo said at paragraph 67:

         I am further  concerned  that  both  [EA]  and  [TA]  have  already
         experienced a significant loss in their life.  The  loss  of  their
         sibling is a huge blow to them and if they are to  experience  loss
         of their family friends, it is  likely  to  lead  to  psychological
         problems such as  sleeping  difficulties,  anxiety,  mental  health
         issues, poor concentration, behaviour problems to name  a  few...It
         would be contrary to the best interests of  [EA]  and  [TA]  to  be
         separated from deceased brother and family friends.

16. In his subsequent decision, the Judge said at paragraph [32]  that  the
    appeal at the hearing  "rested  entirely  on  the  ill  health  of  the
    children", principally EA and, to a lesser degree, TA.

17. At paragraph [37], the Judge said that he had heard oral evidence  from
    the appellants, and from YA's father.

18. At paragraph [45], the Judge found that the appellants, as well  as  EA
    and TA, had "a good  relationship"  with  YA's  father.   He  lived  in
    Manchester.  He was not in the best of health - suffering from diabetes
    and hypertension: "The family visit him about once a month".

19. After making extensive reference to domestic authorities on  the  topic
    of the best interests of the child,  including  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC),
    the Judge began his discussion at paragraph [56].  The  question  which
    he said he had to address was, if the  appellants  and  their  children
    were removed to Nigeria, given both children's allergies and the issues
    of food labelling and counterfeit drugs in Nigeria, would  that  amount
    to either (a) a significant obstacle to integration  into  Nigeria,  or
    (b) exceptional circumstances for the grant of leave to remain  outside
    the Rules, bearing in mind the duty of the respondent to have regard to
    the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are  in
    the United Kingdom?

20. The Judge went  on  to  find  that  YA  took  responsibility  for  food
    preparation and she would not doubt continue to do so in  Nigeria,  and
    accordingly there was no reason why the same level of care and scrutiny
    could not work in Nigeria if it worked in the UK.  With regard  to  the
    problem  of  counterfeit  drugs,  the  Judge  found  that  Nigeria  was
    endeavouring  to  tackle  the  issue,  and  that  the   prevalence   of
    counterfeit drugs had fallen from about 54% in 1990 to 16%  or  17%  in
    2016.   The  Judge  also  observed  that  much  of  the  problem   with
    counterfeit drugs in Nigeria related to counterfeit Malaria  medication
    (as distinct from the type of medication required by EA).

21. The Judge went on to conclude that the removal of the  appellant  would
    not infringe the best interests of either EA or TA, and there would not
    be  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  into  Nigeria  for   the
    appellants as individuals or taking into account the best interests  of
    their children.

22. At paragraph [65], the Judge set out his conclusions on  an  Article  8
    claim outside the Rules.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

23. The application for permission to appeal was settled by the appellant's
    solicitors.  Ground 1 was that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its
    consideration  of  exceptional   circumstances   (proportionality)   by
    unreasonably failing to consider the report of the  independent  social
    worker.  Ground 2  was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    consideration  of  exceptional   circumstances   (proportionality)   by
    unreasonably failing to consider the evidence of the  second  appellant
    and her father on the  topic  of  their  relationship.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to "properly" consider the evidence contained
    in passages from the witness statements of the second appellant and the
    second appellant's father.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

24. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
    grounds were considered to have no merit: they were just an attempt  to
    re-argue the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  Judge.  In  a  renewed
    application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appellant's solicitors  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    consider relevant evidence when exercising discretion.  On 29 September
    2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted the  appellants  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds for the following reasons:

         There was a report by an independent social worker before  the  FtJ
         but there is little in the decision to indicate  that  this  report
         was considered by him.  Although the Upper Tribunal  will  need  to
         consider whether the report could have made any material difference
         to the FtJ's ultimate conclusions, it is, at this  stage,  arguable
         that the FtJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  engage  with  relevant
         evidence.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

25. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Yong sought to extend the grounds of appeal into  other  areas.
    She indicated that she wished to challenge the Judge's findings on  the
    medical issues, and also his methodology in resolving the issue of  the
    children's best interests.  There had been  no  formal  application  to
    seek permission to vary the grounds of  appeal,  and  in  any  event  I
    considered it was far too  late  to  seek  to  introduce  new  grounds.
    Therefore, I refused Ms Yong permission to argue the appeal outside the
    scope of the two pleaded grounds for which  permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted.

26. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kotas  adopted  the  Rule  24  response
    opposing the appeal which had been settled by a colleague. He submitted
    that the Independent Social Worker report  added  very  little  to  the
    appellants' case, and it was fundamentally flawed.  It did not  contain
    an expert's declaration,  and  Mr  Musendo  had  been  discharging  the
    function of an advocate, not the function of an independent expert.

Discussion

27. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

28. Ms Miszkiel does not appear to have had a hand in the drafting  of  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and it also
    does not appear that she  was  asked  to  produce  her  record  of  the
    proceedings  before  Judge  Brewer.  This  is   significant,   as   the
    consequence is that there is no evidence before  me  which  contradicts
    the Judge's declaration at paragraph [32] of his decision that  at  the
    hearing the sole issue in controversy was whether  the  appeals  should
    succeed on account of the ill health of the children.

29. In her skeleton argument for the hearing, Ms Miszkiel relied  primarily
    on  medical  issues,  in  particular  the  availability  of  safe   and
    appropriate medication and treatment for the children  in  Nigeria.   I
    accept that additionally she relied on extracts  from  the  Independent
    Social Worker's report and upon the proposition (at paragraph 30)  that
    because (a) the appellants had lost their  second  child  and  (b)  the
    second  appellant's  mother  had  died  of   ovarian   cancer   shortly
    thereafter, the emotional ties between the appellants  and  the  second
    appellant's father were "above and beyond normal emotional ties"  -  as
    the second appellant cooked for her father and the whole family visited
    him.  Ms Miszkiel further submitted,  in  paragraph  31,  that  matters
    relating to death and burial were sufficient to engage Article 8.

30. However, as Mr Kotas submits, it  does  not  follow  that  the  hearing
    proceeded on the same  lines  as  that  foreshadowed  in  her  skeleton
    argument. There is no factual challenge in the grounds of appeal to the
    Judge's declaration  at  paragraph  [32};  and  there  is  no  specific
    evidence which shows that, after hearing  the  evidence  and  the  oral
    submissions of the representatives, the Judge ought to have treated the
    additional matters ventilated in the skeleton  argument  as  "principal
    important controversial  issues"  upon  which  he  needed  to  reach  a
    distinct and discreet conclusion  when  undertaking  a  proportionality
    assessment outside the Rules.

31. While the Judge did not engage with  the  Independent  Social  Worker's
    report as a 'report', he engaged with its subject matter. There  is  no
    material error in the Judge not giving weight to Mr Musendo's  opinions
    expressed in the report. Not only was the report flawed  in  lacking  a
    declaration by Mr Musendo of his duty of independence, but in substance
    the exercise which Mr Musendo was asked to undertake - and which he did
    undertake - was primarily that of an advocate, rather than that  of  an
    independent expert bringing to bear his expertise on matters which were
    within his competence.

32. Mr Musendo's assumption of the role of an advocate is typified  by  the
    passage from paragraph 39 of his report which is cited in Ground 1:

         Not only would the children have to then cope with the  trauma  and
         emotional distress of losing their sibling on whom they  and  their
         mother depend on, but they will also have  to  deal  simultaneously
         with the loss of their home, school, friends, way of life  and  the
         stability and the security that they are currently smothered in...

33. As is apparent from the other passages in his report to  which  I  have
    made reference earlier in this decision, there was no evidential  basis
    whatsoever for the proposition that the children were currently  having
    to cope with the trauma and emotional distress of  losing  [J].   As  I
    explored with Ms Yong at the hearing, TA had not even  been  born  when
    she "lost" her sibling.

34. Mr Musendo ascertained that the family visited [J]'s grave only once  a
    year.  At the same time, he did not ascertain  how  the  children  felt
    about their dead sibling.  Accordingly, Mr Musendo's  opinion  on  this
    topic was not relevant evidence of  which  the  Judge  needed  to  take
    express account in his proportionality assessment.

35. As for Ground 2, the Judge made a finding of  fact  at  paragraph  [45]
    about the status of the relationship between the  appellants  and  YA's
    father in Manchester.  He found that they had  "a  good  relationship".
    He did not find that there was a dependency relationship between YA and
    her father which meant beyond  normal  emotional  ties.   Although  the
    witness statement evidence of YA was that the family visited him once a
    fortnight, the Judge found that the family visited  him  about  once  a
    month.  There is no challenge by way of appeal to this finding of fact,
    which the Judge will have arrived at after hearing oral  evidence  from
    the appellants and YA's father.   Given  that  her  father  was  living
    independently in Manchester, whereas the appellants  lived  in  London,
    and given that he was receiving visits from the family  at  a  rate  of
    about once a month, no reasonable Tribunal properly directed could have
    found that YA enjoyed family life with her father for the  purposes  of
    Article 8.

36. Indeed, it is not suggested in Ground 2 that the Judge  ought  to  have
    held that the relationship between YA  and  her  father  satisfied  the
    Kugathas criteria.  The error of law challenge is that the Judge failed
    "properly"  to  consider  the  witness  statement  evidence  about  the
    closeness of  the  relationship  between  them  in  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  Hence, the error of law challenge takes no account of
    the oral evidence which the Judge received  on  this  topic.  Moreover,
    there is no reason to suppose that the Judge did not take into  account
    his earlier findings of fact when assessing  proportionality.   In  the
    light of his unchallenged finding of fact at  paragraph  [45],  it  was
    clearly open to the Judge not to treat the relationship between YA  and
    her father as a matter which was capable of tipping the scales  in  the
    appellants' favour when assessing proportionality.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 14 December 2017

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

