

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04012/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2020                           |On 27 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           Terrence Chun Yee yuen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. H. Salmon and Mr. R. Bircumshaw, Central England
                    Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms. H. Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appeal came before me to be remade following the decision of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hemingway dated 11 November 2019.


 2. The Appellant attended the hearing.


 3. This is a human rights  appeal.   However,  the  issue  before  me  was
    whether the Appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules  in
    relation to continuous residence, with reference in particular  to  the
    case law of Teixeira v SSHD [1989] Imm AR 432 and  schedule  4  of  the
    1971 Act.  If he did so, following TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109,
    his appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.


 4. Although the Respondent had been directed to file a copy  of  paragraph
    133 of the immigration rules as was in force at the time that  Teixeira
    was decided, she had not done so.  Neither had  she  filed  a  skeleton
    argument.  However, the Appellant's representatives had filed a copy of
    paragraph 133 as it was at the time that Teixeira was decided.  It  was
    agreed that this raised no new issues  in  relation  to  the  way  that
    Teixeira was decided, given the way that it was discussed  and  treated
    in Teixeira.


 5. Both parties confirmed that neither of them had been able to  find  any
    case law on this point since Teixeira.  Therefore it  was  agreed  that
    the most recent case law in relation to the application of schedule  4,
    and the issue of leave granted in the Isle of  Man,  was  the  case  of
    Teixeira.

 6. It was further submitted by Ms. Salmon, who had researched the  various
    statements of changes to  the  immigration  rules  since  Teixeira  was
    decided in 1989, that no change had been made to the immigration  rules
    in relation to the position of the Isle of  Man  until  sometime  after
    November 2012.  This was only in relation  to  work  permit  indefinite
    leave to remain provisions by means of paragraph  128A,  introduced  in
    November 2012.  However, paragraph 128A(aa) was not introduced at  that
    time, and therefore it must have been  after  November  2012  that  any
    specific provisions for the Isle of Man  were  brought  in.   This  was
    agreed by Ms. Aboni.

 7. In summary therefore, there was no update to  the  position  since  the
    previous hearing, and the appeal proceeded by way of submissions  only.



 8. With reference to [34] of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  it
    was accepted by both parties that the lateness of the  application  was
    not relevant, and did not affect whether or not the Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B.  The only issue before me  was  whether
    or not the time he spent in the Isle of Man counted towards the  period
    of continuous residence.


 9. I have taken into account the Appellant's witness  statement  dated  21
    June 2018, the chronology, the skeleton argument dated 6 September 2019
    and the documents in the Respondent's bundle.

Decision and reasons

10. The issue before me is essentially whether the  case  of  Teixeira  was
    correctly decided in relation to  schedule  4  of  the  1971  Act,  and
    whether schedule 4 similarly applies in  relation  to  the  immigration
    rules in general.

11. Ms. Aboni submitted that the position in the reasons for refusal letter
    was maintained.  Since Teixeira was decided, provision had been made in
    certain immigration rules regarding  residence  in  the  Isle  of  Man,
    namely those relating to work permits.  She  submitted  that,  had  the
    same been intended to apply to  the  long  residence  rules,  provision
    would have  been  made  in  the  specific  immigration  rule.   As  the
    Appellant did not have leave to enter on the basis  of  a  work  permit
    given that he was a student, his residence in the Isle of Man  did  not
    count towards his period of continuous leave.

12. As set out above, and as agreed by the parties, the relevant caselaw is
    the decision of Teixeira.  I accept this is a relatively  old  decision
    dating from 1989.  As was submitted by Mr. Bircumshaw,  it  is  not  as
    detailed as it might be if it were decided now.  However, I  find  that
    Teixeira is clear.  I find that the general point applies and that,  as
    stated, "schedule 4 has the effect of extending  the  rules  so  as  to
    cover the situation of persons such as the appellant: and if  there  is
    an apparent conflict between the Act and a rule, obviously the Act must
    prevail."

13. It is clear that the 1971 Act prevails over the immigration rules,  and
    over any guidance.  I find that the Respondent cannot rely on  her  own
    guidance to carry more weight and to offset the application of the Act,
    as is done in the reasons for refusal letter.  Ms. Aboni relied on  the
    reasons for refusal letter and the guidance  referred  to  there.   She
    stated that version 15, as set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter,
    had now been replaced by version 16, but there was no change.  However,
    I find that this is merely the Respondent's own guidance, not  even  an
    immigration rule, let alone an Act.  I find that reliance  on  guidance
    is not enough.

14. The wording of Schedule 4 is clear.  At  sub-paragraph  (1)  it  states
    that:-

    "Where under the immigration laws of any of the Islands a person is  or
    has been given leave to enter or remain in the island,  or  is  or  has
    been refused leave, this Act shall have effect in relation to  him,  if
    he is not a British citizen, as  if  the  leave  were  leave  (of  like
    duration) given under this  Act  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, or, as the case may be, as if  he  had  under  this  Act  been
    refused leave to enter the United Kingdom".

15. Sub-paragraph (2) states that:-

    "Where under the immigration laws of any of the Islands a person has  a
    limited leave to enter or remain in the  island  subject  to  any  such
    conditions as are authorised in the United Kingdom by section  3(1)  of
    this Act (being conditions imposed by notice given to him, whether  the
    notice of leave or a subsequent notice), then  on  his  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom this Act shall apply, if he is not a British citizen, as
    if those conditions related to his stay in the United Kingdom  and  had
    been imposed by notice under this Act".

16. I find that sub-paragraph (1) is clear that the  grant  of  leave  made
    under the immigration laws of the  Islands  is  as  if  it  were  leave
    granted under the 1971  Act.   I  therefore  find  that,  by  means  of
    schedule 4, leave granted in the Islands is to be  treated  in  exactly
    the same way as if it were leave granted under the 1971 Act.

17. I find the fact that the immigration rules were not  amended  following
    the case of Teixeira, which  was  decided  in  1989,  strengthens  this
    position.  No changes were made to the  immigration  rules  until  some
    point after November 2012.  Had the Respondent disputed the  conclusion
    in Teixeira, I find that the immigration rules would have been  altered
    at the time so as to make plain that Teixeira did not apply  so  as  to
    "extend the rules".  Schedule 4 provides that any leave granted in  the
    Islands must be treated as if it  were  leave  granted  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is not limited.   Leave  granted  in  the  United  Kingdom
    counts towards a period of continuous residence.  There is  nothing  in
    schedule 4 to suggest that leave granted in the Islands should  not  be
    treated as if it were leave granted in the United Kingdom  in  relation
    to the continuous residence  rules.   The  only  place  where  this  is
    suggested is in the Respondent's guidance  which  does  not  carry  the
    weight of the 1971 Act.

18. Further, with reference to the amendment being made to the  immigration
    rules in relation to work permits but not to continuous residence,  the
    fact that it appears that the immigration rules were brought into  line
    with schedule 4 of the 1971 Act in one particular area  does  not  mean
    that the fact that they have not been so amended in other areas offsets
    the overriding effect of schedule 4.  It was  submitted  by  Ms.  Aboni
    that schedule 4 related to  free  movement  of  people  in-between  the
    Islands and the United Kingdom, but I find that it is not  so  limited.
    It clearly states that any period of leave granted in the Islands is to
    be treated as if it were leave granted in the United Kingdom.

19. I find that, if the Appellant was given leave to remain in the Isle  of
    Man, this must be treated as if it  had  been  granted  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I therefore find that, following Teixeira and schedule  4  of
    the 1971 Act, any lawful period of residence in the Isle of Man  is  to
    be treated as a period of  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Lawful residence counts towards  continuous  leave.   Therefore  lawful
    residence in the Isle of Man should be  counted  towards  a  period  of
    continuous leave in the United Kingdom.

20. I was referred by Ms. Salmon to the Respondent's guidance on the Common
    Travel Area, Version 6.0 dated 22 November 2019, in particular at  page
    9 where it says that:-

    "Schedule 4 of the Immigration Act 1971 makes  specific  provisions  to
    ensure that the immigration laws of the UK, Jersey,  Guernsey  and  the
    Isle of Man are integrated.  In  practice,  this  means  that  where  a
    person has  been  granted  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  Crown
    Dependencies and then proceeds directly to the UK,  or  the  other  way
    around, that leave and any conditions attached to it is treated  as  if
    it had been granted in the UK".

21. This is the Respondent's  own  guidance  which  makes  clear  that  the
    purpose of schedule 4 is to ensure that the immigration laws of the UK,
    Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man are  integrated.   It  also  makes
    clear that the leave is to be treated as if it had been granted in  the
    United Kingdom.  It does not make an exception for the  rules  relating
    to continuous residence.   This  further  strengthens  the  Appellant's
    case.

22. I therefore find that the  Appellant  has  shown,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, given that the period leave in the Isle  of  Man  counts
    towards his period of continuous leave, that he meets the  requirements
    of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules.

Article 8

23. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 in  accordance
    with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The Appellant  has  a  private
    life in  the  United  Kingdom  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8.   TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 states at [34]:-


    "That has the benefit that where a person satisfies the Rules,  whether
    or not by reference to an article 8  informed  requirement,  then  this
    will be positively determinative of that  person's  article  8  appeal,
    provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason  that  it
    would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed."


24. Further, the headnote to OA and Others  (human  rights;  'new  matter';
    s.120) Pakistan [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC) states:


    "(1)  In  a  human  rights  appeal  under  section  82(1)(b)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, a finding that  a  person
    (P) satisfies the requirements of a particular immigration rule, so  as
    to be entitled to leave to remain, means that (provided  Article  8  of
    the ECHR is engaged), the Secretary of State will not be able to  point
    to the importance of  maintaining  immigration  controls  as  a  factor
    weighing in favour of the Secretary of  State  in  the  proportionality
    balance, so far as that factor relates to  the  particular  immigration
    rule that the judge has found to be satisfied."


25. Following these cases,  I  therefore  find  that  there  is  no  public
    interest in the Appellant not remaining in the United Kingdom, and that
    his removal would be disproportionate.


26. For the sake of completeness, in case  I  am  wrong  in  this,  I  have
    considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 on the basis that  he
    does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B, solely for the reason
    that his period of time in the Isle of Man does not count  towards  the
    period of continuous residence.

27. I find the Appellant has a private life in the United Kingdom.  He came
    to the United Kingdom in 2006 when he was 14 years  old.   He  spent  a
    year in education in Ipswich before moving to a school on the  Isle  of
    Man.  He then moved to the United  Kingdom  in  August  2011.   He  has
    therefore been in the United  Kingdom  and/or  the  Isle  of  Man  from
    September 2006, a period of over thirteen years.  He has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom, as opposed to the Isle of Man, since September 2011,  a
    period of over nine years.  He has not left the  United  Kingdom  since
    that time.

28. Given the evidence before me in the form of the  Respondent's  guidance
    which states that the immigration laws of the Isle of Man  and  of  the
    United Kingdom should be integrated, and given  that  the  relationship
    between the Crown Dependencies and the United Kingdom is very strong, I
    find that there is nothing to indicate that the time spent in the  Isle
    of Man should be treated any differently to time spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom in terms of integration.

29. I find that the Appellant is fully integrated into the United  Kingdom.
     I find that the Appellant has spent almost half of  his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He came here aged 14,  and  he  is  now  27.   He  has
    studied here, and worked here.  His family have invested a considerable
    amount of money in his education in the United  Kingdom.   He  has  not
    committed any criminal offence.   No  reason  has  been  given  by  the
    Respondent as to why he should not be granted  leave  to  remain  other
    than for the technicality regarding time spent  in  the  Isle  of  Man.
    Proceeding  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the immigration rules, I find that this would mean that
    the Appellant would be penalised despite the Respondent's own  guidance
    stating that the immigration laws of the United Kingdom and the Isle of
    Man were integrated.

30. Although it  was  not  submitted  that  there  had  been  a  legitimate
    expectation that he would obtain indefinite leave  to  remain,  I  find
    that the Appellant sought advice in the past from the  Citizens  Advice
    Bureau, and also from the authorities in the Isle of Man, as to whether
    his residency in the Isle of Man would affect  his  ability  to  obtain
    indefinite leave to remain, were he to abide by the immigration laws of
    the United Kingdom and/or the Isle of Man.   He  was  advised  that  it
    would not which, given schedule 4 to the 1971 Act, and the Respondent's
    own guidance which states that the immigration laws integrated, is  not
    particularly surprising.

31. I find that it not in the public interest to deny the Appellant's right
    to a private life on the basis that, although the immigration  laws  of
    the United Kingdom and the Isle of Man are said to be fully integrated,
    they are in fact not.  While I find that section 117B(1) provides  that
    the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest, and that there is a strong public interest in refusing  leave
    to those who do not meet the requirements of the immigration rules, the
    Appellant has met the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  on  the
    basis that he has always had leave  to  remain  in  either  the  United
    Kingdom or the Isle of Man, whose immigration  laws  are  said  by  the
    Respondent to be integrated, and where  Parliament  has  provided  that
    they be so integrated.

32. I therefore find that, even if I were to find that the period of  leave
    in the Isle  of  Man  did  not  count  towards  continuous  leave,  the
    Appellant should be granted leave in relation to his private life under
    Article 8.  The Appellant would be penalised for residing in  the  Isle
    of Man, although the 1971 Act clearly provides that leave given in  one
    territory should be treated as leave given in the other.  It  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh to deny the  Appellant  his  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom which he has built up over many years on  the  basis  of
    this technicality.

33.  The  Appellant  speaks  English  (section  117B(2)).   He  has  gained
    qualifications and been employed in the  United  Kingdom,  and  I  find
    that, were he  able  to  work,  he  would  be  financially  independent
    (section 117B(3)).  Section 117B(4) is not relevant  as  the  Appellant
    has not been in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  In relation to  section
    117B(5), the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom and/or  the  Isle
    of Man for over ten years.  He  made  his  application  under  a  route
    provided by the Respondent for those who have had ten years  continuous
    lawful residence.   This  shows  that  the  Respondent  considers  that
    further  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life   in   these
    circumstances,  given  that  it  is  expressly  provided  for  in   the
    immigration rules.  Section 117B(6) is not relevant.

34. Taking all of the above into account, I find  that  the  balance  comes
    down in favour of the Appellant.  I find that the Appellant  has  shown
    on the balance of probabilities that the decision is a  breach  of  his
    right to a private life under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  set  aside  by  way  of  a
    decision dated 11 November 2019.

36. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds, Article 8.  The Appellant meets the requirements of  paragraph
    276B of the immigration rules.

37. I have not made an anonymity direction.

[pic]
Signed                          Date 14 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  I have decided to make  a  fee  award
as the Respondent relied on her own guidance, whereas the 1971 Act is  clear
that leave given on the Isle of Man should be treated as if it were  granted
in the United Kingdom.  Different guidance  from  the  Respondent  reflected
this, making it clear that the immigration laws of the Isle of Man  and  the
United Kingdom should be integrated.  In the circumstances,  I  make  a  fee
award for the entire fee paid, �140.

[pic]
Signed                          Date 14 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


