
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04718/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th January 2018                          |On 1st March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mr Simon Limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 10th August 1986.  He  made
    application for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as  the
    adult dependent relative of his father, Mr Bhim Bahadur Limbu - an ex-
    Ghurkha  soldier.   The  Appellant's  application  was  considered   in
    relation to the Home Secretary's policy as outlined  in  Annex  K,  IDI
    chapter 15, Section 2A 13.2 as amended on 5th January 2015.  By  Notice
    of Refusal dated  5th  August  2015  the  Appellant's  application  was
    refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Turquet sitting at Taylor House on 9th August 2016.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 1st September 2016 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 15th September 2016 Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 21st  December  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison refused permission to appeal.

 4. On 14th January 2017 renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds stated that the Appellant's father and Sponsor
    had served in the Brigade of Ghurkhas for almost ten years and that  he
    had been discharged in 1979 but denied any opportunity to settle in the
    United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State had accepted that  the  Sponsor
    would have applied on discharge and that had the injustice not happened
    the Appellant would have been born British.  The grounds contended:-

      1) That there had been a failure to consider the  relevant  facts  and
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had concluded that the Appellant
         was not, contrary to the evidence of the  Sponsor,  dependent  upon
         him and had rejected the evidence of a close bond engaging  Article
         8.

      2) That there had been insufficient direction of law in that the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge had found that the Appellant's bonds  with  his
         parents amount to "no more than the usual emotional ties."

      3) The First-tier Tribunal Judge goes on to resolve  the  question  of
         proportionality against the Appellant and has failed to accept that
         unless a Respondent relies on  something  more  than  the  ordinary
         interests of immigration control, the weight to  be  given  to  the
         historic  injustices  will  normally  require  a  decision  in  the
         Appellant's favour.  (Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas/BOCs - historic
         wrong - weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC).

 5. On 1st March 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington refused permission  to
    appeal stating that the judge had given clear reasoned findings  as  to
    why she did not find family life and this was prior to the findings  on
    proportionality  which  would  import  the  consideration  of  historic
    injustice and the ordinary interests of immigration control.

 6. On 16th March 2017 grounds were lodged by the  Appellant  for  judicial
    review for refusal of the Upper Tribunal to grant permission to appeal.
     On 26th May 2017 the Honourable Mr Justice Morris granted  permission.
    In doing so Morris J said

         "It is arguable that the UT's refusal of permission to  appeal  and
         the underlying FtT determination promulgated on 1st September  2016
         were each wrong in law in that:-

          1) there was a failure properly to  assess  the  credibility  and
             weight to be attached to the Sponsor's evidence  at  paragraph
             49 of his witness statement; and

          2) the First-tier Tribunal Judge applied too high a threshold for
             testing the existence of

                  "Family life,  in  view  of  the  existing  state  of  the
                  authorities, having found there was some financial support
                  and some emotional attachment but that  the  claimant  was
                  not  'wholly  financially  dependent'   nor   'emotionally
                  dependent'"."

 7. Mr Justice Morris concluded that the issue of the correct legal test in
    relation to "family life" involving adult children raised an  important
    point of principle and that there was some other compelling  reason  to
    hear the claim in that if there was an error  in  relation  to  Article
    8(1)  the  case  then  raises  questions  relating  to  the   "historic
    injustice".

 8. On 20th October 2017 Master Gidden quashed the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to  refuse  permission  to  appeal.   On  15th  November  2017
    permission to appeal was granted by the Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 8th January 2018 the Secretary of State responded to  the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24  response  contends  that
    the judge was entitled to find that there was no more  than  the  usual
    emotional ties and that the judge had given  adequate  reasons  in  the
    determination as set out at paragraph 31.   Further  it  was  contended
    that the judge also properly considered the proportionality exercise at
    paragraph 32 and onwards.

 9. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Jesurum.  Mr Jesurum is extremely familiar with this  case.
    He attended before the First-tier Tribunal.  He is the  author  of  all
    Grounds of  Appeal  and  the  application  for  judicial  review.   The
    Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer,  Mr  Bramble.



Submissions/Discussion

10. Mr Jesurum relies on his Grounds of Appeal.  He notes that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had  found  that  the  Appellant's  bond  with  his
    parents amounted to "no more than the usual emotional ties" and accepts
    that while that test is a correct reference to the Kugathas test it  is
    arguably not sufficient and that it is necessary to show not dependence
    but real and committed support".  Dependence he submits  in  the  sense
    that it is an indispensible support is not a requirement.   He  submits
    it is necessary to look at  the  character  of  the  Sponsor  and  that
    everything in the Sponsor's favour should be considered and that  there
    have to be clear assertions as to what he has done.  He  refers  me  to
    the most recent authority of Jitendra Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320  being  a
    decision of the Court of Appeal and indeed one in which he appeared for
    the Appellant.  He takes me to paragraph 36 and 38 setting out that  it
    is insufficient to say dependence is more than an individual  tie,  and
    it is wrong in law of the  judge  to  concentrate  on  the  Appellant's
    parents' decision to leave Nepal  and  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without focusing on practical and financial realities entailed in  that
    decision.  He submits that  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the  whole
    decision to see if the findings were open to  the  judge.   He  submits
    that had the judge applied the correct test he would  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion.

11. Further he submits the judge's analysis pursuant  to  Section  117B  is
    wrong and that unless the Respondent relies on something more than  the
    ordinary interests of immigration control the weight to be given to the
    historic injustice will normally require a decision in the  Appellant's
    favour.  He considers that following Ghising [2013] the judge has taken
    the wrong approach.  He refers me to paragraphs 55 and 57 of Rai and in
    particular at paragraph 57 the findings of the  Court  of  Appeal.   In
    similar circumstances to this case the Court of Appeal  failed  to  see
    how the provisions in Section 117A and B of the 2002 Act can affect the
    outcome of the appeal.  In such circumstances he asks me to  set  aside
    the appeal and to remake it allowing the appeal.

12. Mr Bramble's approach is most helpful.  He starts by taking me  to  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 31 and 34 and  whether  the  relationship
    between an adult sibling and a parent in these cases engages Article  8
    and acknowledges that the decision predates Rai but concedes  that  the
    judge has potentially erred with regard to his findings on family life.



The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. I am satisfied both from the submissions made and Mr Jesurum and by the
    concession made by Mr Bramble that the judge has  materially  erred  in
    law in his assessment, approach and findings on  family  life  and  the
    correct approach is to now set aside that decision and  to  go  on  and
    remake the decision.

Remaking of the Decision

16. Rai is authority for saying that to apply a test of "exceptionality" in
    order to determine whether family life exists between an Appellant  and
    his parents is wrong and is contrary to the approach taken  in  Ghising
    and Gurung.  The correct approach is that there is  no  requirement  of
    exceptionality, that all depends on the facts, and that there  must  be
    something more than the love and affection between  an  adult  and  his
    parents or siblings which will not  in  itself  justify  a  finding  of
    family life.  Against that background I turn to the supplemental bundle
    that is provided by the Appellant's instructed  solicitor  and  Counsel
    and I have considered the further documentary evidence  that  has  been
    produced.  The correct approach is to apply the test of support and  Mr
    Jesurum asks me to find that the Appellant is in daily contact with his
    family and that there is evidence of  some  family  life  in  Nepal  of
    support.   Applying  the  test  set  out  in  Rai  the   Appellant   is
    consequently clearly a dependant.

17. The Sponsor is effectively taking up what should have been granted back
    in 1979.  I am satisfied  that  there  has  been  sufficient  evidence
    produced to show that the financial support to the Appellant  continues
    and that it is correct to make a positive finding of good character  of
    the Sponsor.

18. I have been considerably  assisted  in  this  matter  by  the  approach
    adopted by Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State who does  not
    seek to challenge this approach or these findings.  I  am  consequently
    satisfied the evidence shows real and committed support by the  Sponsor
    for the Appellant and bearing that in mind and taking into account  the
    guidance given in Rai I remake the decision allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and  is  set  aside.   On  hearing  further  evidence/submissions  from  the
Appellant's legal  representatives  the  decision  is  remade  allowing  the
Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23rd February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018`

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

