
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04562/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 26th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS SHAGUFTA FIRDOS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Ahsan, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aziz promulgated on 4th July 2017 allowing the appeal of
    the Appellant on the basis of her human rights in respect of  an  entry
    clearance application  under  the  Family  Reunion  Provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, particularly paragraph 352A  of  those  Rules.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin sitting as a judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The reasons given for granting permission may be summarised as follows:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal has made errors of law
         for the reasons succinctly set out in the  grounds,  in  particular
         that the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds is based
         on an erroneous finding that the marriage was  valid  when  it  was
         undertaken in the UK by proxy and thus  not  recognised  as  valid.
         The Judge arguable was in error in believing that the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules were met."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule  24  reply  but  was  addressed  by  the
    Sponsor in casual submissions.

 3. Given  that  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented,  and  as  the  Sponsor
    indicated was his  preference,  I  ensured  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's representative made her submissions first, and  in  extremely
    simple terms.  I then canvassed with the Sponsor whether he  understood
    all the arguments made and ensured that he comprehended the  procedure,
    the complaints made against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   I
    finally ensured that the Sponsor was able to ventilate his  reasons  in
    reply on the Appellant's behalf as to why the decision  was  free  from
    error, and that he was able to make any other submissions he saw fit on
    his wife's behalf.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  shall  now
    give.  I do not find that there was an  error  in  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set  aside.   My  reasons  for  so  finding  are  as
    follows.

 5. The Entry Clearance  Officer's  appeal  is  contained  in  three  short
    paragraphs.  The first two paragraphs concern the submission  that  the
    validity of the marriage in England and Wales is governed by the law of
    the country where the marriage is celebrated, however  given  that  the
    Nikkah ceremony took place with the Sponsor present in England  on  1st
    May 2012 as noted on the  marriage  certificate,  the  judge  erred  in
    finding at paragraph 37 of his decision that the registration  ceremony
    in Pakistan should be seen as the date of marriage, not the  date  upon
    which the Nikkah ceremony took place.  In support  of  her  appeal  the
    Entry Clearance Officer has simply relied  upon  a  web  link  to  what
    appears        to        be         a         Wikipedia         article
    (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage_in_Pakistan).  Firstly  I  note
    that the Wikipedia article was not appended to the Grounds  of  Appeal,
    nor was  there  any  application  under  Rule  15(2)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce that  further  evidence
    beforehand, nor was any such application made before me and nor was the
    article itself provided.  Consequently, without any production  of  the
    article in question or any application to  rely  upon  it,  the  appeal
    contesting the basis upon which the judge reached the findings that  he
    did at paragraphs 36  and  37  of  his  decision  is  based  upon  mere
    assertions rather than objective or background evidence or higher court
    authority or a professional/expert report on proxy marriages  conducted
    with one party in Pakistan and one in the UK as being  invalid  in  the
    United Kingdom, as one  would  have  expected.   I  note  before  going
    further that the second part of the grounds in relation to  Article  8,
    as Ms Pal conceded, is entirely contingent upon the first  issue  being
    made out namely in respect  of  the  judge's  findings  concerning  the
    applicable date of marriage not being open to him.

 6. Notwithstanding that the article was not produced  and  no  application
    was made to adduce that evidence I do go on to consider this matter for
    the sake of completeness and to provide a view on the matter  from  the
    Upper Tribunal in the event that I am wrong.

 7. In my view the judge was entitled to make the findings that he  did  at
    paragraphs 36 and 37 of his decision.   He  makes  clear  that  he  was
    prepared to accept the evidence he heard from the Sponsor that he comes
    from a community in which there are several  events  which  take  place
    over a period of time and that it is the registration ceremony  at  the
    end of these events which should be seen as the relevant  date  of  the
    marriage.  The Wikipedia article was not before  the  First-tier  Judge
    nor is there any reason given why that was not so, nor  any  indication
    that  an  opporunity  to  present  that   evidence   did   not   exist.
    Notwithstanding that, even if it were before me or  before  the  First-
    tier Judge I do not find that it would reveal  a  material  mistake  of
    fact.  This is because the judge reached the findings that he did based
    upon the live evidence heard  from  the  Sponsor  which  takes  matters
    beyond a mere Wikipedia article authored by members of the  public  and
    this was evidence that the judge was plainly permitted to either accept
    or reject in the event.

 8. Notwithstanding that, I do find that  the  marriage  was  a  valid  one
    because, as stated in the Grounds of Appeal to this Tribunal, the Entry
    Clearance  Officer  mentioned  that  the  law  of  England  and   Wales
    recognises a marriage as being valid if it is considered to be valid in
    the jurisdiction where it was contracted.  In this regard  I  note  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Awuku v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 178 wherein at [15, 16 and 23] the Court  of
    Appeal unanimously decided that the law of England and Wales recognises
    a proxy  marriage  if  it  is  valid  by  the  lex  loci  celebrationis
    principle.  That principle states in short  that  if  the  marriage  is
    valid in the country where  it  is  celebrated,  then  it  is  a  valid
    marriage for the purposes of the law of England and Wales.

 9. I note that the  key  reason  given  for  refusal  is  that  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  relied  upon  a  position  that  a  proxy  marriage
    performed where one of the parties was in the UK and the other  was  in
    Pakistan was not a valid marriage for the purposes of entry  clearance.
    However, that position which appears to be supported by a  letter  from
    the British High Commission of  9th  November  2010  which  appears  at
    paragraph 24.61  of  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  for
    Pakistan published on 7 December 2012, cannot undermine or deviate from
    the binding authority of Awuku  which  makes  clear  that  if  Pakistan
    recognises proxy marriages by telephone which  it  does  appear  to  do
    according to paragraph 24.60 of  that  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report, then  according  to  the  lex  loci  celebrationis  that  proxy
    marriage conducted remotely with a party in the UK  and  one  party  in
    Pakistan, would always be valid according  to  the  Muslim  Family  Law
    Ordinance 1961.  Consequently, notwithstanding the finding by the First-
    tier Judge that the operative date of the marriage was its registration
    in Pakistan, the marriage would be valid even if taking the date of the
    marriage being contracted and it being  conducted  by  telephone  proxy
    (where one party was in the UK and one party was in  Pakistan)  because
    such marriages are recognised in Pakistan, and therefore  are  in  turn
    recognised as valid under the law of England and  Wales.  According  to
    the lex loci celebrationis principle.

10. Therefore in light of the above, the Entry Clearance  Officer's  appeal
    against the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge do not reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 22/03/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini




