
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04015/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2019                        |On 18 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  Neera [A]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark instructed by Luqmani Thompson & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal the appeal  being  limited  to  the  proper  approach  to
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act as amended.   He is an  Indian  citizen
    with a subsisting relationship with his British citizen wife and child.
     His child has autism.

 2. Mr Melvin for the respondent indicated at the hearing that while he was
    not able formally to concede the  appeal,  he  did  not  wish  to  make
    detailed submissions in support of the Secretary of  State's  position.
    For the appellant, Mr Clark provided a skeleton argument which  I  have
    considered,  contending  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh   for   the
    appellant's highly autistic child to be expected to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom or to remain here without his father's support.

 3. The appellant has been continuously  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since October 2001, a period of nearly eighteen years.  This case turns
    on the reasonableness of expecting this particular child to go and live
    abroad in India and adapt to an entirely different culture when  he  is
    having so much difficulty in managing the present culture.

 4. The appellant's child has a significant  disability  arising  from  his
    autism.  He is physically clumsy.  Despite being 4 years old, he  still
    requires significant support in order to attend to the basic activities
    of daily living: he has no awareness of having soiled himself,  has  an
    obsession and fixation with animals and animal  toys  and  his  use  of
    words is limited to a few nouns and one or two nursery rhymes.   He  is
    unable to assemble two words together and speaks only  when  spoken  to
    and only then in single words.

 5. The appellant's child is well supported in the United Kingdom  and  his
    mother supports the family by working as a  regional  manager  for  the
    Middle East and North Africa for Business Monitor International,  which
    she would be unable to do, were the appellant not there to  look  after
    the child while she works.

 6. My attention has been drawn to the decisions of the Supreme Court in KO
    (Nigeria) UKSC 53 [2018], of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AB  and  AO  v
    Secretary of State EWCA Civ 661, SR (subsisting parental relationship -
    Section 117B(6)) UKUT 334  (IAC)  [2018]  and  JG  (Section  117B(6)  -
    reasonable to leave UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC).

 7. It is not necessary to set out in detail the decisions in those appeals
    because I am quite satisfied that  on  the  particular  facts  of  this
    appeal it is not reasonable to expect this child to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom or to remain here without his father, given  his  physical  and
    developmental difficulties.

 8. This appeal is accordingly allowed.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      24 May 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

