
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04031/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 22nd July 2020                |On the 12th August 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Masood, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. On 12 February 2019 the respondent made an order that the appellant
         is to be deported from the United  Kingdom  ('UK'),  following  his
         criminal convictions as it was considered that his presence in  the
         UK was not conducive to the public good. The respondent refused the
         appellant's human  rights  claim  in  a  decision  letter  dated  5
         February 2019.


      2. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, appealed this decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Callow) (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ").  In  a  decision  sent  on  18  December  2019,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds, and the appellant has
         now appealed, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 22nd July 2020, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. I conducted the hearing from  court
         at Bradford IAC with the parties' advocates. No technical  problems
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means. I  am
         grateful to Ms Masood and Ms Petterson for their detailed and clear
         oral submissions.

      4. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of minor children.  I  have
         referred to the  children  as  "A1"  And  "A2"and  the  appellant's
         partner as "X". Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
         otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
         proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or members of
         his family.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to
         the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead
         to contempt of court proceedings.



Background:

      5. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in the decision
         of the FtTJ at paragraphs 3-7. The appellant arrived in the UK at
         the age of 23 as a visitor. He married a British citizen in 2002
         but his application made in July for leave to remain as a spouse
         was refused on the basis that his relationship was no longer
         subsisting. By this time, he was in a relationship with X. X
         arrived in the UK in 1990 at the age of 24. There are two children
         born of their relationship, A1 in 2003 and A2 in 2005. X also had a
         son from a previous relationship. All the children are British
         citizens.


      6. Three applications made in 2008 for leave to remain on article 8
         grounds were rejected as invalid. In April 2009 the appellant made
         a further application relying on his relationship with X and his
         two elder children (hereinafter referred to as "A1" and "A2"), but
         this was refused. The decision was challenged by way of judicial
         review. In his statement, the appellant explained his involvement
         with the children's day-to-day activities (recorded at paragraph 5
         of the FtT J's decision). The respondent agreed to reconsider the
         decision and in April 2020 granted the appellant discretionary
         leave to remain until 8 April 2013. This was extended in September
         2013 until 3 September 2016.

      7. A third child was born in 2015 from a relationship between the
         appellant and another woman. In 2012 the appellant was sentenced to
         a 12 -month community order for an offence of battery of his
         partner X. A restraining order was also put in place and as a
         result the appellant left the family home. Notwithstanding the
         restraining order, the evidence of the parties before the FtTJ was
         to the effect that they continued with their relationship, although
         he did not live in the family home, and continued to see and have
         contact with the children.

      8. The appellant has a number of convictions for minor driving
         offences and cautions for the possession of cannabis. In April
         2015, the appellant was arrested by the police for drug-related
         offences and then released on bail. In June 2017 he was convicted
         following pleas of guilty to offences of conspiracy to evade a
         prohibition on the importation of cannabis between January - April
         2015, possessing cannabis with intent to supply on 22 April 2015.
         On 11 August 2017 he was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment on the
         first count with no separate penalty for the second count.

      9. The circumstances of the offence are set out in the sentencing
         remarks of the Judge and summarised in the decision letter at
         paragraph 17 in detail.
         The sentencing judge described the seriousness of the offence at
         the appellant had been convicted of in the following terms "...
         When they (the police) looked around what they found could only be
         described as a drug factory where you engaged in the preparation of
         cannabis for onward sale ... At the premises was a range of
         paraphernalia ... Hydraulic press ... White disposable suits which
         no doubt were there so that you could seek to avoid DNA
         transmission and this detection and link with the drugs as they
         were past further down the chain ... Police were able to trace via
         FedEx ... Two packages which have been sent to this country which
         they were able to link to you and to drug dealing. Police
         investigations traced ... WhatsApp messaging between you and a
         presumed supplier in the United States. It is clear to me that you
         are importing drugs ... Processing them and packaging them for
         onward wholesale supply ... Indication that this was a commercial
         enterprise which was operating on a very substantial scale ... You
         played a leading role ... In a substantial, commercial and
         sophisticated enterprise ... I have considered the mitigation ...
         You have children with whom you do not live with whom you are in
         contact.


     10. No separate sentence was passed in relation to the second count and
         thus he was sentenced to a period of four years imprisonment in
         total. On 11 May 2018 a confiscation order in the sum of �16,394.26
         was imposed.


     11. In light of his conviction, a decision to deport him was issued  on
         14 November 2017. This was responded to  by  the  appellant  on  31
         January 2018 and further evidence submitted on  21  March  2018.  A
         decision was made on 5 February 2019 to  refuse  a  protection  and
         human rights claim.



The decision of the Secretary of State dated 5 February 2019

     12. The decision letter is a lengthy document extending to 30 pages. It
         is not necessary to set out all that letter and it is summarised at
         paragraphs 8 (a) - (h) of the  FtTJ's decision.


     13.  Having  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  the
         sentencing remarks of  the  trial  judge  at  paragraph  17  ,  the
         respondent  addressed  the  submissions  made  in  respect  of  the
         protection claim by reference to the objective material relating to
         sufficiency of protection and  that  of  internal  relocation.  The
         respondent concluded that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that
         he would be at risk of harm or persecution on return or entitled to
         a grant of humanitarian protection in the alternative.

     14. In respect of his article 8 claim the respondent set out the nature
         of his claim which related to his relationship with his partner and
         three children in the United Kingdom and his  private  life  having
         been resident since 2002.

     15. The decision noted that his deportation was conducive to the public
         good and in the public interest because he had been convicted of an
         offence for which he had been sentenced to a  period  of  at  least
         four years (offences relating to  the  supply  and  importation  of
         cannabis  )and  thus  in  accordance  with  paragraph  398  of  the
         Immigration Rules, the public  interest  required  his  deportation
         unless they were "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
         those described in  the  exceptions  of  deportation"  set  out  at
         paragraph 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

     16. In respect of his offence, there was significant public interest in
         his deportation because he had been convicted of a serious offence.
         The trade in illicit drugs had a severe negative impact on  society
         and that drug addiction affected not only drug users but also their
         families. The  appellant  had  been  well-organised  and  played  a
         significant  role  in  the  supply  and  importation  of  drugs  as
         indicated by the sentence imposed. Despite the evidence  of  having
         undertaken courses in  prison,  it  was  considered  reasonable  to
         conclude that there remained a risk of reoffending in  the  absence
         of evidence that there had been any  improvement  in  his  personal
         circumstances since his conviction.

     17. When addressing his family life, it was noted that his marriage  in
         2002 no longer subsisted and in respect of the claim  made  by  his
         second partner Y, that she and the appellant had  planned  to  live
         together it was noted that when released on bail between  2016  and
         2017 he had not been allowed to contact directly or indirectly.  As
         to his relationship with X, it was noted  that  his  partner  lived
         with the appellant's two children and they lived  separately.  Amid
         the background there were no compelling  factors  why  the  parties
         could not live together in Jamaica. The respondent did  not  accept
         that the appellant's  relationship  with  his  three  children  was
         genuine and subsisting. In the alternative it was  considered  that
         they would be of an age where they might readily adapt to  life  in
         Jamaica with the support of  the  appellant  and  their  respective
         mothers.

     18. The decision addressed the best  interests  of  the  children,  but
         account was taken  of  the  lack  of  evidence  to  show  that  the
         appellant's presence was required to prevent the children's  health
         or development being impaired. It was further  taken  into  account
         that the appellant did  not  reside  with  either  partner  or  the
         children and that any disruption to family life had been caused  by
         the appellant's own conduct. The children would  continue  to  live
         with their respective mothers and will be  supported  by  them  and
         thus would adapt to life  without  the  appellant.  The  respondent
         considered that there were "no compelling factors" if the  children
         remained in the UK without the appellant.

     19. The decision letter  also  addressed  other  considerations,  which
         included the appellant's private life and his friendships which was
         said could continue via modern means of communication and that they
         were  no  very  significant   obstacles   to   his   reintegration.
         Consideration was also given to the medical  evidence  provided  on
         behalf of his partner X.

     20. In conclusion, the respondent considered that his deportation would
         not breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR and the
         public interest in deporting him outweighed his right to a  private
         and family life.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

     21. The appeal came before the FtTJ on  30  September  2019.  The  FtTJ
         heard oral evidence from the appellant, his partner and  two  elder
         children which was summarised at paragraphs [9]-[13]. The FtTJ also
         had a bundle of documentation including a witness  statements  from
         the family members, and the report of an independent social worker.

     22. The FtTJ findings of fact and analysis of the issues are set out at
         paragraphs [15]-[40].

     23. The FtTJ observed at [27] that in the  absence  of  any  meaningful
         evidence and submissions addressing Exception 1, the focus  of  his
         decision was that  of  Exception  2  and  whether  the  effects  of
         deportation on the appellant's children and partner would go beyond
         the degree of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any
         child or partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation.

     24. There was no dispute concerning  the  factual  background.  It  was
         accepted that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
         partner X, and with his three children. The eldest two children, A1
         and A2, born in 2003 in 2005 respectively were the children of  his
         relationship with X. They had met in or about 2002  and  had  lived
         together as a family with the appellant as an active  father  until
         2012 when as a result of an altercation  between  the  couple,  the
         appellant was charged and convicted of an assault upon his  partner
         X (of which no details have been  given)  but  that  a  restraining
         order  was  made  and  the  appellant  moved  out  to  a  different
         geographical  area  (see  4.6  of   the   ISW   report).   However,
         notwithstanding his move from the family home, it was common ground
         that the appellant continued to have contact with the  children  at
         weekends and maintained his relationship  with  them.  He  and  his
         partner X had reconciled but were not living together.

     25. The FtTJ accepted that there was a genuine subsisting  relationship
         between the appellant and his partner and importantly the  children
         including his third child who was born from a relationship  with  Y
         with whom he had a short relationship. At the date of  the  hearing
         his third child was three years of age.

     26. The FtTJ also accepted the evidence of the children which was  also
         reflected in the ISW report that the appellant  had  exercised  the
         role of a parent despite having lived apart from the  family  since
         2012 (see paragraph 16).

     27. At [27] the FtTJ found on the facts that there was no real prospect
         of X and the children joining the appellant in Jamaica and at  [31]
         the FtTJ set out his reasoning in support of that. Namely, that the
         two elder children were at an age where it would be  against  their
         best interests and  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  uproot  them  and
         relocate to a country of which they had  no  first-hand  knowledge.
         Such a move would disrupt their education and deprive them  of  the
         opportunity to be educated in the UK.  The  judge  found  that  the
         eldest child was at a critical stage in his education. There was no
         family support to call on.

     28. Dealing with the issue of whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
         expect them to remain in the UK without the appellant, he concluded
         from the evidence that undoubtedly X and the children would  suffer
         great distress if the appellant were to be deported and their lives
         be made more difficult (at [27[), and  that  this  was  the  likely
         consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal who  had  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner and children  in
         the UK. He concluded on the evidence that the effect upon X and the
         children would "not go beyond the degree of harshness  which  would
         necessarily be involved" and that the  appellant's  involvement  in
         the light of the children and providing support and counselling did
         not of itself mean that the  effects  of  deportation  were  unduly
         harsh  for  X  and  the  children.  He  also  considered  that  the
         difficulties which X  herself  would  inevitably  face,  would  not
         elevate the case above the commonplace so far as the effects of the
         appellant's deportation on her children were concerned. At [33] the
         FtTJ made reference to having "carefully considered" the effects of
         deportation and that they would be likely to  have  a  "detrimental
         effect" and again referred to those effects at [34] as "undoubtedly
         detrimental".

     29. At [27] he also considered that in the event of deportation face-to-
         face contact would be possible, noting that X, born in Jamaica  had
         previously visited there and that she could take  the  children  to
         visit the appellant.

     30. Thus, the judge concluded that it  had  not  been  shown  that  the
         appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh for his  children  or
         on his partner.

     31. Accordingly, the judge proceeded to consider whether there were any
         "very compelling circumstances" over and above those  described  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2.

     32. At [29], the FtTJ addressed the submission advanced  on  behalf  of
         the appellant that it would be unduly harsh for  him  alone  to  be
         deported based on the  prevalence  of  violent  crime  in  Jamaica.
         Having taken account of the objective material the judge  concluded
         that the appellant was familiar with the social and cultural way of
         life in Jamaica where he had lived for the first 23  years  of  his
         life. He took into account that the authorities  in  Jamaica  could
         offer a level of protection and that the appellant could reasonably
         relocate away from his home area and that it  had  not  been  shown
         that he would be at risk. The judge  concluded  that  the  evidence
         advanced on his behalf addressing the appellant's  claim  fear  was
         "minimal"  and  that  there  were   no   details   addressing   the
         circumstances of the deaths of his family in Jamaica  nor  that  he
         would be of any interest to any gang in that country  which  had  a
         real intent to inflict serious harm. The judge also  observed  that
         the appellant raised such a fear some 17 years after his arrival.

     33. Whilst the judge had not  been  addressed  upon  Exception  1,  the
         emphasis being on Exception 2, the FtTJ considered those factors at
         [32], concluding that it had not been established that he had  been
         lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  his  life  nor
         that they were very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  to
         Jamaica taking into account that he was a  mature  person  in  good
         health and capable of working.  He  retained  social  and  cultural
         links with his home country through his association with his family
         and friends and was likely to be able to reintegrate and  make  use
         of employment skills that he had. The judge concluded that  he  had
         an understanding of life in Jamaica with an  adequate  capacity  to
         participate in it.

     34. At paragraphs [33] and [34] the FtTJ concluded  that  having  taken
         account of all the relevant factors he was not  satisfied  that  it
         had been demonstrated that they were "very compelling circumstances
         "in  the  appellant's  case.  The  FtTJ  took  into   account   the
         circumstances of the appellant  and  his  children.  There  was  no
         dispute  that  the  appellant  had   a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with X and the three children; the  judge  found  that
         removal would be likely to have a detrimental effect upon them  but
         was not unduly harsh. The judge took into account  that  throughout
         his relationship with X save for an interlude of about three years,
         the parties  had  been  aware  of  the  precarious  nature  of  his
         immigration status. The judge also gave consideration again to  the
         circumstances of his offending and the seriousness of the  offences
         committed at [34]. The judge considered the factors bearing on  the
         appellant side of the balance but  concluded  that  notwithstanding
         those factors and affording significant weight to  the  appellant's
         family relationships and the best interests of  the  children,  the
         weight of the public interest on the facts of this appeal was  such
         that  it  could  not  be  said  that  they  were  "very  compelling
         circumstances" as required by section 117 C (6).

     35. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.




The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

     36. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and
         permission was refused by  the  FtTJ  but  on  reconsideration  was
         granted by UTJ Keith on 26  February  2020  where  he  stated  that
         "while the FTT carefully considered evidence from the appellant and
         his partner, and had referred to the social worker report at [12] ,
         the FTT arguable (sic) erred in failing to analyse  the  report  in
         the section findings of fact ( [15] onwards) and  engage  with  the
         contents, said to indicate a significant impact on the  appellant's
         children. While the other grounds appear to be weaker, the grant of
         permission to appeal is not limited in its scope. "

     37. The appellant was represented  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Ms
         Masood of Counsel who had  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
         before the FtT and had drafted the grounds of appeal. The Secretary
         of  State  was  represented  by  Ms  Petterson,  Senior  Presenting
         Officer.




    Preliminary Issue:

    Jurisdiction:

     38.  The  first  issue   that   requires   consideration   relates   to
         jurisdiction. The chronology of events demonstrates that  following
         the decision of the FtTJ  promulgated  on  the  18  December  2019,
         grounds of appeal were filed on the 31 December 2019. Permission to
         appeal was refused on the 15 January 2020. On 28  January  2020  an
         application was made to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal
         which was granted by UTJ Keith on the 26 February 2020. However, on
         the 11 February 2020 the appellant, having been detained  at  Brook
         House was removed to Jamaica.

     39. Decision and directions were sent to the parties by UTJ Canavan  in
         which she considered the chronology set out above and directed that
         subject to any representations made  by  the  parties,  the  appeal
         would be treated as abandoned.

     40. In compliance with those  directions,  the  appellant's  solicitors
         sent further submissions where it was argued that  the  appeal  did
         not fall to be treated as abandoned by virtue of section 92 (8)  of
         the 2002 act and that whilst  he  was  removed  to  Jamaica  on  11
         February 2020, this was not a voluntary departure and that  section
         92 (8) covered only voluntary departures and did not apply  to  the
         circumstances where an appellant is removed against their will. The
         submissions cited the decision in SR (Algeria) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
         Civ 1375 at paragraph 15.

     41. The respondent also provided short written submissions in which  it
         was accepted that in view of  the  appellant  having  been  removed
         rather than having voluntarily left the UK, the appeal did not fall
         to be treated as abandoned ( see email from Mr A.  Tan  (Presenting
         Officer).

     42. Consequently, the parties agree that the appeal is  not  abandoned.
         In making an assessment of the issue, the following  provisions  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are relevant:



         "78.  No removal while appeal pending

         (1)     While a person's appeal under section 82(1) is  pending  he
         may not be-

         (a)     removed from  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  a
         provision of the Immigration Acts, or

         (b)     required to leave the United Kingdom in accordance  with  a
         provision of the Immigration Acts.

         (2)     In this section "pending" has the meaning given by  section
         104.

         92.    Place from which an appeal may be brought or continued

         ...

         (8)     Where an appellant brings an appeal from within the  United
         Kingdom but leaves the United Kingdom before the appeal is  finally
         determined, the appeal is to be treated  as  abandoned  unless  the
         claim to which the appeal relates has been certified under  section
         94(1) or (7) or section 94B.

         ...

     43. 104.  Pending appeal

         (1)     An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-

         (a)     beginning when it is instituted, and

         (b)      ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn   or
         abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

         (2)     An appeal under section 82(1) is not finally determined for
         the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-

         (a)     an application for permission to appeal under section 11 or
         13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could be  made
         or is awaiting determination,

         (b)     permission to appeal under either  of  those  sections  has
         been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination, or

         (c)     an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of  that
         Act and is awaiting determination.



     44. In the decision of Niaz (NIAA 2002 s. 104: pending  appeal)  [2019]
         UKUT 399 (IAC) 25 the Upper Tribunal stated at [25].

         "25.    As a general matter, we agree with Mr Farhat that a  person
         who does have a pending appeal, and who is removed by the Secretary
         of State pursuant to her immigration powers, does not thereby cause
         their appeal to be abandoned under section 92(8).  The  meaning  of
         "leaves  the   United   Kingdom"   in   this   context   has   been
         authoritatively determined by  Sales  LJ,  giving  judgment  in  SR
         (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA
         Civ 1375:-

         "15.   The phrase "Where an appellant brings an appeal from within
             the United Kingdom but leaves the United  Kingdom  before  the
             appeal is finally determined"  defines  the  circumstances  in
             which the appeal is to be treated as abandoned.  In  my  view,
             the word "leaves" used  in  this  context  means  "voluntarily
             leaves the United Kingdom".  It does not cover a situation in
             which  an appellant  is  removed  against  her  will  by  the
             Secretary of State.

         16.    My reasons for construing the word "leaves" in this way  are
             as follows:

             (i)      To my mind, as a matter of ordinary usage, the  word
                  "leaves" has a strong connotation of an action being taken
                  by an agent on a voluntary basis (e.g. "The protester did
                  not  leave  the  building  but  was  removed  from  it  by
                  a security guard");
             (ii)     In certain contexts it may be possible for  the  word
                  to be used to  refer  to  simple  physical  relocation  of
                  a person, however  that  relocation  might  be  achieved,
                  whether by deliberate action taken by the person as  agent
                  or by actions taken by others  to  relocate  that  person.
                   However, there are no indications from the context  here
                  that such a wider meaning was intended. On the  contrary,
                  I think that both the linguistic context  and  the  wider
                  context and scheme of the legislation support  the  narrow
                  meaning  of  "leaves"  referred  to  above.   As  to   the
                  linguistic  context,  the   word   "leaves"   appears   in
                  a composite opening phrase in which  there  is  a single
                  subject, the "appellant", who does two things: she "brings
                  an appeal" and she "leaves the United Kingdom".  The first
                  clearly imports a notion of voluntary agency on the  part
                  of  the  appellant,  since  bringing  an appeal  is  not
                  something which is done to an appellant,  and  I see  no
                  reason  to  change  the  sense  of  the  appellant   being
                  a voluntary agent doing something when one comes  to  the
                  second verb in the same phrase.  The use of the word "but"
                  supports this view: the appellant has acted voluntarily to
                  commence an appeal, but then acts voluntarily in  another
                  way so that it should be treated as abandoned.
             (iii)    Rule of law considerations in  this  context  support
                  the same conclusion.  In a state governed by the rule  of
                  law, where the state itself  is  the  subject  of  ongoing
                  litigation, it would breach rule of law principles for the
                  state to be able to defeat the litigation not by defending
                  it on the merits  before  a court  or  Tribunal,  but  by
                  physically removing the opposing  party  so  that  she  is
                  prevented from  bringing  her  claim  before  a court  or
                  Tribunal, as appropriate, for determination  according  to
                  law.   Parliament  is  taken  to  legislate  for  a state
                  governed by the rule of  law  with  rights  of  access  to
                  justice: see, for example, R (Anufrijeva) v  Secretary  of
                  State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL 36; [2004] 1  AC
                  604, paragraphs [26]-[28]. Accordingly, Parliament must be
                  taken to have intended to use the  word  "leaves"  in  the
                  narrow sense referred to above, where it is the  voluntary
                  act of the appellant which has the stated  effect  of  the
                  appeal being abandoned.
             (iv)    The narrower interpretation of the word "leaves"  also
                  accords with what I think  is  the  manifest  object  and
                  purpose of the provision, namely to make  it  possible  to
                  strike out an appeal with a minimum of  procedural  fuss
                  when an appellant has voluntarily left the United Kingdom,
                  since such  action  is  generally  inconsistent  with  the
                  serious pursuit of an appeal launched  on  an in-country
                  basis.  To give the word "leaves" a wider  meaning  would
                  involve going beyond that object and purpose  without  any
                  good reason to do so.
             (v)     It is also significant that in those  cases  in  which
                  predecessor provisions, including section 104(4)(b) of the
                  2002 Act, set out above, have  been  considered  in  this
                  court, the judges expressing views  as  to  their  meaning
                  have been careful to say that the word "leaves" refers  to
                  the appellant "by his voluntary action" physically leaving
                  the United Kingdom: see MM (Ghana) v  Secretary  of  State
                  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]   EWCA   Civ   827   at
                  paragraph [32] and Shirazi v Secretary of State  for  the
                  Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1562; [2004]  INLR  92  at
                  paragraph [13]. These observations have not been critical
                  to the points in issue  in  those  cases,  which  in  fact
                  concerned voluntary departures by an appellant.  However,
                  they are in  line  with  my  own  view  that  the  natural
                  interpretation of the word "leaves"  in  this  context  is
                  that it connotes voluntary  action  on  the  part  of  the
                  appellant in question."
     45. Consequently, applying those provisions and as agreed by the
         advocates, the appeal does not fall to be treated as abandoned, and
         Section 92(8) does not apply. Therefore, the appellant still has a
         valid appeal.

     46. I therefore deal with the submissions from the parties dealing with
         the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellant.



The grounds:

     47. Ms Masood, who had appeared on behalf of the appellant  before  the
         FtT and drafted the grounds of  appeal,  relied  upon  her  written
         grounds. No further  written  submissions  have  been  received  on
         behalf of the appellant. However, Ms Masood made  oral  submissions
         to which I have given careful consideration.

     48. The written grounds  submit  that  an  important  question  in  the
         appellant's appeal was whether the effect  of  deportation  on  the
         appellant's children would be "unduly harsh" (see "Exception 2"  in
         section 117 C (5) of the NIAA 2002 and NA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 662, paragraph 37 per Jackson LJ.  The grounds submit that
         the FtTJ's assessment was flawed.

     49. Ground 2 submits that the FtTJ failed to properly address and  take
         into account the evidence of the ISW's opinion about the effect  of
         the appellant's deportation on  the  children  particularly  A1  at
         paragraphs 5.9.1, 5.10 and 17.6. Ms Masood submitted that this  was
         her principal ground of appeal.

     50. It was submitted there was no real consideration of the  report  in
         the decision. At paragraph 27 the FtTJ stated that  "undoubtedly  x
         and the children would suffer great distress if the appellant  were
         to be deported and their lives will be  made  more  difficult.  But
         those were the  likely  consequences  of  the  deportation  of  any
         foreign criminal who had genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner and children in the UK". The grounds submit that the  ISW's
         opinion was that A1 would not simply suffer  "distress"  but  "poor
         mental health impacting on his health and  social  development"  if
         his father were to be deported.

     51. At paragraph 9 of the grounds  it  was  submitted  that  a  careful
         approach to the professional evidence  was  more  important  for  a
         meaningful appraisal of the children's best interests.

     52. In her oral submissions Ms Masood set out  the  background  to  the
         claim identifying that there were three relevant children and  that
         the appellant had been convicted  of  offences  relating  to  drugs
         having received a sentence of four years. As to the  evidence  that
         was before the judge she highlighted  that  there  were  statements
         from the appellant and his partner and the two eldest children  and
         also a report from an ISW (set out at page 47).

     53. In her submissions she invited the Tribunal to consider  particular
         parts of the ISW report.

     54. Paragraphs 5.1-5.10 related to A1 and paragraph 5.5 - 5.7  set  out
         the conversations the ISW had with A1  and  at  5.9  the  ISW  made
         reference to a discussion that the ISW had with A1. It was recorded
         that he was aware of the prospect  of  his  father  being  deported
         however when this was discussed the ISW recorded that "[A] appeared
         shocked at the suggestion became extremely distressed  placing  his
         head in his hands and sobbing." At paragraph 5.10  the  ISW  stated
         "it is my professional view that [A's]  response  was  extreme  and
         indicates highly  expressed  distress  which  A  is  struggling  to
         process and manage."

     55. Paragraph 6.1 - 6.4 concerned A2. At 6.1 it was stated that A2  had
         no learning needs and was not being treated for  any  emotional  or
         physical health needs. A2 was described as having an  outgoing  and
         lively personality, engaging easily in  conversation  and  able  to
         express the thoughts and feelings well. At 6.3 A2 told the ISW that
         she misses her dad and would prefer him to be at home with her.  At
         6.4 reference was made to maintaining closeness with her father  by
         visiting and speaking to on the phone.

     56. Section 9 concerned the circumstances of  the  appellant's  partner
         and Ms  Masood  direct  the  Tribunal  to  paragraph  9.3  and  the
         reference to the appellant's partner  discussing  the  relationship
         between A1 and the appellant as "particularly strong and when  they
         were both  at  home  they  would  spend  a  large  amount  of  time
         together."

     57. Section 10 concerns the role the appellant played in the  lives  of
         his partner and children and section 11 concerns the  closeness  of
         the family unit and at section 12.1 it was recorded  that  both  A1
         and A2 discuss the close relationship with their  father  in  which
         they were able to rely on him for emotional support.

     58. Ms Masood drew my attention to section 14.1  where it was  recorded
         that the children had found it "extremely difficult  to  cope  with
         their father in prison although have managed this and the knowledge
         that there is an end date and he will be coming home.  Should  this
         not be the case, if x is deported to Jamaica, the  negative  impact
         on both mothers and the children will  be  significant.  It  is  my
         professional opinion that this will have a devastating effect on A1
         and A2 in particular".

     59. She submitted that the "key paragraph" was that  set  out  at  17.6
         where the ISW stated "my  professional  views  that  should  x  not
         return to his previous role in the children's lives this will  have
         a significant detrimental impact on them and for A1 in  particular.
         It is my view that A1 will suffer poor mental health, impacting  on
         his health and social development if  his  father  is  deported  to
         Jamaica."

     60. When looking at the determination she submitted that there  was  no
         reference to the ISW report at paragraph 16 when referring  to  the
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship and at  paragraph  27,
         although reference is made to the issue of undue harshness, the ISW
         report went further than the matters set out in that paragraph.

     61. In her oral submissions, Ms Masood  sought  to  rely  on  a  recent
         decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Imran  (Section  117C  (5);
         children, unduly harsh) [2020] UAUT 83 (IAC) and the discussion  in
         that case of two decisions of the Court of Appeal in  PG  (Jamaica)
         and KF ( Nigeria). In her submissions, she highlighted  factors  of
         those cases and in particular paragraph 27 of PG (Jamaica).  As  to
         the decision in Imran she relied upon paragraph  29  and  submitted
         that there was evidence of a similar type in the present appeal.

     62. She submitted that there was evidence in the  ISW  report  that  A1
         would be distressed or traumatised and would suffer emotional  harm
         if his father was deported and this  was  clearly  referred  to  at
         paragraph 17.6 that he would suffer "poor mental health".

     63. Ms Masood submitted that the error was material to the outcome  and
         that if the FtTJ had properly considered the report the judge would
         have "inevitably have reached  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
         "unduly harsh" for the appellant  to  be  deported  from  Jamaica".
         However, in her submissions she accepted that that would  not  have
         been conclusive but that this was an important "steppingstone"  (as
         referred to in NA (Pakistan).

     64. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted  that  the  FtTJ
         did not make any material error of law in  his  decision  and  that
         ground 2 was a "weight argument" characterised  by  the  submission
         that the judge did not accord sufficient weight to the ISW  report.
         She submitted that the  FtTJ  was  not  required  to  recite  every
         paragraph of the ISW report and  that  even  when  looking  at  the
         factors that Counsel had referred the Tribunal to ,  which  related
         to distress and shock from two teenagers at the prospect  of  their
         father being deported may  make  it  "harsh"  but  not  necessarily
         "unduly harsh" and bearing in mind that the appellant would have to
         meet a higher and  more  demanding  test  than  that  required  for
         Exception 2.

     65. Ms Petterson submitted that whilst Ms Masood had pointed to  issues
         in the ISW report, it was not an  error  of  law  to  consider  the
         report in the round and reach a conclusion  on  the  evidence.  She
         submitted that it may show harsh consequences for the children, but
         it did not go beyond that which any  child  would  experience  when
         being separated from a parent.

     66. As to the decision in Imran  (as  cited)  and  relied  upon  by  Ms
         Masood, she submitted that in  relation  to  the  decisions  of  PG
         (Jamaica) and KF (Nigeria)  the  varying  levels  of  distress  and
         potential level of harm did not meet the  unduly  harsh  test.  She
         sought to distinguish the case of Imran itself on the basis of  him
         falling into the  category  as  a  "medium  offender"  having  been
         sentenced to 18 months imprisonment and therefore S 117C(5) applied
         which was not the case for the present appeal.

     67. Ms Petterson further submitted that even taking the evidence at its
         highest, the ISW's opinion of the impact on A1 set out at paragraph
         17.6 was not supported by any other evidence beyond  that  opinion.
         A1 was not undergoing any assistance or therapy as a result of  his
         father's imprisonment.

     68. In essence she submitted this was a case where it was asserted that
         the FtTJ did not place sufficient weight on the  ISW  opinion.  The
         judge was not required to cite the entire contents of  the  report,
         and it could be taken  that  the  judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
         contents but that the ISW report was not  determinative  and  given
         that the appellant fell into the highest category, on the  evidence
         before the judge it was open for him to find that the appellant did
         not demonstrate "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above
         those in Exception 2.

     69. By way of reply Ms Masood submitted that she did  not  accept  that
         ground 2 was an argument about the weight of  the  ISW  report  but
         that the FtTJ gave no consideration to the report. In this  respect
         she relied upon her skeleton argument before the FtTJ at  paragraph
         37 where it was stated "it would be unduly harsh on x and A1 and A2
         to remain in the UA without the appellant. The likely impact  on  x
         of separation from their father as detailed in the ISW's report  at
         paragraph 14.1 - 14.3 and  15.1  -  15.4.  It  is  clear  that  the
         appellant's deportation would have serious adverse effects  on  his
         children." Thus, she submitted there was no appraisal of the report
         in the decision.

     70. In her submissions Ms Masood submitted that  this  was  a  material
         error of law because the contents of the  report  were  capable  of
         meeting their higher test as set out in section 117C (6).

     71. In respect of grounds 1 and 3, I intend to set out the  submissions
         of the parties when addressing whether they demonstrate  any  error
         of law in the decision of the FtTJ.




    The relevant legal framework:


     72. When a person who is not a British citizen is convicted in the UA
         of an offence for which he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment
         of at least 12 months, section 32(5) of the UA Borders Act 2007
         requires the Secretary of State to make a deportation order in
         respect of that person (referred to in the legislation as a
         "foreign criminal"), subject to section 33. Section 33 of the Act
         establishes certain exceptions, one of which is that "removal of
         the foreign criminal in pursuance of the deportation order would
         breach? a person's Convention rights": see section 33(2)(a).




     73. The right protected by article 8 is a qualified right with which
         interference may be justified on the basis of various legitimate
         aims which include the prevention of disorder or crime. The way in
         which the question of justification should be approached where a
         court or Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
         under the Immigration Acts breaches article 8 is governed by Part
         5A (sections 117A-117D) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 (inserted by amendment in 2014).


     74. Section 117B lists certain public interest considerations to which
         the court or Tribunal must have regard in all such cases. These
         include the considerations that:
         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigrations controls is in the
         public interest.
         ?
         (4) Little weight should be given to -
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.
         ?"


     75. Section 117C lists additional considerations to which the court or
         Tribunal must have regard in cases involving "foreign criminals"
         (defined in a similar way to the 2007 Act). These considerations
         are:
         "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.
         (4) Exception 1 applies where - (a) C has been lawfully resident in
         the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is socially and
         culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and (c) there would be
         very significant obstacles to C's integration into the country to
         which C is proposed to be deported.
         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.
         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or Tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."


     76. "Foreign criminals" who fall within section 117C(3) because they
         have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
         months but less than four years have been referred to in the case
         law as "medium offenders" - in contrast to those with a sentence of
         four years or more, who are described as "serious offenders".


     77. In CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20-21] stated:


         "20. Paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration Rules state the
         practice to be followed by Home Office officials in assessing a
         claim that the deportation of a foreign criminal would be contrary
         to article 8. Paragraphs 398-399A are in very similar terms to
         section 117C(3)-(6) of the 2002 Act. However, as the Court of
         Appeal pointed out in NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239, para 14, although the
         Immigration Rules are relevant because they reflect the responsible
         minister's assessment, endorsed by Parliament, of the general
         public interest, they are not legislation; by contrast, Part 5A of
         the 2002 Act is primary legislation which directly governs decision-
         making by courts and Tribunals in cases where a decision made by
         the Secretary of State under the Immigration Acts is challenged on
         article 8 grounds. The provisions of Part 5A, taken together, are
         intended to provide for a structured approach to the application of
         article 8 which produces in all cases a final result compatible
         with article 8: see NE-A (Nigeria), para 14; Rhuppiah v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2018] UASC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536,
         para 36. Further, if in applying section 117C(3) or (6) the
         conclusion is reached that the public interest "requires"
         deportation, that conclusion is one to which the Tribunal is bound
         by law to give effect: see Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803; [2016] 1 WLR 4204, para 50; NE-
         A (Nigeria), para 14. In such a case there is no room for any
         further assessment of proportionality under article 8(2) because
         these statutory provisions determine the way in which the
         assessment is to be carried out in accordance with UA law.

         21 In these circumstances it seems to me that it is generally
         unnecessary for a Tribunal or court in a case in which a decision
         to deport a "foreign criminal" is challenged on article 8 grounds
         to refer to paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration Rules, as they
         have no additional part to play in the analysis."


     78. As the FtTJ observed at [27] in view of the lack of meaningful
         evidence addressing Exception 1, his focus and that of the
         advocates was on Exception 2 based on the appellant's relationship
         with his 3 children. If the appellant had been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years, he would need to show
         that the effect on his children of his deportation would be "unduly
         harsh": s117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002. However, because the appellant was sentenced to more than 4
         years imprisonment subsection (6) of s117C was applicable and he
         needed to show something "above and beyond" undue harshness (as was
         explained in SSHD v JG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982 at [16]).

     79. In AO (Nigeria) at [23], the Supreme Court held that: '... the
         expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce a
         higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness" under section 117B(6),
         taking account of the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element of
         comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness",
         that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the
         relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond that
         level.

     80. In so far as the appellant sought to rely on the effect of his
         deportation his children  (who, being  British citizens, were a
         qualifying children) it would not be enough to show that that
         effect would be "unduly harsh", in the sense explained in AO. That
         would satisfy Exception 1, but because his case fell within section
         117C (6) he needed to show something over and above that, which
         meant showing that the circumstances in his case were, in Jackson
         LJ's phrase in NA, "especially compelling".


     81.  A further recent authority from the Court of Appeal, handed down
         on the 22 November 2019, is SSHD v AF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ
         2051 which confirmed the current position at [31] in which Lord
         Justice Baker, when giving the lead judgement, stated:


         "31. For those lawyers, like my Lord and myself, who have spent
         many years practising in the family jurisdiction, this is not a
         comfortable interpretation to apply. But that is what Parliament
         has decided, and it is important to bear in mind the observations
         of Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:
         "When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in circumstances in
         which they can remain in the United Kingdom with the other parent,
         they will inevitably be distressed. However, in section 117C(5) of
         the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its will that, for foreign
         offenders who are sentenced to one to four years, only where the
         consequences for the children are 'unduly harsh' will deportation
         be constrained. That is entirely consistent with Article 8 of ECHR.
         It is important that decision-makers and, when the decisions are
         challenged, tribunals and courts honour that expression of
         Parliamentary will."


     82. In PF (Nigeria) v SSHD EWCA Civ 1139,  Hickinbottom  LJ  reiterated
         that this in the case of an offender of 4 years or more, there is a
         more stringent test than unduly harsh at [33] and  he  referred  to
         Underhill LJ's description of the test in SSHD v JG (Jamaica) [2019
         EWCA Civ 982 as " extra unduly harsh".




    Decision on error of law:

     83. I have carefully considered the submissions made  by  each  of  the
         advocates and I am grateful for the careful and  clear  submissions
         made by each of them.

     84. I intend to deal with Grounds 3 and 1  before  Ground  2  which  Ms
         Masood submitted was her principal ground.

     85. As to ground 3, it was  submitted  that  at  paragraph  27  of  the
         decision the FtTJ stated that "in the event of deportation face-to-
         face contact would be possible. X the appellant's partner, born  in
         Jamaica has previously visited Jamaica. She and the children,  like
         many tourists do,  could  visit  Jamaica  to  see  the  appellant."
         However, the appellant's partners evidence and that of  the  mother
         of his youngest child was that they would not  visit  Jamaica  with
         the children due to the prevalence  of  violent  crime  in  Jamaica
         which the judge noted in  paragraph  28.  Consequently,  the  judge
         failed to take  this  evidence  into  account  or  make  any  clear
         findings on this evidence.

     86. In her oral submissions, Ms Masood she referred the Tribunal to the
         ISW report at 15.2 where the appellant's partner said she would not
         want to take the children to Jamaica she feared for  their  safety.
         Therefore, she submitted there was no basis for the finding made at
         paragraph 27.

     87. I find no error of law in the  FtTJ's  finding  of  fact  at  [27].
         Whilst  the  appellant's  partner  had  stated  her  opposition  to
         visiting Jamaica in her conversations with the ISW as  recorded  at
         paragraph 15.2, it was open to the judge to  place  weight  on  her
         conduct in the past based on the evidence before the Tribunal  from
         the  appellant  in  cross-examination  that  his  partner  and  the
         children had been on a visit to Jamaica (see paragraph 9)  and  the
         appellant's partners evidence recorded at paragraph  10  where  she
         acknowledged that she had visited her mother in Jamaica. It is also
         relevant to observe that the ISW report at paragraph 15.2 stated "I
         am aware, from the paperwork provided to me  for  the  purposes  of
         this report that there is no valid reason why  the  children  could
         not visit and that there is sufficient police protection in Jamaica
         to mitigate any potential risks to the  children."  Therefore,  the
         assessment made by the FtTJ that the  children  would  be  able  to
         safely visit their father was one that  was  open  to  him  on  the
         evidence before the Tribunal.  In  the  alternative,  there  is  no
         reason to believe that the children  would  not  seek  to  maintain
         contact with their father by telephone or by other  means  as  they
         did when he was in custody, although I would accept  that it is not
         of a similar quality to face-to-face contact.

     88. In respect of ground 1 reliance is placed on paragraph 33 where the
         FtTJ stated "Throughout his relationship with x save  an  interlude
         of about three years the parties have been aware of the  precarious
         nature of the appellant's immigration status. Taking account of all
         factors, recognising that a child should not  be  held  responsible
         for the conduct of the parent as was held in  Zoumbas  [2013]  UASC
         74,  is  not  been  shown  that  the  effect  of  the   appellant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh".

     89.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the  FtTJ  wrongly
         took into account  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  his
         precarious immigration status when assessing whether the effects of
         deportation would be "unduly harsh" on the children and  that  this
         was contrary to the decision in  KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UASC 53
         where it was held that the question of whether it would be  "unduly
         harsh" on a child of the parent to be deported was to be determined
         without regard to the criminality of the parent or the severity  of
         the relevant offence and that it must be determined, without regard
         to the immigration history of the parent. It is  further  submitted
         that the judge took into account the appellant's precarious  status
         and that was contrary to the decision in Zoumbas  v SSHD  [2013]  1
         WLR 3690.

     90. I find no error in law on the  basis  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant. The written grounds cite part of paragraph 33 but do not
         cite the whole of the paragraph or make  reference  to  where  that
         paragraph stood in the analysis of the FtTJ. In my  judgement  this
         ground entirely  misreads  the  decision.  The  FtTJ  set  out  the
         relevant legal framework at  paragraphs  [17  -  26]  and  properly
         identified on the facts of this particular  appeal  that  the  case
         fell within section 117C (6) as a result of his  sentence  of  four
         years and that the public interest required his deportation  unless
         there were "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2" ( see paragraph [22]).

     91. At [24] and [25] the FtTJ directed himself in accordance  with  the
         decision of NA (Pakistan) at paragraph 37, that in  relation  to  a
         "serious offender" (which this appellant was),  it  will  often  be
         sensible first to see whether his case  involves  circumstances  of
         the  Kind  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2  both  because  the
         circumstances so describe set out particularly significant  factors
         bearing upon respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that
         may provide a helpful basis on  which  an  assessment  to  be  made
         whether they are "very compelling circumstances",  over  and  above
         those described Exceptions 1 and 2 as  is  required  under  section
         117(C) 6.

     92. At [27] the FtTJ then carried out that assessment, and in doing  so
         observed that he should "focus on the consideration of Exception  2
         as to  whether  the  effects  of  deportation  on  the  appellant's
         children partner would go beyond  the  degree  of  harshness  which
         would necessarily be involved any child or  partner  of  a  foreign
         criminal  face  of  deportation,  absent  a  consideration  of  the
         seriousness of  the  offence  committed  by  the  appellant  facing
         deportation (applying KO  (Nigeria))  and  had  expressly  referred
         later on to Zoumbas at [33]but concluded that the  evidence  before
         the Tribunal had not provided a  basis  upon  which  the  appellant
         could establish Exception 2 under section 117C(5). Accordingly, the
         judge then proceeded  to  consider  whether  they  were  any  "very
         compelling circumstances over and above those described in the said
         Exceptions" (see [28]).

     93. Following this at paragraphs 29 - 34 the judge  then  set  out  his
         assessment as to whether they were "very compelling  circumstances"
         and it was in that assessment under section 117C(6) that  the  FtTJ
         weighed in the balance factors that were  relevant  to  the  public
         interest which included the precarious nature  of  the  appellant's
         immigration status.

     94. There is no error identified by the judge's self-direction  to  the
         relevant law nor in his approach to the applicable test. Whilst the
         judge considered the appellant's immigration status at paragraph 33
         he was  doing  so  in  the  context  of  whether  they  were  "very
         compelling  circumstances"  which  was  entirely   permissible   as
         explained at paragraph 33 of PF (Nigeria) :
             "33. Turning to section 117C(6), for offenders who are
             sentenced to at least four years, or who fall outside the
             exceptions, the new statutory provisions reflect MF (Nigeria),
             by adopting the wording "very compelling circumstances"
             instead of the previous "exceptional circumstances". That is
             clearly a more stringent test than the "unduly harsh" test of
             section 117C(5). At [22] in AO, Lord Carnwath referred to
             section 117C(6) requiring, "in addition" to the section
             117C(5) criteria, "very compelling circumstances". In
             Secretary of State for the Home Department v JG (Jamaica)
             [2019] EWCA Civ 982 at [16], having reviewed the relevant
             authorities, Underhill LJ referred to the need to show that
             the effect on the relevant child or partner would be "extra
             unduly harsh" (emphasis in the original). However, as Mr
             Dunlop submitted, that formulation risks masking a difference
             in approach required by section 117C(5) and (6) respectively:
             whilst AO held that the former requires an exclusive focus on
             the effects of deportation on the relevant child or partner,
             section 117C(6) requires those effects to be balanced against
             the section 117C(1) public interest in deporting foreign
             nationals. Under section 117C(6), the public interest is back
             in play."

     95. I am therefore satisfied that ground 1 is not made out.

     96. Dealing with ground 2 which Ms Masood submitted was the  "principal
         ground", I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not make a material error
         of law which was capable of affecting the outcome of this appeal. I
         shall set out  my  reasons  for  reaching  that  conclusion  in  my
         analysis of the appeal and the evidence that was before the FtTJ.

     97. The grounds centre upon  the  submission  that  the  FtTJ  gave  no
         consideration to the ISW report in his assessment  of  whether  the
         effect of deportation on the appellant's children would be  "unduly
         harsh". In her submission Ms Masood relied upon  paragraph  27  and
         submitted that the paragraph failed to properly  reflect  the  harm
         identified in the ISW report.

     98. When analysing this submission, it is  important  to  consider  the
         decision of the FtTJ when read as  a  whole.  Before  reaching  his
         decision the FtTJ set out the salient parts of the  evidence,  much
         of which was unchallenged, which was relevant to the  issues  under
         consideration which included the nature of the relationship between
         the children and the appellant (and his  partner)  and  the  likely
         effect upon them of his deportation. This was set out at  paragraph
         10 where the judge recorded the evidence of the appellant's partner
         and made reference to the nature of family life; the appellant  was
         an active parent in the lives of the children particularly A-1  and
         also the effect upon the children of separation from their  father.
         A-1 described as regularly crying for  his  father  and  that  both
         children were "emotionally upset" about their father being returned
         to Jamaica. At paragraph 11 the FtTJ summarised the  evidence  from
         the children. As regards A-1 the judge set out the evidence of  the
         impact of his father being imprisoned and that as a teenager it was
         hard for him without his father; he had  struggled  at  school  and
         that he could not speak to anyone about this. I observe  that  this
         was also in the ISW report at paragraph 5.7. In respect of  A2  she
         explained that her father being in prison affected her daily life.

     99. At paragraph 12 the FtTJ provided a summary of the ISW in  succinct
         terms. Whilst Ms Masood referred the Tribunal to certain  parts  of
         the ISW report, it is not necessary for a judge to  set  out  large
         parts of the evidence which he had plainly read and had regard  to.
         This is supported in this particular case at [14] where  the  judge
         expressly stated that he had had regard to  the  skeleton  argument
         and the submissions  made  by  Ms  Masood  which  at  paragraph  37
         referred  to  the  ISW  report  and  that  "her   submissions   are
         considered in arriving at my decision."  He  had  referred  to  the
         report as "detailed" and in  his  overall  assessment  referred  to
         having carefully considered all of the evidence.

    100. In my judgement paragraph 27 should be read alongside those earlier
         paragraphs but also in the light of paragraphs 30, 33 and 34  which
         necessarily formed part of the overall assessment of the  issue  of
         undue harshness.

    101. As I have set out earlier, I find no error of law identified in the
         approach taken by the judge to the applicable legal framework which
         is set out at paragraph 17  -  26.  I  observe  that  he  correctly
         identified that on the particular facts of this  appeal  S  117C(6)
         applied and that he was required to  consider  whether  there  were
         "very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2" )at [22]  and properly directed himself to  the
         applicable law  at [23 - 27].

    102. As to the applicable  test  as  to  whether  deportation  would  be
         "unduly harsh" the judge directed himself to the relevant parts  of
         KO(Nigeria) at [27] where he stated "I focus on  the  consideration
         of Exception 2 as to whether the  effects  of  deportation  on  the
         appellant's children and partner would  go  beyond  the  degree  of
         harshness which would necessarily be involve any child  or  partner
         of a foreign criminal faces deportation, absent a consideration  of
         the seriousness of the offence committed by  the  appellant  facing
         deportation." And further at  [30]  cited  paragraph  23  of  KO  (
         Nigeria) and the relevant threshold.

    103.  Having summarised the relevant  evidence  and  the  correct  legal
         framework, at paragraph[27] the judge stated as follows:

                  "27.  In  the  absence  of  any  meaningful  evidence  and
                  submissions  addressing  Exception  1,  I   focus   on   a
                  consideration of Exception 2 as to whether the effects  of
                  deportation on the appellant's children and partner  would
                  go beyond the degree of harshness which would  necessarily
                  be involve any child or  partner  of  a  foreign  criminal
                  faces  deportation,  absent   a   consideration   of   the
                  seriousness of the  offence  committed  by  the  appellant
                  facing deportation: KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. In  doing
                  so I consider whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
                  children and/or x to live in Jamaica and whether it  would
                  be unduly harsh with them to remain in the UA without him.
                  In the present case there is no real prospect of x and the
                  children joining the appellant in Jamaica.  According  the
                  issue is whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  them
                  to remain in the UA without the appellant.  Undoubtedly  x
                  and the  children  would  suffer  great  distress  if  the
                  appellant were to be deported and their lives to  be  made
                  more difficult. But those were the likely consequences  of
                  the deportation of any foreign criminal who had a  genuine
                  and subsisting relationship with a partner and children in
                  the UK. The effect on x and  the  children  would  not  go
                  beyond the degree of harshness which would necessarily  be
                  involved  for  the  partner  and  children  of  a  foreign
                  criminal was deported. The appellant's involvement in  the
                  lives of the children in providing support and counselling
                  did not of itself mean that  the  effects  of  deportation
                  were unduly harsh for x and the children.  Nor  could  the
                  difficulties which x would inevitably face,  be  increased
                  by her ongoing effort to further her education  so  as  to
                  improve her earning capacity and elevate  the  case  above
                  the commonplace so far as the effects of  the  appellant's
                  deportation  on  her  were  concerned.  In  the  event  of
                  deportation face-to-face contact will be possible, x  born
                  in Jamaica has previously visited  Jamaica.  She  and  the
                  children, like many tourists do, could  visit  Jamaica  to
                  see the appellant.  Neither  the  nature  of  the  offence
                  committed nor the passage of time could assist x now  that
                  KO (Nigeria) made it clear that  the  seriousness  of  the
                  offending  was   not   a   relevant   consideration   when
                  determining pursuant to section  117C  (5)  whether  undue
                  harshness would be suffered: PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ
                  1213.  It  has  not  been  shown  that   the   appellant's
                  deportation would be unduly harsh for his children and x .
                  The evidence has not provided a basis on  which  he  could
                  establish Exception 2 under section 117C (5)."

    104.  At [33] the FtTJ made reference to having carefully considered the
         effect of deportation on the children and that  "removal  would  be
         likely to have  a  detrimental  effect".  At  [34]  the  FtTJ  made
         reference to  the  effects  of  deportation  for  the  children  as
         "undoubtedly detrimental".

    105. The  consideration  of  the  issue  of  undue  harshness  in  those
         paragraphs and particularly at [27] is based on the evidence before
         the FtTJ including the ISW report. In general terms the ISW  report
         did make reference  to  the  likely  outcome  for  the  appellant's
         partner and the children that they would suffer great  distress  if
         the appellant were to be deported and that  their  lives  would  be
         more difficult.  This is reflected in  the  description  in  A1  at
         paragraph 5.9 and the ISW's  consideration  at  paragraph  5.10.  I
         observe that the ISW proceeded on the basis that A1  was  aware  of
         the prospect of his father being deported to  Jamaica  and  it  was
         when the ISW broached that  subject,  A1  was  described  as  being
         "extremely distressed". The description of his distress at 5.9  and
         5.10 would necessarily have to be seen in the context of the nature
         of the conversation and of his reported lack of  awareness  of  the
         issue of deportation. At paragraph 14.1  the  report  provided  the
         opinion  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would  have  a
         "negative  impact  on  both  mothers  and  the  children  will   be
         significant" and that it would have a "devastating effect on A1 and
         A2 in particular."  At  17.1  the  report  made  reference  to  the
         detrimental impact on them in  the  long  term.  Consequently,  the
         FtTJ's assessment was  based  on  the  evidence  before  him  which
         included the ISW report.

    106. Ms Masood submitted that a key paragraph at 17.6 was not taken into
         account. This stated as follows: -

         "17.6 The children are receiving good care  by  their  mothers  and
         their basic needs are being consistently met. X is able to  provide
         A1 and A2 with care which is safe and  effective  and  is  able  to
         ensure  they  are  protected   from   maltreatment.   However,   my
         professional view is that should the appellant not  return  to  his
         previous  role  within  the  children's  lives  this  will  have  a
         significant detrimental impact on them and the A1 in particular. It
         is my view that A1 will suffer poor mental health, impacting on his
         health  and  social  development  if  his  father  is  deported  to
         Jamaica."

    107. However, the judge acknowledged in his assessment that the  mothers
         of the children provided good care for the children and their needs
         were being met at paragraph 33 where the judge found  that  it  was
         significant that the appellant's partner and three  children  would
         remain in the UK and that the youngest  child,  would  continue  to
         benefit from the care from her mother. Whilst  the  judge  did  not
         expressly refer to the opinion  provided  at  17.6  that  A1  "will
         suffer poor mental health", the FtTJ did properly acknowledge  that
         the evidence  before  him  demonstrated  that  the  effect  of  the
         appellant's deportation would be the likely to have  a  detrimental
         effect upon the children  ( see paragraph [33])  and  also  removal
         would be "undoubtedly detrimental" to them ( see paragraph [34]).

    108. I am therefore satisfied that when the decision is read as a  whole
         and in the light of the material that  was  before  the  FtTJ  that
         proper regard was given to  the  ISW  report  when  addressing  the
         relevant issues.

    109. Even if it could be said that the FtTJ  should  have  made  further
         reference to the ISW report, I am not satisfied that any failure to
         do so was material to the outcome.

    110. In her submissions Ms Masood submitted that such a failure would be
         material because the content of the report would meet the necessary
         test under section 117C (6).

    111. During her  submissions  she  had  directed  my  attention  to  the
         decision in  Imran  (Section  117C  (5);  children,  unduly  harsh)
         [2020] UAUT 83 (IAC).  The  headnote  of  that  decision  reads  as
         follows:



         "To  bring  a  case  within  Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  the  'unduly  harsh'
         test will not be satisfied,  in  a  case  where  a  child  has  two
         parents, by either or both of  the  following,  without  more:  (i)
         evidence of the particular importance of one parent in the lives of
         the children; and (ii) evidence of the emotional dependence of  the
         children on that parent and of the emotional  harm  that  would  be
         likely to flow from separation.

         Consideration as to what  constitutes  'without  more'  is  a  fact
         sensitive assessment."

    112. As can be seen from that head note and  the  decision  itself,  the
         appellant was a "medium offender"  whereas  on  the  facts  of  the
         present appeal S 117C (6) applied as a result of  his  sentence  of
         imprisonment of 4 years. Ms Masood also relied upon  that  decision
         due to the references made to the Court of Appeal decisions  in  PG
         (Jamaica) cited at paragraph  20  of  Imran  and  also  SSHD  v  KF
         (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2051 cited at paragraph 23. She submitted
         that the description of family life between the children and  their
         fathers and the risk harm that would follow was similar  in  nature
         to that set out in those appeals.

    113. I agree with the submissions made by Ms Petterson that the  factual
         circumstances  of  those  particular  appeals  do  not  assist   in
         determining whether the circumstances of  this  appellant  met  the
         elevated test that was necessary in  relation  to  this  particular
         appellant. In PG (Jamaica)  the  Court  of  Appeal  set  aside  the
         decision of the FTT and their determination  of  "undue  harshness"
         for the reasons set out at  paragraph  66  -  67  and  43  and  45.
         Similarly, on the facts of KF (Nigeria) the  court  set  aside  the
         decision of the FtTJ and at paragraph 18 the Court  of  Appeal  set
         out the relevant parts of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  which
         referred to the fact that a child being separated from a parent  is
         something that a child be likely to find traumatic and  would  have
         potentially long lasting adverse consequences for the child.  Which
         was what the ISW in the present appeal had concluded.  However,  at
         [30], Baker LJ said at [30], was not enough:

             'Looking at the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal that
             led  to  the  conclusion  that  family  would  suffer  adverse
             consequences as a result of the deportation, and in particular
             the consequences for the respondent's son separated  from  his
             father,  it  is   difficult   to   identify   anything   which
             distinguishes this case from other cases  where  a  family  is
             separated. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  that  the
             respondent's son would be deprived of his father at a  crucial
             time in his life. His view that "there is  no  substitute  for
             the emotional and developmental benefits for a  three-year-old
             child that are  associated  with  being  brought  up  by  both
             parents during its formative years" is indisputable. But those
             benefits are enjoyed by all  three-year-old  children  in  the
             care of both parents. The judge observed that it was  a  "fact
             that being deprived of a parent is something a child is likely
             to find traumatic and that will potentially have  long-lasting
             adverse consequences for that child" and that he was  entitled
             to take judicial notice of that fact. But the "fact" of  which
             he was taking "judicial notice" is likely to  arise  in  every
             case where a child is  deprived  of  a  parent.  All  children
             should,  where  possible,  be  brought   up   with   a   close
             relationship with both parents. All  children  deprived  of  a
             parent's company during their formative years will be at  risk
             of suffering harm. Given the changes to the law introduced  by
             the amendments to 2002 Act,  as  interpreted  by  the  Supreme
             Court, it is necessary to look for consequences  characterised
             by a degree of harshness over  and  beyond  what  every  child
             would experience in such circumstances.'


    114. As set out above, if the appellant had been sentenced to  a  period
         of imprisonment of less than four years, he would need to show that
         the effect on his children of  his  deportation  would  be  "unduly
         harsh (see section 117C (5) of the NIAA 2002).  However,  here,  as
         the appellant was sentenced to four years imprisonment,  s117C  (6)
         applied and the appellant was required to show something "above and
         beyond" undue harshness.   As explained  in  SSHD  v  JG  (Jamaica)
         [2019] EWCA Civ 982 at [16]:



           ".....in so far as the Respondent sought to rely on  the  effect
           of his deportation on his son (who, being a British citizen, was
           a qualifying child) it would not be enough  to  show  that  that
           effect would be "unduly harsh", in the sense  explained  in  AO.
           That would satisfy Exception [2],  but  because  his  case  fell
           within section 117C(6) he needed  to  show  something  over  and
           above that, which meant showing that the  circumstances  in  his
           case  were,  in  Jackson  LJ's   phrase   in   NA,   "especially
           compelling".   In short, at the risk of  sounding  flippant,  he
           needed to show that the impact on  his  son  was  "extra  unduly
           harsh".

    115. It is plain from reading the assessment made by the  FtTJ  that  he
         accepted  that  there  was  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  three   qualifying
         children and that it was established on the  evidence  before  him,
         that the appellant had exercised the role  of  the  parent  despite
         living apart from them since 2012 when he had left the family  home
         following the imposition of the restraining order. The  judge  took
         into account that his  role  as  a  father  had  been  particularly
         evident in the role of assisting A1 to participate in football  and
         insofar as A2 was concerned, that he listened and provided her with
         help for her emotional concerns (  at  [16]).   These  were  issues
         highlighted in the ISW report as well as in  the  evidence  of  the
         children. His involvement in their lives and providing support  and
         counselling was also acknowledged in the ISW report at 12.1 and  in
         the FtTJ's assessment at [27]. Consequently the role he  played  in
         their lives was not in issue as  described  by  the  ISW  described
         section 10 of the report which included him playing a hands-on role
         in their upbringing, attending parents evenings,  taking  them  out
         for meals to the park and the cinema when  having  regular  contact
         with the children.


    116. The potential impact of removal upon the children was  referred  to
         at paragraphs 14.1 -14.3 in relation to A1  and  A2  where  it  was
         stated that children had found it extremely difficult to cope  with
         their father in prison (14.1) and that A1 had found separation from
         his father particularly traumatic and presented a somewhat  guarded
         and unwilling to talk about his emotions in relation to his  father
         but that when he did talk about his views he was  "deeply  affected
         by separation from X who  had  been  a  significant  and  important
         person in his life." At  16.1 for the youngest child ,the impact of
         removal would have to be considered in the light of the child's age
         (age 3 ) and who therefore was not able to  articulate  her  wishes
         and feelings but that removal of her father would remove any future
         attachment between them. At 17.6 in respect of  A1  it  was  stated
         that if the appellant was deported and not return to  his  previous
         role with the children "this will have  a  significant  detrimental
         impact on them and the A1 in particular. It is my view that A1 will
         suffer poor mental health,  impacting  on  his  health  and  social
         development if his father is deported to Jamaica."


    117. I observe that the passage Ms Masood relied upon at 17.6 was  based
         upon general research set out at 17.5 that a  positive  father  and
         child relationship is important not just for childhood  but  on  an
         ongoing basis and that the mental health benefits related to having
         an involved in positive father influence become  more  evident.  No
         one could dispute this general proposition. However, there  was  no
         reference in the report to demonstrate that either of the  children
         had any particular vulnerabilities or mental health problems  as  a
         result of their father  having  been  separated  from  them  for  a
         significant period of time since August 2017. To the contrary,  the
         evidence was to the effect  that  both  children  had  no  learning
         difficulties and were receiving no treatment  or  therapy  for  any
         emotional upset or distress as a result of  separation  from  their
         father (see paragraph 5.2 and  6.1).  Therefore,  the  opinion  was
         based on generalised evidence and not specific to A1 and there  was
         no explanation given as to why A1 or A2  would  suffer  detrimental
         effects more than any other typical child as a result of separation
         from his father.


    118. The FtTJ accepted that the appellant's children if deprived of  the
         appellant during their lives and ongoing formative years, may be at
         risk of suffering some form of emotional harm. This is  plain  from
         his reference to the detrimental effects of deportation shown  from
         the evidence. However, for this to  be  properly  characterised  as
         "unduly  harsh"  it  is  necessary   to   look   for   consequences
         characterised by degree of harshness  over  and  above  what  every
         child would experience in such circumstances. Being deprived  of  a
         parent with whom they had a close relationship is something a child
         is likely to find traumatic as the ISW  sets  out.  Furthermore,  I
         would accept that such a separation would potentially have  adverse
         consequences. However, on the evidence that was before the FtTJ  it
         failed to establish  that  the  consequences  for  the  appellant's
         children was "over and beyond" what every child would experience in
         such circumstances.

    119. I am therefore satisfied that it was open to the  judge,  based  on
         the evidence before him to conclude that the effect of  deportation
         upon the children would not be  "unduly  harsh"  and  having  given
         careful consideration to the evidence myself, and in the  light  of
         the "demanding test" under section 117C(6), the conclusion  reached
         by  the  judge  that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  "very
         compelling circumstances" over and above those described Exceptions
         1 and 2 was reasonably open to him.

    120. The grounds only sought  to  challenge  the  assessment  of  "undue
         harshness" and Ms Masood  did  not  seek  to  challenge  any  other
         aspects of the FtTJ's decision relating to any other factor.  In  a
         s. 117C(6) case, there is a requirement to consider the seriousness
         of the particular offence and to balance the strong public interest
         in support of deportation against the circumstances over and  above
         Exceptions 1 and 2.  I am satisfied that this is precisely what the
         FtTJ  did.   Therefore  the  FtTJ  having  considered  all  factors
         weighing in the appellant's side of the  balance  cumulatively  was
         entitled to conclude that the weight of the public interest in this
         particular case required deportation because it cannot be said that
         there are "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 .

  121. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ  did
       not involve the making of a material error on  a  point  of  law.  I
       therefore dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members.  This direction applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                                Dated 6/08/20
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

