
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04384/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            treezer annah chelimo
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Mavaza a Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the sake of consistency with  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal I will hereafter refer to Ms Chelimo as the  Appellant  and
       to the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


    2. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 1 February 2016. Her appeal against this  was  allowed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley ("the Judge") following a  hearing
       on 25 April 2016.

The grant of permission


    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig granted  permission  to  appeal  (6
       October 2016). He said it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
       undertake an Article 8 proportionality assessment, or consider  s117
       of the Nationality, Immigration, and Asylum Act 2002.

Appellant's position

    4. The Judge took into account  all  relevant  factors  in  determining
       whether it was proportionate to require  her  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom. He noted that the relationship was genuine and  subsisting,
       that the parties intend to live together permanently  as  a  couple,
       that the Sponsor is British, and that he is employed in  the  United
       Kingdom. The Judge  balanced  the  need  to  maintain  an  effective
       immigration control against the Sponsor's right to marry and  remain
       here. The Judge was entitled to find that the couple could not  live
       together in Kenny due to the Sponsor's criminal conviction.  It  was
       noted that British nationals are advised not to travel to Kenya. The
       application amounts to nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the
       decision.


    5. It is accepted that the Judge did not specifically  refer  to  s117.
       However, he did not need  to.  The  Appellant  speaks  English.  The
       Sponsor works and can therefore provide for her. The Judge was aware
       that the relationship was entered into whilst her immigration status
       was precarious.

Respondent's position

    6. Mrs Peterson relied on the grounds in support of the application.


Discussion

Ground 1

    7. Nowhere in the determination has any consideration  being  given  to
       the Appellant returning to Kenya and making an  application  in  the
       normal way for permission to enter the United Kingdom as  a  spouse.
       This is not simply a situation where  preserving  the  integrity  of
       immigration control is the only factor on the Respondent's  side  of
       the proportionality equation as the Judge noted [8] that it was  not
       accepted that the eligibility requirements were met.  It  was  noted
       that she had failed to meet the requirements of a partner. Whilst it
       is noted that the Sponsor worked, there is  no  indication  anywhere
       within the determination that the level of his income is  considered
       or that there is any consideration as to whether  public  funds  are
       relied upon either for maintenance or accommodation.


    8. In this regard I bear in mind R (app Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -
       Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT
       00189  (IAC)  which  notes  that  Appendix  FM  does   not   include
       consideration   of   the   question   of   whether   it   would   be
       disproportionate to expect an  individual  to  return  to  his  home
       country to make an entry clearance  application  to  re-join  family
       members in the United Kingdom. There may be cases in which there are
       no insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the
       United  Kingdom  but  where  temporary  separation  to   enable   an
       individual to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
       disproportionate. In all cases, it will be  for  the  individual  to
       place before the Respondent evidence that such temporary  separation
       will interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It will not
       be enough to rely solely upon the case-law  concerning  Chikwamba  v
       SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.


    9. Hayat (nature of Chikwamba principle)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  00444
       (IAC) notes that the significance of Chikwamba is to make  it  plain
       that, in appeals where the only matter weighing on the  Respondent's
       side of an Article 8 proportionality balance is the public policy of
       requiring an application to be made under the immigration rules from
       abroad, that legitimate objective  will  usually  be  outweighed  by
       factors resting on the Appellant's side of the balance.


   10. The Judge's failure to take any of these matters into account was  a
       material error of law as he simply considered  whether  family  life
       can occur in Kenya.

Ground 2

   11. Nowhere in the judgement is there a  reference  to  s117.  The  only
       references to any of  the  matters  contained  within  s117  in  the
       determination is that the Sponsor works. It does not  indicate  that
       any consideration has been given to the level of his income  or  his
       expenses or whether the Appellant would consequently be a burden  on
       the taxpayer. There is  no  finding  that  she  speaks  English.  No
       consideration has been given to the fact that little  weight  should
       be given to the relationship formed with her Sponsor while  she  was
       here unlawfully for 10 years.


   12. All those factors are matters that are required  to  be  taken  into
       account in the proportionality balancing exercise and the absence of
       any consideration of any of those factors is  a  material  error  of
       law.

Conclusion on error of law

   13. I am satisfied that the Judge made the material  errors  of  law  as
       identified above.


   14. Both representatives agreed that it was appropriate for me to  remit
       the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. That was because  the  errors
       of law were significant and go to the core of the case and relate to
       findings that have not been made.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  not  before
    Judge Handley, with a time estimate of 3 hours.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
7 November 2016
