









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04661/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 27 September 2018                |On: 13 December 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Britney [w]
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Kotak, counsel, instructed by Shaka Services

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the entry clearance officer" and to
      the respondent as "the claimant."

   2. The entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
      decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox,  who  in  a   decision
      promulgated on 24 May 2018 allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on  human
      rights grounds, against the decision of the  entry  clearance  officer
      refusing her application for entry clearance to the UK as a  dependent
      child of [EG], her mother and sponsor.

   3. The entry clearance officer did not accept that the claimant's  father
      is deceased. Nor was it accepted in the alternative, that the  sponsor
      had sole responsibility for the claimant or that there are serious and
      compelling circumstances making her exclusion undesirable.

The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

   4. One of the issues in the appeal was 'the  status'  of  the  claimant's
      father. The entry clearance officer did not accept that the claimant's
      father is deceased [2]. The Judge had to determine whether the  person
      identified in the  death  certificate  produced,  was  the  claimant's
      biological father.

   5. In her witness statement dated 11 April 2018 the sponsor claimed  that
      there has been consistent commitment to  the  claimant.  Her  daughter
      desired to learn about her father. She did not tell  the  claimant  of
      the violence inflicted by the father on her, as she wished to  protect
      her daughter from those facts.

   6. The sponsor stated that she was aware that the father had died but she
      had not told the claimant as she did not want to suffer recrimination.

   7. The claimant went in search of her father and  was  accompanied  by  a
      companion.

   8. The sponsor agreed that [LH] has made decisions for the  claimant  but
      only under the sponsor's instructions.  Examples  given  included  the
      insistence of the sponsor on a curfew due to the high crime  rate  and
      the claimant's particular vulnerability as a girl.  The  claimant  was
      moved to another address as the previous guardian became unwell [24].

   9. She stated that as the claimant now resides with a male guardian it is
      even more important that she provides guidance to her daughter as  she
      matures into adulthood. Regular contact is maintained by telephone and
      they speak about the claimant's financial  and  practical  needs.  The
      claimant relocated to a new guardian each time the sponsor's  parental
      authority was challenged. She has  been  forced  to  relocate  on  one
      occasion as the guardian's lease expired [25-26]

  10. [IB] gave evidence and adopted her  witness  statement.  She  provided
      details of her association with the claimant and  sponsor.  In  cross-
      examination she provided details of decisions made  by  [IB]'s  mother
      when she was appointed guardian by the sponsor - [27-28].

  11. In his assessment of the evidence, Judge Fox addressed the issue as to
      whether the sponsor was the claimant's sole  surviving  parent.  There
      was no dispute that the death certificate  presented  was  a  reliable
      document. Judge Fox noted that the issue related to the nexus  between
      the name of the deceased and the claimant's biological father - [37].

  12. He found the sponsor to be entirely credible. He stated  that  he  has
      had the opportunity to observe the sponsor and  'also  considered  the
      available evidence within the prism of country conditions' [38].

  13. He stated at [39] that it is information in  the  public  domain  that
      districts within Jamaica are sub-divided into parishes. These parishes
      are invariably centred upon hubs  such  as  rum  shops  and  community
      halls. These environs are not conducive to anonymity.

  14. He found it to be entirely credible that the claimant would be able to
      trace her father with only a name and district to guide her especially
      when  one  considers  the  evidence  that  demonstrates  that   family
      member(s) continue to reside in that area [40].

  15. The sponsor provided evidence that she had a  good  relationship  with
      the aunt at the time of the sponsor's relationship with the father. It
      is plausible that the aunt would  recall  the  difficult  relationship
      experienced by the sponsor and may  have  been  predisposed  to  offer
      assistance due to their historic affection - [41].

  16. The evidence of the claimant's quest to  locate  her  father  is  also
      'entirely credible'. He did not doubt that the sponsor has experienced
      difficulties in her personal life throughout her lifetime as described
      by her. This manifested itself at the hearing through  her  anxiety  -
      [42].

  17. He  found  it  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  sponsor  took  the
      responsible  parental  decision  to  withhold  information  from   the
      claimant until the sponsor was satisfied that she  had  the  emotional
      intelligence  to  cope  with  the  facts  surrounding   her   parents'
      relationship. The timing of the claimant's demands are consistent with
      a young person approaching adulthood  with  the  need  to  know  their
      personal history.

  18. In the event, he accepted that the claimant's  father  is  deceased  -
      [46].

  19. In the alternative, he considered the issue  of  sole  responsibility.
      There was no dispute that the  claimant's  father,  whether  alive  or
      deceased, has had no involvement with the claimant in any capacity.

  20. He noted that the entry clearance officer asserted  that  the  sponsor
      has delegated parental control to  third  parties  [47].  He  did  not
      accept that parental  responsibility  had  been  relinquished  by  the
      sponsor. The sponsor's physical absence from  Jamaica  required  third
      party provision for the appellant's day to day care [49].

  21.  The  available  evidence  demonstrated  that  the   sponsor   remains
      responsible for the claimant's financial well being. She has taken all
      reasonable steps  to  provide  historic  evidence  of  her  consistent
      financial responsibilities. She has also provided credible evidence of
      disagreements  that  arise  when  the  sponsor  feels  that  financial
      resources are being diverted away from the claimant.

  22. He "acknowledged" the documentary evidence demonstrating the sponsor's
      active involvement with the claimant's  education.  In  addition,  she
      provided credible evidence along with other witnesses of her  struggle
      to maintain parental authority remotely [51].

  23. She provided credible and consistent evidence of conflict with various
      guardians who failed to recognise the sponsor's parental authority. It
      is possible that discord has arisen as the claimant and the respective
      guardians have failed to recognise the emotional consequences upon the
      sponsor due to her physical separation from the claimant. However,  it
      is also reasonable to  conclude  that  the  sponsor  was  particularly
      sensitive to the limited opportunities to make a practical and  direct
      contribution to the claimant's day to day life [52-53].

  24. He set out an example of this at [54]. Whilst [IB]'s mother was merely
      attempting  to  teach  the  claimant  life   skills,   the   sponsor's
      sensitivity as a remote parent interpreted this as potential  neglect.
      Judge Fox found that this was convincing evidence of genuine  parental
      interaction by the sponsor.

  25. He acknowledged at [56] that the latter letter from  Mrs  [R]  stating
      that she could not keep the claimant any longer, may be vulnerable  to
      contrivance.  However,  due  to  the  abundance  of  evidence  in  the
      claimant's favour, he accepted that the letter was  obtained  in  good
      faith.

  26. The sponsor provided credible evidence of her concerns  regarding  the
      claimant's profile as a young  female.  The  unique  features  of  the
      available evidence lend themselves to the credibility  assessment.  He
      found that the sponsor has been honest and open about the difficulties
      of her relationship with the claimant which have been  exacerbated  by
      the separation. He  accepted  that  having  regard  to  the  available
      evidence, family life exists between the claimant and the sponsor.  He
      accepted that the sponsor is the only surviving parent [58-60].

  27. If wrong about that, he found that the sponsor has sole responsibility
      for the claimant.  As  the  claimant  satisfied  the  entry  clearance
      officer's   definition   of   Article   8,   any    interference    is
      disproportionate to any legitimate aim pursued.

  28. Ms Fijiwalah relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission.  The  Judge
      'apparently relied on unsupported  Judicial  knowledge  that  was  not
      referred to at the hearing'. He failed at any point to  identify  what
      information it is that  he  was  referring  to  at  [38-39],  that  is
      allegedly in the public domain that would support the conclusions. The
      finding is unsupported speculation which appeared to  be  based  on  a
      perception of Jamaican society held by the Judge  in  the  absence  of
      supporting evidence, which was compounded when  making  a  fee  award,
      based  on  country  conditions  in  Jamaica,  'presumably'  based   on
      information available to the Judge that was neither  referred  to  nor
      sourced at any point in the determination.

  29. In support of that submissions, Ms Fijiwalah referred to the  decision
      of the Upper Tribunal in AM (Fair Hearing) Sudan  [2015]  UKUT  00656.
      The Tribunal held that independent judicial research is inappropriate.
      It is not for the Judge to assemble evidence. Rather, it is  the  duty
      of the Judge to  decide  each  case  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      presented by the parties,  duly  infused,  where  appropriate  by  the
      doctrine of judicial notice.

  30. If a Judge is cogniscant of something conceivably material which  does
      not form part of either party's case, this  must  be  brought  to  the
      attention of the parties at the earliest possible  stage,  which  duty
      could in principle extend beyond the hearing date.

  31. As to his conclusion in respect of sole responsibility, she  submitted
      that the Judge did not make any findings on the submission made by the
      ECO, that the sponsor herself in oral  evidence,  confirmed  that  the
      guardians of the claimant made the decisions in her life.

  32. Ms Fijiwalah referred to  [30]  where  the  Judge  recorded  that  the
      sponsor has shared responsibility with various guardians. No  findings
      were made at all  in  this  respect.  The  Judge  recorded  the  entry
      clearance  officer's  submission,  but  made  no  findings   on   that
      submission. She submitted that if the guardians do make  decisions  it
      is difficult to see how the claimant can meet the requirements  of  TD
      (paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 0049 at
      [50]. It  was  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence  that  she  allowed  the
      guardians  to  make  important  decisions  in  her  daughter's   life.
      Accordingly, the claimant could not meet  the  requirements  for  sole
      responsibility.

  33. On behalf of the claimant, Ms  Kotak,  who  represented  the  claimant
      before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that  there  was  sufficient
      evidence that it was the claimant's father who died. The  sponsor  had
      stated in evidence that he was her father. Her evidence has been found
      to be credible.

  34. The claimant asserted that she was given his name as well as the  area
      by her mother and she searched for him. She went to the area with  her
      guardian. Details were subsequently given to her as to how he died.

  35. She referred to the claimant's bundle at O1: A birth registration form
      relating to the claimant was produced. Her date of birth is  set  out.
      Her residence is stated to be Waugh Hill in the  town  or  village  of
      Rock Hall.

  36. It was not contended  in  the  'permission  grounds'  that  the  death
      certificate was being challenged in any way. The Judge in  fact  noted
      that there is no dispute that the  death  certificate  is  a  reliable
      document. The issue related to the  nexus  between  the  name  of  the
      deceased and the claimant's biological father.

  37. She submitted that the  Judge  has  properly  set  out  the  evidence,
      including that referred to at [22], that the sponsor  was  aware  that
      the father had died but did not tell the claimant as she did not  want
      to suffer recrimination. Further, the sponsor  confirmed  in  evidence
      that the claimant was only aware of the father's  name  and  his  home
      district  when  she  began  her  search.  The  father's  sister   (the
      claimant's aunt) was content to provide the claimant with the father's
      death certificate.

  38. The Judge found the sponsor to be entirely credible. None of this  has
      been challenged. With  regard  to  sole  responsibility,  the  sponsor
      provided evidence that she had a good relationship with  the  aunt  at
      the time  of  the  sponsor's  relationship  with  her  father.  It  is
      plausible that  the  aunt  would  recall  the  difficult  relationship
      experienced by the sponsor and may  have  been  predisposed  to  offer
      assistance due to their historic affection [41].

  39. At [45] the Judge found that the sponsor took the responsible parental
      decision to withhold information from the claimant until she was  able
      to emotionally deal with it.

  40. In support of her submissions, Ms Kotak  referred  to  the  claimant's
      witness statement. At paragraph 7 she said that she went to Waugh Hill
      looking for her father and asking around. That is when she found  that
      he was dead.

  41. She had found one of her father's sisters. Her aunt was polite to  her
      and told her a little about him. She gave the claimant a copy  of  his
      death certificate. At paragraph 9 she stated that she grew up  knowing
      one parent, namely her mother, who has done everything  for  her.  She
      learned that she has sent money regularly to the person looking  after
      her. This was for her accommodation  as  well  as  costs  relating  to
      school, including her uniform and books. She  used  to  speak  to  her
      teachers at the school. She discussed with her what was  happening  at
      the school.

  42. At paragraphs 20 of the sponsor's statement, she  set  out  her  claim
      that she has  been  solely  responsible  for  the  claimant.  She  was
      responsible for paying people who were looking after the claimant. She
      also bought her food, clothes and other items. She sent money for  her
      school uniform, her daily lunches as well as school fees.

  43. She  provided  evidence  from  the  claimant's  school  that  she  was
      responsible for the school fees and was also in regular contact  about
      her ongoing educational attainment. She contended  that  she  was  the
      person who made major decisions about  her  education.   She  provided
      evidence of regular contact that  she  maintained  with  her  daughter
      through telephone calls and  more  recently  WhatsApp.  Various  phone
      cards were produced. This she used prior to WhatsApp.

  44. She claimed that she never abandoned parental responsibility  for  the
      claimant being prepared to move her where she felt that the care being
      provided was not good enough. She was often moved. That was to  ensure
      that she was receiving good care from  people  who  were  prepared  to
      follow her wishes  and  directions  relating  to  the  claimant.  Even
      deciding whether the claimant could  participate  in  extra-curricular
      school activities had to be discussed with her  first.  She  was  then
      able to discuss it with the school and the claimant.

  45. Ms Kotak submitted that it was accordingly reasonable for the Judge to
      conclude that the sponsor took the responsible parental  decisions  to
      withhold information from the claimant until the sponsor was satisfied
      of her relationship with the father. Judge Fox stated that she  wished
      to protect the claimant from those facts.

  46. Ms Kotak noted that the sponsor stated that her faith was important to
      her and she was insistent that the claimant  attend  the  Seventh  Day
      Adventist Church even if no-one else in the  household  was  going  to
      church. When [LH] was not able to  insist  that  the  claimant  go  to
      church as  she  instructed,  she  moved  her  daughter.  She  was  not
      satisfied with the overall care she was receiving.

  47. Ms Kotak also referred to the witness statement  of  [LH],  at  D1-D2.
      She resides in Jamaica She is the mother of [IB]. In her statement she
      noted that the sponsor would send her money to  cover  the  claimant's
      clothes, toiletries, school uniforms and the like. She would ring  the
      claimant regularly and talk to her. She also used to ring  the  school
      as sometimes when the claimant brought  home  papers  or  reports  she
      would tell her that the school had already spoken to her mother.

  48. The sponsor had made it clear from the start when the  claimant  spoke
      with her that she would make all  the  main  decisions  regarding  the
      claimant. She did not try to take over the role of parent. There  were
      times when she heard that the claimant had  been  late  home  and  got
      angry. She insisted that the claimant should discuss such matters with
      her first.

  49. She confirmed that the sponsor was upset because she  was  not  really
      strict on the claimant's attending the Seventh Day Adventist church in
      which she had been raised.

  50. In reply, Ms Fijiwalah submitted that there was no finding relating to
      the nexus referred to by the Judge at [37]. Nor did the Judge make any
      findings relating to sole responsibility.

      Assessment

  51. It is correct that the Judge should have informed the parties  of  his
      research and recording that there was available evidence in the public
      domain that districts within Jamaica are  sub-divided  into  parishes.
      This formed part of his finding that it was credible that the claimant
      would be able to trace her father with only a  name  and  district  to
      guide her.

  52. However, this was not the only evidence  relating  to  the  claimant's
      curiosity and desire to find out who her father was. There was also  a
      birth certificate of the claimant produced, in  which  her  mother  is
      recorded as residing at Waugh Hill, in the 'town/village' of Rock Hall
      - O1.

  53. The claimant's evidence was  that  her  mother  told  her  on  several
      occasions when she was about fourteen or fifteen,  what  her  father's
      name was, and the area he lived in. She also told her the name of  one
      of his sisters with whom she got on quite well when she was going  out
      with him.

  54. That was the background in which she accordingly went herself  to  the
      Waugh Hill area looking for him. She then discovered that he was dead.
      Her aunt told the claimant a little about him and said  that  she  had
      nothing else to give but offered her a copy of his death  certificate,
      which the claimant took.

  55. She noted that he died in 2004. She had never met  him.  Although  her
      mother had told him when she was born, he did not  come  to  see  her,
      apart from perhaps once. She never knew him.

  56. I have also had regard to the sponsor's witness  statement  at  C1-C6.
      She identified her husband, [EW]. They were married in 2011.  She  had
      wanted the claimant to join her in 2013 when she was 14. Unfortunately
      her husband unexpectedly fell ill in 2012. She set out  his  diagnosis
      at paragraph 7 of her statement.

  57. He required  significantly  more  practical  and  emotional  care  and
      support. He  suffered  not  only  from  dementia/Alzheimers  but  also
      diabetes, hypertension and had prostate and  heart  problems.  He  was
      eventually placed in a nursing home in 2014. His  health  deteriorated
      significantly and it required a great deal of her time to agree  to  a
      long term care plan for him. He died in November 2017.

  58. The death certificate relating to [EW] was produced at  U1(a)  of  the
      claimant's bundle. The coroner's certificate  of  the  fact  of  death
      certified by the Senior Coroner for South London,  dated  15  December
      2017, identified [EW], giving his date of birth and the place  of  his
      birth at St Elizabeth, Jamaica. He is recorded as a retired husband of
      the sponsor, a care assistant. He died on 25 November 2017 at the  [~]
      Nursing  Home,  in  Surrey.  At  [46]  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
      claimant's father is deceased.

  59.  Judge  Fox  directed  himself  in  accordance   with   the   relevant
      authorities, set out at [14]. He had before him the available evidence
      regarding the  claimant's  father  from  both  the  claimant  and  her
      sponsor. His finding as to the identity of the claimant's father,  and
      the fact that he is deceased, is sustainable on the evidence produced.



  60. Further, on the evidence before him it was also established  that  the
      sponsor was responsible for  important  decisions  in  the  claimant's
      life, including important decisions taken in respect of her school and
      her religion. Although the day to day care would necessarily  have  to
      be undertaken by any guardian at the time,  it  is  evident  that  the
      sponsor from time to time changed guardians when she was not satisfied
      about their care of the claimant.

  61. In light of the evidence produced, the Judge was entitled to find that
      the sponsor has been sole responsibility  for  the  appellant.  Having
      satisfied the Rules, Judge Fox  satisfied  himself  that  family  life
      exists between the claimant and her mother. He found that she  is  the
      only surviving parent.  She  also  has  sole  responsibility  for  the
      claimant. His finding that the entry clearance decision constituted  a
      disproportionate interference with  the  legitimate  aim  pursued,  is
      sustainable on the evidence.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      Anonymity direction not made






      Signed                             Date 10 October 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





