
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04893/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10 October 2019                  |On: 17 October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           eleanor omozogie atakpu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson, instructed through Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 25 June  1996.  She  entered
the UK on 29 December 2012 on a child student visa valid until  15  November
2014. She was granted further periods of leave as a student until 30  August
2018. On 29 August 2018 she applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  family  and
private life grounds, on the basis of  her  family  life  with  her  husband
[CM], a British citizen whom she married on 25 August 2018.

The appellant's application was considered under the 10-year  partner  route
and was refused on 26 February 2019 on the basis that  the  requirements  of
Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules  could  not  be
met and that there were no exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of
leave outside the immigration rules. The respondent  considered  that  there
were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  outside  the  UK
for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(a)  of  Appendix  FM  and  no  very
significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in  Nigeria  for  the
purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1).

The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard in the  First-
tier Tribunal on 15 May 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke. The  judge
noted that the appellant had always had lawful leave in the  UK.  She  noted
the appellant's claim that she had fallen out with her parents  because  her
mother was cross that she had not completed her final year of  studies.  She
feared that her mother would be violent towards her. Her husband  would  not
go to live in Nigeria. The judge considered that  that  did  not  amount  to
insurmountable obstacles and concluded that the appellant  could  return  to
Nigeria and make an entry clearance application to re-join  her  husband  in
the UK. The judge considered that, whilst the appellant's  husband  did  not
meet the income threshold required under the immigration  rules  as  he  had
recently been made redundant,  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  work  as
previously and her husband's mother and aunt would be able to  make  up  the
shortfall to meet the financial threshold if an out of  country  application
was made. The judge concluded  that  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
rules could not be met and that the facts of the case did not permit her  to
conclude that it would be unjustifiably harsh to require  the  appellant  to
return to Nigeria and make an out of country  application.  She  accordingly
dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on  the  basis  that
the judge had failed to consider and apply the  principles  in  Chikwamba  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 and Hayat  (nature
of  Chikwamba   principle)   Pakistan   [2011]   UKUT   444   in   assessing
proportionality  and  had  misapplied  section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal.

At the hearing before me, Ms Ferguson relied on the  grounds  and  submitted
that since all the  "balance  sheet"  factors  applied  in  the  appellant's
favour the judge ought to have found that it was disproportionate to  expect
the appellant to return to Nigeria to make an entry clearance application.

Mr Walker submitted that it was unusual for  the  judge  to  have  found  in
favour of the appellant to the extent set  out  at  [11]  but  yet  to  have
concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for her to return to Nigeria  to
make an entry clearance application. He agreed that the judge had  erred  in
law in her approach to the balance sheet assessment and that the  error  was
material. He agreed that the decision should  be  re-made  by  allowing  the
appeal.

In light of Mr Walker's concession, there is no need for me to say  anything
more. Mr Walker, on behalf of  the  respondent,  accepts  that  the  balance
should fall in favour of the appellant, in light of the judge's findings  at
[9] and [11], and accordingly I accept that  the  respondent's  decision  to
refuse the appellant's human rights claim is disproportionate and in  breach
of Article 8. I therefore find that the judge erred in law in  her  decision
and I set it aside. I allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  human
rights grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.



Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 11 October
2019
