
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04526/2018
                                                               HU/09585/2018
                                                               hu/09586/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2019                      |On 10 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MKA
                                     NK
                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. S. Karim, Counsel instructed by Awan Legal
                    Associates Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 6 February 2019 I set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before me to be remade.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to MKA, NK and AK  as  the  Appellants,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. I continue the anonymity direction made at the error of law hearing.

The hearing

 4. I heard oral evidence from the first Appellant.   Both  representatives
    made oral submissions.  I reserved my decision.

 5. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle  (to
    O6), the Appellants' bundle from the First-Tier Tribunal (70 pages) and
    the first Appellant's statement and attachments prepared for the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  I was provided with a copy of Balajigari [2019] EWCA
    Civ 673.

 6. It was agreed that the sole issue before me  was  in  relation  to  the
    application of section 322(5), regarding the difference  in  the  first
    Appellant's  income  as  declared  to  HMRC  and  as  declared  to  the
    Respondent.   It  was  agreed  that  the  first   Appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 276B, but for the  application  of  paragraph
    322(5).  There was no suggestion that removal  would  be  proportionate
    under Article 8 if I were to find that  the  first  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.

Burden of proof

 7. The burden of proof lies on the Appellants to show that, at the date of
    the hearing, the Respondent's decision is a breach of their rights to a
    family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.  The standard of proof is
    the balance of probabilities.


 8. Where the Respondent has  refused  an  application  with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(5) of the immigration rules, the initial burden of  proof
    lies on the Respondent to show that the application  should  have  been
    refused with reference to  this  paragraph.   Only  if  the  Respondent
    satisfies the initial burden of proof and provides prima facie evidence
    of deception does the burden of proof then shift to the first Appellant
    to provide an innocent explanation.

Findings and conclusions

Paragraph 322(5)


 9. The case of Balajigari was promulgated in April 2019, after the initial
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  after  my  error  of  law
    decision.  This case has clarified  the  law  in  this  area.   I  have
    carefully considered the reasons for refusal letter, with reference  to
    the case of Balajigari.  Balajigari makes clear that  there  must  have
    been dishonesty for section 322(5) to have been  met.   At  [37(2)]  it
    states:

         "We would accept that as a matter of  principle  dishonest  conduct
         will not always and in every  case  reach  a  sufficient  level  of
         seriousness, but in the context of an earnings discrepancy case  it
         is very hard to see how the deliberate and dishonest submission  of
         false earnings figures, whether to HMRC  or  to  the  Home  Office,
         would not do so."

10. Balajigari states at [42]:

         "A discrepancy between the earnings declared to  HMRC  and  to  the
         Home Office may justifiably give rise to a suspicion that it is the
         result of dishonesty but it does not by itself justify a conclusion
         to that effect. What it does is to call for an explanation.  If  an
         explanation once sought is not forthcoming, or is unconvincing,  it
         may at that point be legitimate for the Secretary of State to infer
         dishonesty; but even in that case the position is not that there is
         a legal  burden  on  the  applicant  to  disprove  dishonesty.  The
         Secretary of State must simply decide, considering the  discrepancy
         in the light of the explanation (or lack  of  it),  whether  he  is
         satisfied that the applicant has been dishonest.

11. This makes the position very clear that paragraph 322(5) does not  fall
    to be used automatically when there is a  discrepancy,  but  only  when
    there has been dishonesty.  Mr. Karim referred to [211] of  Balajigari.
    It was submitted that the concerns which arose from the use of language
    in Balajigari were the same for the first Appellant.  There had been no
    reference in the reasons for refusal letter to deception or dishonesty.
     Paragraph [211] states:

         "We are, however, very troubled by the terms of the  Reasons  given
         for both decisions. In neither set of Reasons does the Secretary of
         State state in terms that he has found the discrepancies to be  the
         result of dishonesty. Instead, the Reasons for  the  administrative
         review decision repeatedly use language  which  suggests  a  lesser
         threshold. In the first of the passages quoted at para.  201  above
         they refer to "undesirable conduct", which  is  plainly  the  wrong
         test; the succeeding passages are couched in terms of the Secretary
         of State's "doubt" and "concerns"; and  the  final  passage  quoted
         "deems" (which is an odd word in this context) Mr Albert's  conduct
         to have been "questionable", which is certainly short of a  finding
         of dishonesty."

12. I have carefully considered  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   This
    states on page 4:

         "The Secretary of State considers that it would be undesirable  for
         you to remain in the United Kingdom in light of your character  and
         conduct.  She  is  satisfied  that  you  have  misrepresented  your
         earnings at various times and from time to time have  changed  what
         you have represented in respect of your earnings to HM Revenue  and
         Customs and/or UK Visas & Immigration for the purpose  of  reducing
         your tax liability or for the purpose of obtaining leave to  remain
         or both."

13. Later on page 4 the Respondent states that the evidence submitted  does
    not satisfactorily demonstrate  that  the  failure  to  declare  was  a
    genuine error.  On page 5 he states that it would be  "undesirable  for
    you to remain in the United Kingdom in  light  of  your  character  and
    conduct".  On page 6, when considering family life under  Appendix  FM,
    the Respondent states that the application falls for  refusal  "due  to
    your character and conduct in respect of the discrepancies".

14. I find that the Respondent has not stated in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter that the first Appellant has employed deception  or  dishonesty.
    The language used by the Respondent is very similar, if not  the  same,
    to  that  criticised  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Balajigari.   The
    Respondent has referred to the discrepancy, but  has  not  gone  on  to
    state that the discrepancy shows that  the  first  Appellant  has  used
    dishonesty.

15. Therefore, while Balajigari is clear that paragraph 322(5) can be  used
    in situations where there is a discrepancy between income  declared  to
    HMRC and the Respondent, this is only when dishonesty or deception  has
    been used.   This  must  be  stated,  and  the  language  used  by  the
    Respondent in the decision is important.  It is not  enough  merely  to
    set out that there is a discrepancy.  As  is  made  clear  by  [42]  of
    Balajigari, a discrepancy may give rise to suspicion of dishonesty, but
    discrepancy itself is not enough.

16. Following Balajigari, I therefore find  that  the  Respondent  has  not
    satisfied the evidential burden  to  show  that  paragraph  322(5)  was
    applicable to the first Appellant's case, and that the first  Appellant
    had used dishonesty.

17. In the event that I am wrong in my  finding,  and  the  Respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof, I find in  any  event  that  the  first
    Appellant has discharged the burden on him to show that dishonesty  and
    deception were not employed, and has provided an  explanation  for  the
    discrepancy.

18. I was referred to the letter from the Appellants'  solicitors  dated  4
    March 2016 (C7 of the Respondent's bundle).   This  letter  accompanied
    the first Appellant's first application for indefinite leave to remain.
     In this letter it states:

         "He has also revised his income tax returns for the period of 2010-
         11, 2012-13 because of some errors  and  he  has  provided  updated
         copies of returns and accounts."

19. It was submitted by Mr. Karim that this showed that the first Appellant
    had raised the fact that there were discrepancies with  the  Respondent
    as early as March  2016,  which  is  considerably  in  advance  of  the
    Respondent raising the issue.  I find that  in  March  2016  the  first
    Appellant  voluntarily  informed  the  Respondent  that  he  had   made
    amendments to his tax return.  I accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr.
    Karim that the Appellant's  situation  is  far  from  those  where  the
    Respondent raises a discrepancy after an application has been made.   I
    find that this was a voluntary disclosure, and  was  also  a  voluntary
    amendment to his tax returns, unprompted by the Respondent.

20. Secondly, it was submitted by Mr. Karim that the  first  Appellant  had
    continuously stressed the  fact  that  he  had  used,  and  relied  on,
    accountants.  He submitted that there was nothing implausible in  that.
    In oral evidence the first Appellant  said  that  the  discrepancy  was
    because the accountant had not declared his self-employment  income  at
    the time.  He said that he had given the accountant  information  about
    his income, but he had not known how much the accountant  had  declared
    to HMRC.  He had been told by his accountant that  self-employment  tax
    was due after one and a half to three years, and he  therefore  thought
    that he would be paying his tax later.  He had not queried the  figures
    with the accountant as he thought he was paying  the  correct  tax,  in
    reliance on the information from the accountant.

21. The first Appellant was asked in cross-examination whether, when he had
    been setting up his  business,  he  had  looked  into  his  likely  tax
    liabilities as part of a business plan.  However, I find that while the
    first Appellant is self-employed, he is working as  a  contractor.   He
    works as a data analyst for banks.  He has worked for RBS  and  Lloyds.
    He is paid on a daily rate for six month contracts.  He said that there
    was no fixed income for the year.  Before he had commenced a  contract,
    he did not know what he would be earning over the period of a year.

22. I find that while the first Appellant is  self-employed,  he  does  not
    have a business in  the  traditional  sense.   He  is  a  self-employed
    contractor working for banks as a data analyst.  I do not find it casts
    doubt on the first Appellant's evidence  that  he  did  not  look  into
    likely tax liabilities as part of any business plan, given  the  nature
    of his self-employment.

23. I find that the Appellant used and relied on accountants,  and  I  find
    that there is nothing implausible  or  unusual  in  this.   He  has  no
    background in accountancy.  At [17] of his witness  statement  dated  4
    June 2019 he said that he did not, and does not,  know  accounting  and
    taxation affairs.  He relied on  accountants  and  paid  them  for  the
    services he provided.  "As a  person  who  has  Information  Technology
    knowledge, I am used to  people  trusting  me  with  their  Information
    Technology queries; in the same way I trust  accountants  with  my  tax
    matters, or trust lawyers with my legal  matters  or  doctors  with  my
    health."  There is nothing implausible in this.

24.  It  was  submitted  by  Mr.  Karim  that  the  accountant  had   taken
    responsibility for the error.   I  was  referred  to  the  letter  from
    Samantha Skyring, an accountant at TaxAssist Accountants, dated 25  May
    2017 (D14  of  the  Respondent's  bundle).   She  has  given  her  ACCA
    membership number.  Ms. Skyring states:

         "I am writing to confirm that our  client's  tax  returns  for  the
         years 2010/11 and 2012/13 was submitted with incorrect details.


         The mistake was from our side as we  inadvertently  mixed  earnings
         details of two clients."

25. It was submitted by Mr. Karim that it was dangerous  to  underplay  the
    consequences of an accountancy firm admitting to such a mistake  as  it
    opened the firm  up  to  being  sued.   It  was  implausible  that  any
    professional would put  pen  to  paper  in  this  way  if  he  was  not
    responsible, given the possible repercussions.  It was  submitted  that
    full weight should be given to the admission by the accountants.

26. I find that there is force in this submission.  It was submitted by Mr.
    Avery that there were some discrepancies between the  evidence  of  the
    first Appellant and the evidence in the letter, in relation to how  the
    mistake had been made.  I find that these  are  not  significant  given
    that the accountant has admitted the mistake.  The core  of  the  first
    Appellant's claim is that the accountant made  the  mistake,  which  is
    supported by the letter.  The first Appellant's evidence  is  that  the
    accountants did not declare his self-employed income at  all.   In  the
    letter it states that they mixed the earnings details of  two  clients.
    However, these two  are  not  mutually  exclusive.   There  is  nothing
    inconsistent.

27. I have considered whether there is any inconsistency  in  the  evidence
    regarding whether the first Appellant asked the accountant to  look  at
    his tax returns, or whether  it  was  the  other  way  round.   It  was
    submitted by Mr. Avery  that  there  was  a  discrepancy.   The  letter
    states:

         "Later we approached our client and pointed out this mistake and we
         amended the HMRC records accordingly and client was compensated."

28. In the first Appellant's witness statement he said:

         "I approached my  accountants  and  asked  them  to  check  all  my
         previous tax years' record." [16]

29. In oral evidence the  first  Appellant  said  that  he  had  asked  his
    accountants to check if his tax affairs were in order as his solicitors
    had told him to  go  through  his  tax  details  prior  to  making  his
    application.  He therefore asked the accountants to go through it,  and
    then the accountant told him that  he  had  found  errors.   The  first
    Appellant asked him to rectify the errors.  I find  that  there  is  no
    inconsistency here.

30. I find that it does not detract from  the  first  Appellant's  evidence
    that he is still using the same accountants.  He gave evidence  at  the
    hearing that, when he went to ask another  accountant  to  rectify  his
    returns, he was told that he would be charged "a lot" to do so, whereas
    his current accountants said that, as it was their mistake, they  would
    not charge him for making the  amendments.   They  amended  it  without
    charge.  I find there  is  nothing  untoward  in  the  first  Appellant
    remaining with these accountants given that they said that  they  would
    make the amendments without charge.  I find it adds to the  credibility
    of the first Appellant's evidence that the  accountants  rectified  the
    error without charge, as it  is  consistent  with  their  admission  of
    responsibility.

31. I have  considered  the  two  tax  periods  in  question.   The  first,
    2010/2011, was the first period of self-employment.  I  find  that  the
    first Appellant was new to being  self-employed.   There  is  therefore
    nothing inconsistent in his evidence that he did not query when he  was
    told that tax for this year would be paid later.

32. In relation to the  second  period,  2012/2013,  he  received  dividend
    income and corporation tax on this which was paid at  source  (see  the
    Company- Short Tax Return Form  appended  to  his  witness  statement).
    There was a full declaration of the profits of his company.  There  was
    no dispute regarding his payment of corporation tax.  I  find  that  he
    had made a full declaration of his profits to HMRC, albeit not as self-
    employed income.

33. I have also taken into account the fact that  HMRC  did  not  impose  a
    penalty on the first Appellant.  Balajigari states at [74]:

         "We further bear in mind that there would be nothing to prevent the
         applicant from drawing attention to the fact that HMRC had enquired
         into a matter and had decided  not  to  impose  a  penalty  or  had
         decided to impose a penalty at a lower rate, which  signified  that
         there had been carelessness rather than dishonesty. That  would  be
         information which was within an applicant's own knowledge and  they
         could draw this to the attention of the Secretary of State."

34. I find this is  evidence  that  the  arm  of  government  charged  with
    prosecuting for these  kind  of  offences  imposed  no  penalty.   This
    indicates, in accordance with the policy document issued by HMRC,  that
    it was not considered to be deliberate, or  deliberate  and  concealed.
    Following Balajigari, this is information which the first Appellant was
    entitled to draw to the attention of the Respondent.

35. Taking into account all  of  this  evidence,  I  find  that  the  first
    Appellant has given a plausible explanation for the discrepancy in  the
    amounts declared to HMRC and to the Respondent.  I find that,  even  if
    the Respondent had satisfied the burden of proof to show that there was
    a reasonable suspicion that the first Appellant had been dishonest, the
    first Appellant has shown that he did not use dishonesty and  that  the
    inaccurate declarations were due to an error of his accountants.

36. I therefore find that the Respondent wrongly applied  paragraph  322(5)
    to the first Appellant's application.  This being the only  reason  why
    the first Appellant's application for indefinite leave  to  remain  was
    refused, I find that the first Appellant has shown that  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules.

Article 8

37. As stated above, it was not submitted by Mr. Avery that, if I  were  to
    find that the first Appellant met the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules, the removal of the Appellants would be proportionate.   This  is
    in line with the cases of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109,  and  OA
    and Others (human rights; 'new  matter';  s.120)  Nigeria  [2019]  UKUT
    00065 (IAC).


38. TZ states at [34]:

         "That has the benefit that where  a  person  satisfies  the  Rules,
         whether or not by reference to an article 8  informed  requirement,
         then this will be positively determinative of that person's article
         8 appeal, provided their case engages article 8(1),  for  the  very
         reason that it would then be disproportionate for that person to be
         removed."

39. This is reflected in the headnote to OA which states:

         "(1) In a  human  rights  appeal  under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  a  finding  that  a
         person (P) satisfies the requirements of a  particular  immigration
         rule, so as to be entitled to leave to remain, means that (provided
         Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged), the Secretary of State will  not
         be able to point  to  the  importance  of  maintaining  immigration
         controls as a factor weighing in favour of the Secretary  of  State
         in the proportionality balance, so far as that  factor  relates  to
         the particular immigration rule that the  judge  has  found  to  be
         satisfied."

40. I find that the Appellants have both family and  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The first Appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since July 2006, a period of 13 years.  I find that he has  established
    a private life in this period sufficient to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8.  I find that the decision would interfere with  his  private
    life.  To the extent that the Appellants would all return  to  Pakistan
    together, there would not be an interference in their family life.


41. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.

42. In assessing the public interest, I have taken into account section  19
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  117B(1)
    provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
    the public interest.  I have found above that the first Appellant meets
    the requirements of the immigration rules, and  the  second  and  third
    Appellants are dependents on his application.  There will therefore  be
    no compromise to the maintenance of effective immigration control  and,
    as set out above, the caselaw holds that the Respondent cannot point to
    the importance of maintaining immigration controls as a factor weighing
    in  his  favour  when  an  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.

43. The Appellant speaks English (section  117B(2)).   The  Appellants  are
    financially dependent (section 117B(3)).  Under  sections  117B(4)  and
    117B(5), although the first Appellant's leave here has been precarious,
    the Respondent has provided a route under the immigration rules where a
    person can apply for indefinite leave to remain if they have  spent  10
    years here lawfully.  This indicates that the Respondent considers that
    more weight should be given to his private life.  Section  117B(6)  was
    not relied on.

44. Taking all of the above into account, and giving particular  weight  to
    the fact that the requirements of the immigration rules are met, I find
    that the balance comes  down  in  favour  of  the  Appellants  and  the
    decision is not proportionate.  I find that the Appellants have  shown,
    on the balance of probabilities, that the decision is a breach of their
    rights under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

45. The Appellants' appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.  The first
    Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph  276B.   The  second  and
    third Appellants are his dependents.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  I have found that the Respondent  was
wrong to use paragraph 322(5), and the first Appellant met the  requirements
of the immigration rules apart from this.  In the circumstances,  I  make  a
fee award for the entire fee paid.


Signed                                  Date 6 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
