
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04898/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd April 2018              |On 26th April 2018              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               Mr RAMELS SMITH
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     MS N Mallick, instructed by Cleveland law Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwall, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 7th October 1965 and  he
    appealed on human rights  grounds  against  the  respondent's  decision
    dated 1st February 2016 to refuse his application dated 23rd  September
    2015 for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his spouse.

 2. In a determination dated 21st of June 2017  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Talbot dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.    The
    appellant appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 3. The application for permission set out the following grounds

    (i) the immigration judge made an error  of  law  by  failing  to  give
    effect to material evidence provided in the trial bundle.    The  judge
    in paragraph 23 accepted the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting
    and the couple had been living together since January 2011 but  he  did
    not give effect to that evidence before  the  court  and  overturn  the
    Secretary of State's decision

    (ii) the decision was irrational as the immigration judge had  made  an
    error in the application of the law.   He failed to apply paragraph  51
    of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 which detailed 'the lack of  public  interest
    in deporting those who would otherwise be granted leave to enter by  an
    application made from outside the UK'.

    (iii) The decision was perverse as the judge had failed  to  allow  the
    appeal in considering the appellant's private and/or family life.    At
    paragraph 18 of the decision, the judge had identified the difficulties
    the appellant would face in establishing family life in Jamaica.    The
    judge failed to consider all the factors as  presented  and  failed  to
    apply the jurisprudence in relation to article 8.    The  enquiry  into
    proportionality should be a balanced judgement of what could reasonably
    be expected in the light of all the material facts.   The likelihood of
    returned via entry clearance should not  be  ordinarily  treated  as  a
    factor rendering removal proportionate

The Hearing


 4. At the hearing, Ms Mallick submitted that the judge had failed to  give
    adequate reasons and failed to consider that the appellant had been  in
    the United Kingdom since  2002  and  that  he  had  not  been  removed.
    Particularly the judge had failed to consider the aunt who  experienced
    ill health, was on dialysis and  relied  on  the  appellant  for  care.
    Miss Mallick accepted that the aunt had children of her  own,  and  her
    daughter was her assigned carer in the United Kingdom and that they did
    not live together but I was referred to the witness statement in  which
    the aunt had expressed her attachment to the appellant.   The aunt  was
    not at the hearing because she  had  been  taken  to  the  London  free
    Hospital for dialysis.

 5. The appellant and his partner had been in a relationship since  January
    2011.   The judge had given inadequate  reasons  for  his  findings  in
    relation to the lack of insurmountable obstacles on return to  Jamaica.
     The partner (and sponsor) was born in the United Kingdom; her  parents
    had come to the United Kingdom in 1959.    The partner was British  and
    had a child here who was aged 38 years.     He had a job in the  United
    Kingdom and lived with his mother and her partner (the appellant).

 6. The partner had been involved in the  community  and  had  a  full-time
    employment since 1991 and she had lived and worked in the  UK  for  all
    her life and had very strong  ties  in  the  UK.    She  could  not  be
    expected to relocate to Jamaica.    The appellant himself had not lived
    in Jamaica since 2002 and the Home Office had not removed the appellant
    since he had overstayed.   The  appellant  and  his  partner  had  been
    together for eight years.   The judge had noted that the appellant  had
    no family in Jamaica and there was no support and no accommodation  for
    him there.   The judge had not taken this into account.   Further,  the
    judge had not considered how the appellant and  his  partner  could  be
    expected to continue their family life in Jamaica.

 7. Mr Fijiwala, on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  advanced  that  the
    application was merely a disagreement with the determination which  was
    clear and well balanced.   The judge had properly directed  himself  in
    relation to EX. 1 of Appendix FM and in relation  to  the  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles.    The  judge's  reasoning  was  set  out  at
    paragraphs 18 and 19 and his findings were  sound.    The  judge  noted
    that the appellant's partner had a knowledge of the culture of  Jamaica
    and also noted that she had savings such  that  his  employability  and
    support in Jamaica would not be an issue.   The  judge  had  recognised
    that the EX.1 was a stiff test and the  reasoning  was  adequate.    Ms
    Fijiwala asserted that paragraph 276 ADE had not  been  challenged  and
    there  were  no  very  significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration in Jamaica.

 8. The judge had carefully considered article  8  outside  the  rules  and
    whether there  were  any  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  from  the
    refusal or for the appellant and  his  partner  returning  to  Jamaica.
    It was not correct to assert that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account or balance the factors.   The judge  in  particular  considered
    Section 117  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  act  2002.
    There were no exceptional or compelling circumstances and there was  an
    option and this was a further option to make an application  for  entry
    clearance to return spouse.    It was submitted that the aunt  did  not
    give evidence at the hearing before the first  Tier  Tribunal  and  the
    appeal was not argued on the basis of Zambrano.    The  judge  properly
    considered the factors that were before him.   The Secretary  of  State
    could not be criticised for failing to remove the appellant when he had
    chosen to remain in the unit United Kingdom unlawfully and she did  not
    know that he was even in the United Kingdom.

Conclusions


 9. Ground (i). It is not evident from a reading of the determination as  a
    whole that the judge failed to take  into  account  material  evidence.
    The judge departed from the previous decision of first  Tribunal  judge
    Russell who rejected the assertion that the  relationship  was  genuine
    and subsisting and indeed found at paragraph 16 that  the  relationship
    was genuine.   The judge specifically noted that  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules  and  correctly  directed  himself
    with reference to EX.1 (b), noting that insurmountable obstacles  meant
    'very significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or
    their partner continuing their family life together outside the UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardships  of
    the applicant or their partner'.

10. In that context the judge ranged  the  evidence  in  his  decision.  At
    paragraphs 18 and 19, the  judge  acknowledged  that  the  partner  and
    sponsor was someone who was born and had lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    for all of her 54 years.   He noted that her son lived with her in  the
    UK and that all her network of family and friends were also in the  UK.
     The judge also identified that the partner had a good job with Hackney
    Council which she had held for some 27 years  it  was  clear  that  the
    judge had a full grasp of the underlying material facts of  this  case.
    He acknowledged that he had

    "no doubt that a move to Jamaica would be  highly  disruptive  for  her
    both in terms of her employment/career and her social and family life".



11. It simply cannot be argued that  the  judge  ignored  relevant  points.
    The judge identified all the  salient  points  and  recorded  the  oral
    evidence that he had considered.    He noted that the appellant and his
    partner had moved  in  together  in  January  2011  [7]  and  that  the
    partner's son lived with them.   He noted the appellant had  no  family
    in Jamaica save his brother with whom he had had no  contact  for  many
    years and that it was asserted that his  partner  would  be  unable  to
    follow him, and, if she did there  would  be  no  accommodation.    The
    judge also identified at [8] that the appellant had volunteered  during
    the Olympics.   The judge made a full assessment of the evidence of the
    partner identifying that she was currently renting  and  that  her  son
    Sean lived with them.    The  judge  also  recorded  that  the  partner
    advised that she became aware of  the  immigration  status  after  they
    embarked on a relationship but was aware of it by 2010 [9].    I  note,
    however, that the appellant and partner in fact moved  in  together  in
    January 2011.   The  judge  identified  that  it  was  the  appellant's
    partner's case that she could not relocate to Jamaica and she  had  her
    job and family in the UK and he accepted that now she was over 50 years
    old it may be difficult for her to find a job  in  Jamaica.    Although
    she had gone to Jamaica for a holiday about three  years  ago  and  her
    parents were born there, she had only distant relatives there whom  she
    had not met.   The judge also recorded the evidence in relation to  the
    appellant's partner's son.   He was 37 years old, lived with the couple
    and that they had a close relationship.   He was  employed  as  a  site
    manager and had himself visited Jamaica approximately six times.

12. The judge acknowledged that the assessment  was  finally  balanced  and
    specifically set out the relevant in competing factors at paragraphs 18
    and 19.  As indicated above he was fully aware of the  relevant  facts.
    He identified that Miss Davies, the partner, was a 54-year-old  British
    national who had lived in the UK all her life and that  her  son  lived
    with her and all of her network of family and friends were  in  the  UK
    and she had a good job with Hackney Council.   He acknowledged that any
    relocation  would  be  highly  disruptive  in   terms   of   both   her
    employment/career and her social and family life and that it  would  be
    very difficult for her to find employment in Jamaica is a newly arrived
    foreigner  in  her  mid-50s.   The  judge  also  recognised  that   her
    employment pension rights in UK  would  be  adversely  affected.    The
    judge acknowledged that the appellant had no close  family  in  Jamaica
    apart from a brother and that he was 51 years of age and  may  find  it
    difficult to maintain obtain employment and accommodate himself.

13. At paragraph 19 however the judge balanced the fact that the  appellant
    and his partner were in good health and that he had lived in Jamaica up
    till the age  of  37  prior  to  entering  the  UK.    The  judge  also
    considered that Miss Davies, the partner, had been on visits to Jamaica
    and was of Jamaican heritage and her parents were born  there  and  the
    culture would not be totally "alien".   The judge was  a  realistic  in
    and identifying that there would be  considerable  difficulties  and  a
    high degree of disruption if they needed to pursue  their  family  life
    together in Jamaica, but it was open to the judge to  find  that  those
    difficulties would not be "insurmountable" in the sense that they would
    involve very serious hardship.   In  the  analysis  undertaken  by  the
    judge, who had directed himself appropriately, that finding was open to
    him bearing in mind  that  the  test  in  relation  to  "insurmountable
    obstacles" is an exacting test.

14.  Having  identified  the  relevant  evidence   and   directed   himself
    appropriately it is a matter for the judge as to the weight he  accords
    to the evidence when concluding as to whether there were insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant relocating to Jamaica with his partner.

15. That the judge did not specifically refer to the aunt to my mind is not
    a material error.    The aunt on neither occasion attended to give oral
    evidence and although I appreciate that she has kidney difficulties and
    undergoes dialysis, but the evidence was that she did not live with the
    appellant,  and  the  application  was  made  on  the  basis   of   his
    relationship with his partner, and further, the statement of  the  aunt
    noted that the assigned carer was in fact  her  daughter.    I  am  not
    persuaded that there was any article 8 right in relation  to  the  aunt
    such that the failure to take her into account was material.   The case
    before the first Tier Tribunal was  not  put  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was a carer for the aunt but that she featured as part of his
    overall network.   The judge was clearly aware of  and  considered  the
    relationship between the son and the appellant  and  his  partner  when
    making his findings.  The son, however, is 37 years old  with  his  own
    job and own partner.  The judge's findings cannot be undermined by  the
    criticism of his approach which was open to him.  He did  consider  the
    overall impact on the family.

16. The judge clearly found that even the relationship with his partner did
    not suffice to outweigh the public interest.   The judge looked at  the
    private life of the appellant at paragraph 20  and  was  not  persuaded
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Jamaica.   He found that the appellant  had  lived  in
    Jamaica until he was aged  37,  had  experience  of  having  worked  in
    Jamaica in the building trade, and that he could be sent some financial
    remittances to ease his life there by  his  partner  and  family  here.
    The judge also concluded that the appellant may have some more  distant
    family or friends with whom he would  be  able  to  resume  contact  in
    Jamaica.   The judge did take the evidence in the  round  and  was  not
    satisfied that  the  appellant  had  shown  that  they  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his return.  Nevertheless the judge  proceeded
    to make an analysis outside the  immigration  rules  and  against  this
    background as set out above.

17. Ground (ii) asserted that the decision ignored the principle enunciated
    in Agyarko such as 'the lack of public interest in deporting those  who
    would otherwise be granted leave to enter by an application  made  from
    outside the UK'.    The test for irrationality is a high test and  that
    the judge's decision was irrational is simply  not  made  out  in  this
    case. He properly directed himself and the decision  was  open  to  him
    having weighed the evidence. The judge  was  obliged  to  consider  the
    immigration rules as they expressed the position of  the  Secretary  of
    State.   It was the case that the appellant partner was  said  to  earn
    sufficiently to fulfil the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  but
    the judge nevertheless, explored the circumstances of return to Jamaica
    and the difficulties on relocation.   The judge  found  they  were  not
    insurmountable. It is not  arguable  that  there  would  be  no  public
    interest in removal in  line  with  paragraph  51  of  Agyarko.     The
    applicant could not comply with the immigration rules because he was an
    over stayer and in relation to section 117 the evidence given was  that
    the relationship was formed at a time when both parties knew  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.   There  clearly  is  a
    public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  the  immigration  rules  and
    although the judge stated that it was open to the appellant  to  return
    to Jamaica and make an application for entry clearance as a  spouse  it
    cannot be said that it would be certain that that application would  be
    successful (indeed there should not be speculation on  the  success  or
    otherwise of an application).   It was open to the judge to reflect  in
    his assessment of article 8 the position of the Secretary of  State  as
    expressed in the immigration rules and further the judge was obliged to
    apply section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  such
    that "little weight should be given to a private life  or  relationship
    the qualifying partner that is established by  persons  time  when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully".

18. The fact is that the judge noted that the couple had a choice.    There
    is no right to choose which country to enjoy family life under the ECHR
    Article 8 Abdulaziz v UK App No 9214/80 where by couples cannot  choose
    where to  pursue  their  article  8  family  life.    The  judge  fully
    recognised the difficulties which  faced  the  couple  but  nonetheless
    found that the partner could either go with the appellant to Jamaica or
    withstand a separation  while  he  returned  to  Jamaica  and  made  an
    application through lawful channels for entry  clearance  to  join  his
    partner in  the  UK  on  the  basis  that,  as  the  judge  found,  the
    relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting.     This   case   can   be
    distinguished from Tikka v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 642.   Specifically  in
    that case it was found that the putative  entry  clearance  application
    from abroad was certain to be refused because the appellant would  fail
    the rules relating to suitability.   In that  case  the  appellant  had
    been in the UK lawfully throughout and when he married, but it was also
    found that  there  were  obstacles  to  the  spouse  returning  to  the
    appellant's home country. That, as the judge cogently argued,  was  not
    the case here.   It cannot be  said  that  it  is  'certain'  that  the
    immigration rules would be met 'but for' the appellant's unlawful  stay
    in the UK. Judge Talbot considered the  rules  and  found,  as  I  have
    discussed, that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant
    and  his  partner  returning  to  Jamaica  under  EX.1.   That   is   a
    consideration of the application of the immigration rules  which  takes
    into account the fact of the appellant being here unlawfully  under  R-
    LTRP.1.1(d).

19. I find no error of law  in  the  judge's  analysis  with  reference  to
    Agyarko or Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.   In sum this is not a case
    where the judge found that there would be very significant obstacles to
    return to a country of origin.   It is  feasible  to  factor  into  the
    balancing exercise whether a further application  could  be  made  from
    abroad.   There was no  evidence,  regardless  of  speculation  on  its
    success, that such a course of action was not open to the appellant and
    his partner or that the application would certainly be refused.

20. Ground (iii).   This asserts that the judge was perverse in failing  to
    allow the appeal and because he identified the difficulties but did not
    allow the appeal.   On the one hand the ground states  that  the  judge
    failed to give effect to material evidence and on the other hand states
    that the judge having taken into account the relevant  evidence  should
    have  allowed  the  appeal.   Neither  ground  is  sustainable  and  is
    addressed above. There  is  no  traction  in  the  assertion  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to remove this appellant.    From  2002  when
    the appellant entered the United Kingdom on a six-month visit visa  and
    promptly  overstayed,  he  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom   without
    voluntarily removing himself and unbeknown to the Secretary  of  State.
    It was not until he made an application in 2012 that the  Secretary  of
    State was aware that he was even in the United Kingdom.

21. The judge carefully assessed the factors in  relation  to  whether  the
    partner should relocate with the appellant to Jamaica and the key  test
    in relation to  this  assessment  is  having  considered  the  relevant
    factors, whether  the  removal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences.  The judge found none and he was entitled to do  so.  The
    judge carefully analysed the evidence and the  determination  discloses
    no arguable material error of law.

22. The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Talbot shall  stand  and  the
    application is dismissed.




Signed           Helen Rimington        Date      23rd April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



