
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04315/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 July 2017                                |On 6 July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                               thanh tung tran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Baines, Counsel instructed by Kitty Falls
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam and  his  date  of  birth  is  15
    December 1994.  He made an application for leave to remain on  18  June
    2015 and the application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  29
    July 2015.  The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal
    was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Bart-Stewart
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 9 September 2016.  The  decision
    was promulgated on 28 October 2016.  Permission was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan on 8 May 2017, with reference to MM (Lebanon) and
    Others v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 10.

2.       Ms Holmes conceded, at the start of the  hearing,  with  particular
    reference to MM, that the judge materially erred and I agree with  her.
    The judge materially erred when considering proportionality because  he
    did not factor into the assessment  evidence  of  third-party  support.
    There was no proper assessment of the appellant's income  from  various
    sources which is relevant when assessing proportionality. The judge did
    not make findings of fact in respect of third party support.

3.     I set aside the decision of the  judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   I
    agreed with the parties that that the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

4.   In the light of Ms Holmes' concession it is not  necessary  for  me  to
    engage in detail with the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  or
    indeed with each and every ground of appeal. There is to be a  de  novo
    hearing. Article 8 will need to be considered on the facts and evidence
    pertaining at that time.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date   4 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

