
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04067/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2019                |On 8th January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              TATENDA RYAN GUWA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mohzan of CB solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr Guwa is a Zimbabwean citizen born on 22nd  June  1991.  On  16th
         August 2010 he was convicted at Guildford Crown Court of  3  counts
         of robbery and sentenced to 28 months imprisonment with a further 2
         months imposed to run consecutively for theft from a person  and  a
         further 1 month to run concurrently for breach of a previous order.
         A deportation order was signed on 28th March 2012; his human rights
         claim was refused. His appeal against  the  refusal  of  his  human
         rights claim was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, referring  the
         matter back to the Secretary of State for  reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision promulgated on  5th  September  2012.  An  appeal  by  the
         Secretary of State was allowed, the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan and a decision  dismissing
         Mr Guwa's appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim  was
         made for reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  4th  March
         2013.

      2. Mr Guwa did not leave the UK. He made further submissions  in  June
         2018 to the Secretary of State which were considered by her to be a
         fresh human rights claim but refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision dated 22nd February 2019. His appeal against that decision
         was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard and  allowed  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 14th August 2019.

      3. The Secretary of State  sought,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
         appeal.




         Mr Guwa's unchallenged family situation

      4. Mr Guwa arrived in  the  UK  on  18th  February  2001  as  a  child
         dependant. He was granted indefinite leave to remain in  line  with
         his mother on 24th July 2008. He has a child, T, born on 28th March
         2011, from an earlier relationship. T was born  whilst  he  was  in
         prison. On release from prison in November 2011  he  lived  at  his
         mother's  home  with  T  and  T's  mother,  Safari   Russell.   His
         relationship with Ms Russell broke down in 2014 at  which  point  T
         and Ms Russell went to live with T's maternal grandmother. T  is  a
         British Citizen; Ms Russell  is  a  Jamaican  citizen.  Ms  Russell
         returned to Jamaica sometime in 2014, leaving T with  her  maternal
         grandmother. Mr Guwa had regular and frequent access and the  child
         spent a considerable amount of time with him and his mother, at his
         mother's home. As noted in Judge Howard's  decision,  T  "recently"
         moved from her maternal grandmothers to  live  with  Mr  Guwa,  his
         current partner, her paternal grandmother and her half-brother  TR.
         Although no date for this move appears  in  the  documentation,  it
         seems from the letters written to the First-tier Tribunal  and  the
         witness statements  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  this  move
         occurred in about May/June 2019 because  T's  maternal  grandmother
         was no longer able to remain living in her previous accommodation.

      5. Mr Guwa is and has been in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with Adelaide Nyathi, a British citizen, since 2015. They have  one
         child TR, a British citizen born 14th August 2016.  They  live  and
         have  lived  together  at  Mr  Guwa's  mother's  home   since   the
         commencement of their relationship.




         Issues arising from the First-tier Tribunal decision

      6. The First-tier Tribunal judge found, it having been accepted by the
         Secretary of State that it would be unduly harsh for  either  child
         to relocate with Mr Guwa to Zimbabwe on his  deportation,  that  it
         would be unduly harsh for his current  partner  to  relocate.  This
         conclusion was not the subject of appeal by the Secretary of State.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that Mr Guwa did not  meet  the
         criteria required for Exception 1 (s117C(4) Nationality Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002). This was not the  subject  of  appeal  by  Mr
         Guwa.

      8. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not consider, in  terms,  whether
         there were very compelling circumstances requiring the  deportation
         of Mr Guwa over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and  2.
         For some unexplained reason, the First-tier Tribunal  judge  having
         found that it would be unduly harsh on the child T if Mr Guwa  were
         deported, directed himself  "to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
         Rules". In undertaking this consideration, he directed himself that
         he  should,  in  considering  the  conflicting  interests  of   the
         Secretary of State and Mr Guwa adopt the approach  set  out  in  MM
         (Uganda) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450.  He  set  out,  in  his  decision,
         paragraphs 23 and 24 of MM. He then set out the balancing  exercise
         he undertook in paragraphs 42 to 46 of his decision:

             "42. ... the offending while unpleasant is very  much  at  the
             lower end  of  the  continuum  of  offences  on  the  criminal
             calendar. This is reflected in the sentence...  Robbery  is  a
             serious offence.

             43.  The appellant accepts his guilt and  the  punishment.  He
             has shown himself to be rehabilitated by the fact he  has  not
             re-offended. The family relationship he has with  his  partner
             and children is ongoing. The consequences of his  removal  are
             those I have set out above.

             44.  In performing the balancing exercise a further factor  in
             this case lies in the fact the respondent has sought to deport
             the  appellant.  The  consequences   of   deportation   is   a
             prohibition on return  within  10  years.  By  that  time  his
             children will be teenagers and  their  relationship  with  the
             appellant will in all likelihood,  be  markedly  different  to
             that it is today and the prospect of a return to the  UK  then
             cannot mitigate my findings as to the impact on [T].

             45.  given the substance in the public interest  argument  and
             the ways the significant consequences flowing from deportation
             and separation would be mitigated by  the  fact  of  telephone
             contact with his family in the UK and the prospect  of  family
             visits to Zimbabwe, for all the  foregoing  reasons,  in  this
             case the balance does not lie in favour of deportation."

      9. These paragraphs of the First-tier Tribunal decision are confusing.
         They minimise the offence committed - a street  robbery  of  mobile
         phones and cash, including an assault with a bottle,  in  which  Mr
         Guwa took the lead. Although Mr Guwa pleaded guilty, his  plea  was
         very late in the day  and  he  committed  another  similar  offence
         whilst on bail. The First-tier Tribunal judge was simply  incorrect
         to state it was at the lower end of the  spectrum;  the  sentencing
         guidelines for the offence were in the range of two to seven  years
         with a target of 4. Had he not pleaded guilty, the  judge  said  he
         would have imposed a custodial sentence of roughly three and a half
         years. These were the first  offences  committed  by  Mr  Guwa.  It
         verges on the perverse to conclude as the First-tier Tribunal judge
         did, that these offences were "at the lower end of the  continuum".
         The judge has included in his assessment that Mr Guwa has  not  re-
         offended. Yet the judge has failed to consider that  rehabilitation
         is to be expected; rehabilitation of the kind exhibited by Mr  Guwa
         is unlikely, in the absence of detailed reasoning, to contribute to
         the  existence  of  very   compelling   circumstances   given   the
         seriousness of the crimes committed  by  Mr  Guwa  and  the  public
         revulsion in such crime.

     10. The judge has factored in the potential separation of Mr Guwa  from
         his children for 10 years and contact being restricted to telephone
         calls and occasional visits  as  a  matter  of  importance  in  the
         balancing exercise. Yet deportation does  separate  families.   The
         reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal judge seems little more than a
         passing nod to the public interest in deportation  with  separation
         from family acquiring significant importance. The judge has  failed
         to take into account that Mr Guwa lost his  deportation  appeal  in
         2013 and became appeal rights exhausted in July 2013 but failed  to
         leave the UK. He embarked upon another relationship whilst  in  the
         UK with no lawful basis of stay, failed to respond to a request  by
         the  Secretary  of  State   for   further   information   following
         submissions made in October 2014  and  did  not  make  any  further
         submissions until June 2018.

     11. If this consideration given by the First-tier Tribunal is  read  as
         consideration of whether there are "very compelling circumstances",
         which seems to be how the Secretary of State read it in formulating
         her grounds of  appeal,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  particular
         submissions by Mr Mohzan on these paragraphs, we conclude that  the
         judge erred in law in finding 'outside the Rules' that  deportation
         was disproportionate. The judge failed to include relevant  matters
         in the balancing provision and did not identify matters that  could
         be considered to amount to very compelling  circumstances.   In  so
         far as the judge found there to be "very compelling  circumstances"
         for the purposes of s.117C(6), he erred in law.  We do not consider
         that this error of law is material, such that his ultimate decision
         to allow the appeal must be set aside for reasons we now turn to.

     12. The parties agreed  that  the  significant  and  pivotal  issue  is
         whether the judge erred in law in finding that separation of T from
         Mr Guwa would be unduly harsh i.e. that Exception 2  was  met.   If
         this was a finding open to the judge, he was entitled to  allow  Mr
         Guwa's appeal on Article  8  grounds,  irrespective  of  any  other
         errors on discrete issues.

     13. Mr Jarvis, very sensibly, did not rely on the  submissions  in  the
         grounds seeking permission to appeal that (i) no expert report  had
         been filed to show the effects the proposed  separation  may  have,
         and (ii) no evidence was given of how T coped when Mr Guwa  was  in
         custody. T was only 8 months old when her father came out of prison
         and during that time it would have been unusual for  such  a  young
         baby to show any long-lasting effects from separation  from  birth.
         The judge identified the nature  and  extent  of  the  relationship
         between Mr Guwa and T, and was entitled to make findings based upon
         the straightforward evidence before him.  The provision of a report
         from an  independent  social  worker  merely  to  confirm  a  close
         relationship was unnecessary in these circumstances.   Indeed,  the
         circumstances  involved  in  such  a  report  could  result  in   a
         potentially abusive interrogation of  a  child  for  no  or  little
         purpose.

     14. Mr Jarvis clarified the grounds relied upon  as  being  essentially
         that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  seemingly  unaware  of  KO
         (Nigeria) & others  [2018]  UKSC  53[1],  had  failed  to  identify
         anything that reached the demanding threshold of unduly  harsh  and
         further or alternatively that the finding that it was unduly  harsh
         was, on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  perverse.  He
         relied  on  the  approach  to  the  test  of  unduly  harsh   being
         particularly demanding - see PF  (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1139
         applying KO, and to RA (s.117C; unduly harsh; offence: seriousness)
         Iraq [2019 UKUT 123 (IAC) that it is not enough for the outcome  to
         be severe or bleak; proper effect  must  be  given  to  the  adverb
         "unduly". He drew specific attention to what he  described  as  the
         incoherence of paragraph 32 of the First-tier Tribunal decision and
         submitted the judge had failed to consider the whole picture  which
         included  the  caring  and  close  family  role   played   by   the
         grandparents and the injustice done  to  the  grandparents  in  the
         findings made. He submitted  that  it  was  unsafe  to  attempt  to
         separate elements of a factual decision that are predicated from an
         incorrect legal standpoint.




         Discussion

     15. The First-tier Tribunal judge found the evidence of  the  witnesses
         to be consistent,  candid  and  scrutinised  thoroughly  in  cross-
         examination. In his summary of the evidence he referred to:

             "16. The appellant describes the role that he  played  in  his
             daughter [T's] life following her mother's departure.

             17.  ...

             18.  Next I heard from Petra Guwa the appellant's  mother.  It
             is at her home, she told me,  that  the  appellant  has  lived
             since his release from prison  in  November  2011.  She  is  a
             school teacher and the primary breadwinner for  this  extended
             family. In addition to telling me about her son's  family  she
             told me about her remaining family in Zimbabwe....

             19.  She was asked if she could support her son financially is
             you [sic] were returned to  Zimbabwe.  She  said  not  as  she
             simply could not afford to....

             20.  I also asked  her  about  [T's]  circumstances  following
             Safari's departure. She stated that initially [T]  lived  with
             her maternal grandmother but that recently she  came  to  live
             permanently with her. She explained that the reason  for  this
             was that her maternal grandmother lost her accommodation  when
             her friend with whom she lived passed away. She also said that
             her son has been a father to [T] since his release in November
             2011. She too describes all the activities he carries out  for
             his daughter. She described how her son takes his daughter  to
             school and his son to nursery, collecting them at the  end  of
             the day. She described how he takes his daughter to the doctor
             when she is ill. She described the bedtime routine.  Returning
             to the theme of [T's] mother she told me that  in  the  months
             after her departure there were regular video calls,  but  that
             they have tailed off in recent times. She stated but [sic] [T]
             looks to her father for guidance as she knows  but  [sic]  her
             mother is not there, adding that she takes all issues  to  her
             father. She also told me that in the month  after  her  mother
             left Jamaica [T] was not herself she would ask repeatedly when
             her mother was coming home.

             21.  ...

             22.  Finally I heard from the  appellant's  partner  is  [sic]
             Adelaide Nyathi. She too adopted her witness statement  and  a
             letter she has written, she was asked about the role that  the
             appellant plays in his two  children's  lives.  She  explained
             that she  works  part-time  and  that  as  a  consequence  the
             appellant does the school runs and takes them to  the  doctor.
             Asked what would happen is the appellant were removed she told
             me that she would have to give  up  work  to  be  a  full-time
             mother. ...Before the birth of her son  she  had  worked  full
             time at Gatwick airport....

             23.  I asked her about [T's] relationship  with  her  maternal
             grandmother. She told me that [T]  has  a  great  relationship
             with her grandmother. In all the time she has no [sic] [T] she
             has never heard her say anything bad  about  her  grandmother.
             She told me that she and her son  [TR]  have  no  relationship
             with her parents."

     16. The First-tier Tribunal judge went on to state:

             "30. ... I am satisfied the only remaining  issue  for  me  to
             determine is whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  Mr  [sic]
             Nyathi and the two children to remain in the  UK  without  the
             appellant.  I  find  the  answer  to  this  question  in   the
             circumstances of [T] as they would be  in  the  event  of  the
             appellant's removal.

             31.  It is common ground the mother has already left UK. While
             this was undoubtedly an unhappy episode for her it is one that
             she has successfully negotiated. On the evidence before  me  I
             am satisfied that in large part the reason for  her  so  doing
             was the presence of her father in her life at  that  time.  In
             his submissions Mr Sartorius suggested there was  no  evidence
             that  [T]  had  struggled  particularly  with   her   mother's
             departure. This submission ignores the  fact  that  while  her
             mother had gone her father it [sic] was still very much in her
             life. This happened after he was released from custody.  Where
             [sic] the appellant to be removed it would be to  expect  this
             eight year old girl simply to take it in her  stride  and  for
             there to be no significant adverse effect upon her.

             32.  As an eight year old she knows her mother and  she  knows
             her father. She knows the respective roles they currently play
             in her life. As a consequence she knows only too well what her
             relationship with her father will be reduced to. She  will  be
             required  to  negotiate  her  formative  years   without   the
             immediate support of either parent. No solution can  be  found
             in the prospect of her mother returning UK actually it's not a
             British Citizen [sic]. To require an eight-year  old  girl  to
             grow up without either parent at side [sic] and simply  expect
             her fill the gaps [sic] in emotional support by  reference  to
             my [sic] grandmothers all [sic] electronic communication  with
             her parents it is to ask too much on a child [sic]. The bar of
             what is "unduly harsh" is a high one, but in the case of  [T],
             that is what the consequences of the  appellant's  deportation
             upon her would be."

     17. The First-tier Tribunal judge does not appear to have read  through
         his decision prior to promulgation. Paragraphs 31 and  32  are  the
         core of the decision and although the errors make them difficult to
         read, it cannot be sustainably argued  that  they  are  incoherent.
         When the decision is read as a whole, it is  tolerably  clear  that
         the First-tier Tribunal judge found that in  the  circumstances  of
         this family unit, the role played by Mr Guwa with his daughter T is
         not and cannot be replicated by the grandparents, even though  they
         form part of a loving family. The judge identified  the  key  issue
         for the purposes of Exception 2 to turn on Mr  Guwa's  relationship
         with T, and the effect of his deportation to Zimbabwe without  her,
         upon her. This cannot be faulted -  if T were not in  the  picture,
         the separation of Mr Guwa from his partner and TR could plainly not
         reach the high unduly harsh threshold. But T is a young  child  who
         has been abandoned by her mother and for whom her father has played
         a crucial and critical role. The judge was entitled  to  find  that
         T's grandparents, no matter how loving and caring,  are  unable  to
         replace the care, support and stability provided by a loving father
         who has enabled the child to deal with abandonment by her mother at
         such a tender age.

     18. Of course criminality leads to deportation and deportation can have
         the inevitable consequences of splitting families -  as  reiterated
         in  numerous  leading  cases.  Mr  Jarvis  provided   us   with   a
         comprehensive bundle of authorities which make very clear that  the
         threshold to be crossed is very high and that  the  nature  of  the
         criminality is of no relevance when determining whether one of  the
         Exceptions  applies.   We   have   no   disagreement   with   these
         propositions. Each case has to be determined  on  its  own  factual
         matrix.

     19. The First-tier Tribunal judge referred to MM (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 450 We are satisfied that this reference was in the context  of
         his purported consideration of the human rights claim "outside  the
         Rules". His decision does, in our view, make that plain. The First-
         tier Tribunal judge does not, in assessing whether  the  separation
         of T from Mr Guwa reaches the high threshold required, consider the
         extent or nature of the criminality. We take  note  of  Mr  Jarvis'
         submission that it was unsafe to separate  elements  of  a  factual
         decision that are predicated upon an  incorrect  legal  standpoint.
         However, when the decision is read as a whole we do not accept that
         the judge's finding that the effect upon T would  be  unduly  harsh
         (for the purposes of Exception 2) is predicated upon  an  incorrect
         legal standpoint. Rather, the  incorrect  legal  standpoint  arises
         from the judge's consideration of the appeal "outside  the  Rules".
         The conclusion that it would be unduly harsh was arrived at from an
         analysis of this child's particular history and situation, and  did
         not involve any consideration of  criminality  other  than  in  the
         context that Mr Guwa was subject to a deportation order. We do  not
         accept that the decision is perverse, given the  evidence  accepted
         by the judge regarding T's circumstances.

     20. We are therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  did
         not err in law in finding that the deportation of Mr Guwa would  be
         disproportionate on the basis that Exception 2 is met.

     21. In so far as our finding in  paragraph  11  is  concerned,  we  are
         satisfied that there is no need for us to remake  that  element  of
         the decision. Having found that Exception 2 is  met,  there  is  no
         requirement to go on to consider whether there are very  compelling
         circumstances over and above Exception 1 or 2. Had  we  found  that
         the judge's decision that Exception 2 was met  was  infected  by  a
         material error of law, then it would have been correct to  consider
         whether there were very compelling circumstances. If that had  been
         the case we note that Mr Mohzan was unable to identify any  matters
         that could reach that significant and high test.




    Conclusions:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law such that the decision  is  set  aside.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on human rights
    grounds stands.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date 6th January 2020
-----------------------
[1] Despite it being in the appellant's bundle, judgment having been given
on 24th October 2018 some 8 months before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

