
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04361/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 February 2018                            |On 6 March 2018              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  SALAM [H]

                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which was sent to  the  parties
on 19 December 2016.   The  tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 29 January 2016  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection.  However, on 6 December 2017, I  set  aside  the
tribunal's  decision  whilst  preserving  certain  of   its   findings   and
conclusions.   I  decided  that  I  would  remake  the   decision   in   the
Upper Tribunal.  In remaking the decision  I  have  decided  to  allow  the
claimant's appeal against the decision of 29 January 2016.   What  follows
below is an explanation as to why I have done so.

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a  national  of  Iraq.   He  was
born on [ ] 1975.  He is a Feyli Kurd.  According to the expert report  of
one Dr. R Fatah of 10 November 2017, Feyli Kurds are Shia Muslims,  not
Sunni Muslims as many Iraqi Kurds are, and they speak their own dialect  of
Kurdish which is known as Laki.  There is, it is  said  in  that  report,  a
history of Feyli Kurds having been persecuted by previous Iraqi regimes  in
the past.  The claimant is from Khanaqin in the Diyala Governorate.

3.    The claimant's immigration history is extensive and convoluted.  I  am
not going to set it out in full because it is a  matter  of  record  and  is
largely irrelevant to the specific issues I am now called  upon  to  decide.
But it is worth noting that he first came to the United Kingdom ("UK") on a
date in 2002 and that he made his first (unsuccessful) claim for  asylum  on
12 November 2002.  There have been a number of different decisions made by
decision makers and tribunals in respect of him.

4.    The claimant had  asserted,  before  the  tribunal,  that  being  from
Diyala he would be at risk upon return at  the  hands  of  the  organisation
sometimes called "ISIS", who were then in control of that part of  Iraq  and
that  conditions  there  were  such  that  he  fell  within  the  terms   of
Article 15c of the Qualification Directive.  He also asserted that he would
not  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  an  internal   flight   alternative.
Specifically, he argued that it would be unsafe for him in  Baghdad  or  the
part of Iraq governed by Kurdish Iraqis and which I shall call  the  "IKR",
or that it would otherwise be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
either place.

5.    The tribunal did not actually make a finding as to whether it  thought
he would be at real risk of persecution for a 1951 Convention Reason at the
hands  of  ISIS  in  Diyala.    It   did,   though,   in   accordance   with
Country Guidance decisions, conclude that he would face an Article 15c risk
there such that, absent  the  facility  of  internal  flight,  he  would  be
entitled to humanitarian protection.  But the tribunal concluded that if  he
went to the IKR he would be free of  any  risk  of  persecution  or  serious
harm.  I set aside the tribunal's decision because  although  it  had  found
that the claimant would not be at real risk of persecution or  serious  harm
if he was to go to the IKR it had not actually made a clear  finding  as  to
whether it would or would not be unduly harsh to expect him to so  relocate.
 The distinction is important because  if  a  claimant  establishes  to  the
necessary standard that he/she is at risk of persecution or serious harm  in
the home area of the home country, then  the  question  in  the  context  of
asylum and humanitarian protection is not  simply  whether  there  would  be
such a risk elsewhere but whether there would be available to such  claimant
an internal flight alternative  in  circumstances  where  it  would  not  be
unduly harsh to require him or her to take  advantage  of  it.   The  unduly
harsh test, it seems to me, is in general terms a less  demanding  one  than
the test for persecution  or  serious  harm.   I  preserved  the  tribunal's
findings with respect  to  all  matters  other  than  relocation  to  either
Baghdad  or  the  IKR  and  I  directed  a  further   hearing   before   the
Upper Tribunal which took place before me on 2 February 2018.   The  only
issue to be decided at that hearing, therefore, related to  internal  flight
to Baghdad or the IKR.  Representation at that hearing was as  stated  above
and I am grateful to each representative.

6.    At the hearing I had  before  me  the  documentation  which  had  been
before the tribunal.  I also had additional documentation which  included  a
supplementary bundle filed on behalf of the claimant on 26 January 2018, a
skeleton argument prepared by Mr Worthington and dated 2 February 2018 and
the expert report of Dr. R Fatah referred to above.  I confirm that I have
considered the  various  documents  before  me,  even  if  not  specifically
mentioned in the previous sentence, before deciding how the  decision  ought
to be remade.  Further, I have reminded myself of the very well  established
legal tests concerning entitlement to  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
and concerning the matter of internal flight.

7.    The claimant's evidence in  chief  was  extremely  brief.   He  simply
adopted his most recent witness statement which is  dated  18 January 2018
and then confirmed to Mr Worthington that he is able to speak  Arabic.   In
his statement the claimant had confirmed the location of his  home  area  in
Iraq, that he is a Shia Muslim, that he had first come to the  UK  in  2002
and that when he lived in Iraq he did some work on his  family's  farm.   He
said that he did not think any of his family had  ever  been  recognised  as
Iraqi citizens.  Pausing there,  there  is  information  in  the  report  of
Dr R Fatah to the effect that at least  some  Feyli Kurds  had  not  been
recognised  as  Iraqi  citizens  in  the  past.   In  cross-examination  the
claimant reiterated that he is a Feyli Kurd from Khanaqin.  He said he does
not have any friends either in his home area of Iraq or in the IKR.

8.    Having considered the oral and the  documentary  evidence  I  find  as
follows:


    "(a)   The claimant is from Khanaqin in Iraq and is a Feyli Kurd.


    (b).   He is able to speak Kurdish Sorani (he spoke it at the hearing);
    he is able to speak Laki (which one would expect of a Feyli Kurd); and
    he is able to speak Arabic (he told me he could).


    (c)    I find on the basis of what the claimant has  indicated  and  on
    the basis of what is confirmed by Dr R Fatah that Feyli Kurds in Iraq
    are Shia Muslims and not Sunni Muslims.  For the avoidance of doubt I
    find that the claimant himself is a Shia Muslim.


    (d)    I find that the claimant has not  previously  been  issued  with
    documentation by the Iraqi authorities which would confirm that  he  is
    accepted  as  a  national  of  Iraq.   This   finding   requires   some
    explanation.  Dr R Fatah has said, in his report, that some Feyli Kurds
    have not been  recognised  as  Iraqi  nationals.   Further,  some  have
    previously been stripped of  their  Iraqi  nationality.   The  claimant
    himself said in his statement of 18 January 2018 that he has never had
    a  CSID  (an  important  identity  document  possessed  by  most  Iraqi
    nationals and about which I shall say more below) or an Iraqi passport.
     He also said that his father had told him that the family  'had  never
    had any documents from the Iraqi Government'.  He  repeated  his  claim
    that he had never had any formal identity documentation  in  Iraq  when
    cross-examined and was not further challenged about that.  What he says
    is plausible given the content of Dr Fatah's report.  To the 'real risk
    standard'  which  applies  with  respect  to  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection cases, I accept what he says.


    (e)    I find the claimant previously worked on his family's farm as  a
    shepherd.  He says so in his statement and was not challenged about it.
     It seems to me to be a plausible contention. I accept what he says.


    (f)    I find that the claimant no longer has any contact  with  family
    and friends in Iraq.  That finding too requires some explanation.   The
    claimant has been in the UK since 2002.  He has, therefore, been absent
    from Iraq for an extensive period.  Although he did not make mention of
    contact with his family in his statement of  18 January 2018  he  did
    address that matter in his earlier statement of 12 October 2016.   He
    said then that he had not been in contact with anyone in Iraq since  he
    left in 2002 and that he no longer knew 'if the members  of  my  family
    are even still alive'.  He added 'I have no family or  friends  in  any
    other part of Iraq'.  He was not specifically  asked  about  family  in
    cross-examination before me but he did say, which  is  consistent  with
    his statement, that he did not have any friends  in  Iraq.   Given  the
    well documented upheavals  and  difficulties  experienced  in  Iraq  in
    relatively recent times I regard it as plausible that the claimant  has
    lost contact with his family and any friends he would have had in Iraq.
     Given that he was not seriously challenged about this assertion before
    me and given the plausibility of what he says  I  find,  to  the  lower
    standard, that he is no longer in touch with his family nor any friends
    in Iraq."


9.    I now go on to consider, in  light  of  the  above  findings,  whether
there will be available to  the  claimant  an  internal  flight  alternative
either in Baghdad or in the IKR.  I must do that because, of course, I  have
preserved the  tribunal's  findings  concerning  the  Article 15c  risk  in
Diyala.

10.   In AA (Article 15(c)) [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC),  as  adjusted  by  the
judgment of the Court of Appeal, a non-exhaustive list of  matters  relevant
to internal flight to Baghdad (the place to  which  this  claimant  will  be
returned if he is returned) was set out.  I shall now go through them.   The
first matter is whether or not the claimant has a CSID document or  will  be
able to obtain one.  Such a document, as explained by the  Court  of  Appeal
in  AA,  is  of  considerable  importance  because  it  provides  access  to
financial assistance from the authorities,  employment,  education,  housing
and medical treatment.  I have, however, found that this  claimant  has  not
even been recognised, in the past, as a national of Iraq.  On that  basis  I
conclude that he does not currently have  a  CSID  document.   I  would  not
entirely preclude the possibility that he might be able  to  obtain  one  at
some time in the future.  However, in looking at what is said in Dr Fatah's
report, it may be that he would first of all have to attempt  to  apply  for
Iraqi citizenship and that there would be no  guarantee  that  he  would  be
granted it although there is that possibility.  But I  would  conclude  that
in the short to medium term it is most unlikely that he  would  be  able  to
get one.  That means he will at least for a considerable  period  face  real
difficulty in accessing the sorts of support services referred to above.

11.   The next consideration is whether or  not  the  claimant  is  able  to
speak Arabic.  It is relevant because it was decided in AA  that  those  who
cannot are less likely to be able to find employment.  Here the claimant  is
in a relatively favourable position because he does speak  Arabic.   But  it
is also appropriate to consider,  more  widely,  his  prospects  of  finding
work.  In that context I have found that his only work  experience  in  Iraq
was on a farm.  It does not seem unreasonable to say that, at  least  within
Baghdad itself, he is unlikely to have available to him similar  employment.
 It does not seem to  me  that  the  absence  of  a  CSID  will  necessarily
preclude him from finding  employment  but  it  will  probably  represent  a
barrier.

12.   The next consideration is whether or not  he  has  family  members  or
friends in Baghdad able to assist him.  I have found  that  he  is  not,  in
fact, in contact with any family members or any former friends.  Even if  he
does have family or friends in Iraq with whom he is not in contact  but  who
he might be able to locate at some  point  in  the  future,  it  seems  most
unlikely that they would be located in Baghdad given that he himself is  not
from there.

13.   The next consideration relates to the position of lone females and  is
not relevant to this claimant.

14.   The next question is whether or not the  claimant  would  be  able  to
find  a  sponsor  to  enable  him  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  to   rent
accommodation.  It follows from what I have already said that he  would  not
be able to do that.

15.   The next consideration is whether  or  not  the  claimant  is  from  a
minority community.  He is.  Not only is he a Kurd but he is a Feyli Kurd.

16.   The final matter specified in AA is whether or not there might be  any
support available for him bearing in mind that there is some  evidence  that
returned failed asylum seekers are provided with support generally given  to
internally displaced persons.  I have not  been  directed  to  or  presented
with any evidence on behalf of the Secretary of State which  would  indicate
that such support might be available to him.

17.   In addition to  the  above  factors  I  have  considered  the  general
situation in Baghdad at present.  In BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG  [2017]
UKUT 00018 (IAC) it  was  said  that  the  level  of  general  violence  in
Baghdad is significant.  I do not accept what reads to me as  a  suggestion
by Dr Fatah that the claimant, if returned to Baghdad, would actually be  at
risk of persecution or serious harm there,  because  that  view  is  largely
unexplained and because it seems to be in conflict with what was decided  in
BA which is current Country Guidance.  But I would accept that the  general
concerns regarding lawlessness and insecurity are pertinent to the  question
of internal flight.

18.   Putting all of the  above  matters  together  I  have  concluded  that
whilst the claimant would be able to  go  to  Baghdad,  indeed  he  will  be
returned there, it would be unduly harsh to expect him to take advantage  of
an internal flight alternative there.  That is, essentially, because of  his
lack of contacts in Baghdad,  because  of  what  I  have  found  to  be  his
inability to obtain appropriate documentation within  the  short  to  medium
term and because of an absence of family or other support.

19.   I now turn to internal flight to the IKR.   Mr Worthington's  initial
contention, as to that, is that  the  claimant  will  simply  be  unable  to
actually  travel  from   Baghdad   to   the   IKR   without   documentation.
Mr Worthington relies, for the most part, upon what is said in  Dr  Fatah's
report about such difficulties.   Although  the  standard  of  proof  is  an
undemanding one it does not seem to me that the  claimant  has  demonstrated
that he will not be able to actually travel to the IKR.  The comments of  Dr
Fatah relied upon by Mr Worthington in his skeleton argument seem to me  to
relate more to difficulties in obtaining documentation and  difficulties  in
seeking to actually be admitted to the IKR which is  slightly  different  to
the question of whether he would physically be able to make his  way  there.
So, I proceed on the basis that he could get there.

20.   In AA it was said that a Kurd who does  not  originate  from  the  IKR
would be able to obtain entry to the IKR for  a  period  of  10 days  as  a
visitor and then renew that entry permission for a further 10 days.  It was
also said that if such a person was able to  find  work  then  he  would  be
permitted to stay for longer though there would be a need to  register  with
the authorities and provide details concerning the employment.  It was  also
noted that there was no evidence that  the  authorities  in  the  IKR  would
proactively seek to remove Kurds from the IKR once their period of entry  as
a visitor had expired.  Here though,  of  course,  I  am  dealing  with  the
position of a Feyli Kurd.  Dr. R Fatah, in his report, notes  that  there
have been reports of Feyli Kurds, even documented ones, facing difficulties
in gaining access to the IKR.   But  there  is  little  detail  as  to  that
contained in the report and I would conclude, following AA, that as  a  Kurd
the claimant will be able to obtain the usual temporary entry into  the  IKR
as a visitor.  The question then is whether  requiring  him  to  live  there
would be unduly harsh.

21.   If he were to attempt to live in the IKR the claimant would  be  doing
so, on my findings, without any assistance  from  family  members  there  or
from friends there.  He would be undocumented which might cause him  ongoing
difficulties in accessing any support from the  authorities  in  control  in
the IKR.  Dr Fatah makes reference to an independence referendum  which  had
been held in the IKR in September 2017 and which led to the retaking by the
Iraqi authorities, from the Kurds, of disputed  territories  and  which  has
had an adverse knock on effect regarding the economy in the  IKR.   I  would
conclude that the IKR will have  sustained  some  economic  damage  in  that
regard which will impact upon employment prospects  generally  and  I  would
also conclude that as a Feyli Kurd and a Shia Muslim  the  claimant  might
experience particular and significant difficulty  in  obtaining  employment.
I would conclude, therefore, in his particular circumstances, that it  would
be unduly harsh to expect him  to  take  advantage  of  an  internal  flight
alternative in the IKR.

22.   It is in light of the above that I  have  decided,  in  remaking  this
decision, to allow the claimant's appeal.  I do not do so on asylum  grounds
because the risk identified by the tribunal and preserved by me  related  to
Article 15c of the Qualification Directive.  But that does mean,  given  my
findings as to the undue harshness of  the  internal  relocation,  that  the
claimant succeeds on humanitarian protection grounds.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
protection grounds.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed:                      Date: 5 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award since no fee is payable.


Signed:                      Dated: 5 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

