
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04423/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 May 2019                       | On 10 June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           YAHYA ABDULSAMAD MULLA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Amin of Counsel instructed by Bhavsar Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes back before me further to the 'error of law'  hearing
    held at Field House on 11 April 2019, and the Decision  and  Directions
    promulgated by the Tribunal on  30  April  2019.   (The  'Decision  and
    Reasons: Error of Law & Directions' is appended to, and should be  read
    as an integral part of, this Decision.)



2.   Since the last hearing -  pursuant  to  the  Directions  issued  -  the
    Appellant has filed and served further evidence under cover  of  letter
    dated 7 May  2019.   The  further  evidence  includes  further  witness
    statements (both from the  Appellant  and  his  partner),  and  further
    financial information.  Original documents, in particular in respect of
    the financial evidence, were made  available  at  the  Tribunal  today.
    Further to this, a Schedule has been  helpfully  prepared  by  Ms  Amin
    indicating the pages in the bundles - both current and previous -  that
    demonstrate income of either or both  the  Appellant  and  his  partner
    cross-referenced to corresponding entries in bank statements.



3.   Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    has had an opportunity  to  consider  the  materials  now  presented  -
    including inspecting the original documents.  She  informs  me,  albeit
    with the caveat that the opportunity to consider these  materials  this
    morning has been limited, that there is nothing immediately apparent to
    show that  any  of  the  documents  are  inadequate  in  terms  of  the
    requirements of  Appendix  FM-SE;  indeed  she  acknowledges  that  the
    apparent overall picture that emerges is that the  combined  income  of
    the Appellant and  his  partner  surpasses  the  threshold  of  �18,600
    required under Appendix FM of the Rules.



4.   I note Ms Everett's caveat; however, on balance  I  am  satisfied  that
    the  evidence  that  has  now  been  filed  is  adequate  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM  and  Appendix  FM-SE  in  respect  of  the
    financial requirements for leave to remain as a partner.



5.   Further to this, my attention has been directed to the decision  of  TZ
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    1109,  in  particular  at  paragraph  34,  and  the  significance  when
    considering issues of proportionality of the fact that the  Immigration
    Rules are met in any particular case.



6.   My consideration of matters  at  the  'error  of  law'  stage  included
    looking at the very particular  circumstances  of  the  Appellant,  his
    partner and her parents.  I indicated in my  'error  of  law'  Decision
    that discussion that the available evidence made it  plain  that  there
    was a family life as between the Appellant's partner  and  her  parents
    because of the very particular dependency that they had  on  her  (e.g.
    paragraph 20).  It is also the case necessarily that  there  is  family
    life between the Appellant and his wife. I am also persuaded that there
    is an element of family life between the Appellant and his in-laws.



7.   The departure of the Appellant from the United Kingdom  in  consequence
    of the Respondent's decision would inevitably involve a  disruption  to
    one or other aspect of the mutual and inter-dependent  family  life  of
    the Appellant, his partner and her parents.  If the Appellant  were  to
    depart  the  UK  without  his  wife,  necessarily  there  would  be  an
    interference in their mutual family life.  If he were  to  depart  with
    his wife, then necessarily there would be an interference in her family
    life as enjoyed with her parents; the  consequence  would  more  likely
    than not be significant bearing in mind the materials explored  at  the
    'error of law' hearing and rehearsed in the 'error of law' Decision.



8.   In the circumstances I have  little  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
    first and second Razgar questions are to be answered in favour  of  the
    Appellant.  There is no particular issue in respect of  the  third  and
    fourth Razgar questions. Accordingly, the real issue in the appeal - as
    is so  often  the  case  -  is  that  of  the  fifth  Razgar  question,
    proportionality.



9.   In this regard Ms Amin points in particular to  the  circumstance  that
    the Rules are now essentially met - and in this regard  highlights  the
    pertinence of TZ (Pakistan).  On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Ms
    Everett observes that this was not the situation at  the  time  of  the
    Appellant's application or indeed the time of the Respondent's decision
    in that specified evidence had not been brought forward:  she  suggests
    arguably it would be proportionate to expect the Appellant now to  make
    a further application.



10.  I find the facts of this particular case  are  very  exceptional.   The
    extent of the medical difficulties and consequent functional  abilities
    of both of the Appellant's  wife's  parents  are  significant.   In  my
    judgment the balance favours allowing the appeal rather than  expecting
    the Appellant to make a further application.  In this context it  seems
    to me that an approximate analogy with the approach in Chikwamba is  to
    be  drawn.  I  find  that   the   decision   of   the   Respondent   is
    disproportionate. I remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds with particular reference to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.



Notice of Decision

11.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



12.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal this is in significant part by  reference
to evidence that did not from part of the initial application.  In  all  the
circumstances I do not consider a fee award to be appropriate.


Signed:                                 Date: 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

                                  APPENDIX

               TEXT OF 'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
                       (promulgated on 30 April 2019)


1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Row promulgated on  27  March  2018  dismissing  an  appeal  against  a
    decision dated 21 February 2017  refusing  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 22 May  1987.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 27 March 2014 pursuant to entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse conferring leave to remain until 27 December 2016.   His  spouse
    is Ms Shamabanu  Ayub  Khan  (d.o.b.  28  September  1987).   Ms  Khan,
    formerly an Indian national, is a British citizen who has been  present
    in the United Kingdom since 2002 (i.e. since she was  approximately  15
    years old).


3.   The Appellant applied for further leave to remain in the same  capacity
    - as the spouse of a British citizen.  In making  that  application  he
    relied upon a claimed exemption from the financial requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that his wife was in receipt of  carer's
    allowance.  In the event, although it appears that  at  one  point  his
    wife was indeed in receipt of carer's allowance, by  the  time  of  the
    application and the Respondent's decision - and indeed also at the time
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal - she was not in  receipt
    of carer's allowance.  The arrangements by which she received monies in
    respect of her undertaking care for her father were now managed through
    the local authority in circumstances that were such  that  the  carer's
    allowance that had originally been awarded through  the  Department  of
    Work and Pensions was no longer paid.   On  that  basis  the  Appellant
    could not rely upon any exemption to the financial  requirement  aspect
    of the Rules.


4.   I pause to note that at the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it was said on behalf of the Appellant that he did indeed  now
    satisfy the financial threshold under the Immigration Rules.   To  that
    end, he provided some supporting evidence by way of a letter  from  his
    employer and photocopies of wage slips (see Appellant's  bundle  before
    the First-tier Tribunal at pages 77 to 81).   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  noted  that  on  its  face  this  evidence  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of Appendix  FM-SE,  but  otherwise  made  no  finding  in
    respect of the Appellant's claimed level of earnings.  Indeed, in  this
    regard the Judge suggested that if the Appellant had an application  to
    make it was open to him to make such an application  but  that  it  was
    "not for me to decide its outcome" (see paragraph  29).   It  has  been
    reconfirmed to me today that it is still the case  that  the  Appellant
    claims that his current earnings in combination with  the  earnings  of
    his wife are sufficient to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    However, notwithstanding that some further medical  evidence  has  been
    filed in the appeal to be relied upon in the  event  of  a  finding  of
    error of law, no further financial evidence has been filed to date.


5.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    as a spouse for reasons set out  in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') dated 21 February 2017.


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision  of  Judge
    Row promulgated on 27 March 2018.


8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney on 13 July 2018.  (Judge  Feeney  also
    extended time for lodging the application  for  permission  to  appeal,
    which was a day late.)


9.   The grounds of  challenge  have  primarily  focused  upon  the  Judge's
    consideration of supporting evidence filed in respect of the health  of
    the Appellant's in-laws, that is to say the mother and  father  of  his
    wife.


10.  The evidence indicates that the Appellant and  his  wife  live  in  the
    same household as the Appellant's in-laws,  Mr  Mohamed  Khan  and  Mrs
    Avambibi Abdulaziz; their personal details are a matter  of  record  on
    file and it is unnecessary for me to set them out here.   It  was  said
    that both the Appellant's father-in-law and mother-in-law suffered from
    significant disabilities such that a high level of care  was  required.
    It was also said that that care was met by the  Appellant's  wife  with
    the aid and assistance of the Appellant since his arrival in the United
    Kingdom.


11.  The Judge gave consideration to these matters in the first instance  in
    the context  of  considering  the  application  of  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM; that is to say the Judge looked at  these  matters  whilst
    considering whether there were any very significant difficulties  which
    would be faced by the Appellant or his wife in continuing their  family
    life together outside the UK which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship for the Appellant or his wife.  The  Judge
    said this at paragraphs 17 to 23:

         "17. The Appellant argues that he and the sponsor [i.e.  his  wife]
             provide 24-hour personal care  to  the  sponsor's  father  and
             mother.  The sponsor's father and  mother  receive  disability
             living allowance.  The Appellant and  sponsor  say  that  they
             have to feed them, bathe them, get them  out  of  bed  with  a
             hoist, dress them and do everything for them.  They are unable
             to leave them alone.  They had to get  sleeping  tablets  from
             their GP to render the parents unconscious  before  coming  to
             the hearing.


         18.  It is not at  all  clear  why  the  sponsor's  parents  should
             require such care.  The sponsor's father is 48 years old.  Her
             mother is apparently 64 years old.  There  is  a  letter  from
             their GP at  page  90  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  dated  19
             February 2018 and an earlier letter dated 18 April 2016.   The
             GP records that the sponsor's father has osteoarthritis of the
             hip and avascular necrosis of  the  head  of  the  femur.   It
             records that his wife has  severe  headaches  and  depression.
             Both are said by the GP to be bedbound, in a state of  stupor,
             with reduced wakefulness and responsiveness.


         19.  It is not clear why.  Mr Khan has a painful hip.  No  surgical
             intervention is planned.  He is  treated  conservatively  with
             standard analgesics.


         20.  The sponsor said that her mother was treated with  a  standard
             first-line  antidepressant.   She  was  not   treated   by   a
             psychiatrist.   The  secondary  services  were  not  involved.
             There had been no intervention of the crisis team.  There  had
             been no hospital admission.   The  GP  in  his  letter  of  19
             February 2018 mentions no physical problem for  the  sponsor's
             mother.  There is no explanation of why she should need to  be
             removed from her bed in a hoist as the Appellant  and  sponsor
             claim.


         21.  Moreover although Mr Khan is said to require 24-hour  care  he
             is being paid carer's allowance by the DWP for providing  day-
             to-day care to his wife.


         22.  I do not  find  that  the  care  required  by  either  of  the
             sponsor's parents is as claimed.  There is  in  any  event  no
             reason why Mr Khan could not pay someone else to provide  care
             to him.  It is clear that Leicester City Council  is  prepared
             to arrange care in appropriate cases and to finance it.   That
             is what it  has done.  There are other relatives who might  be
             able to provide such care.  The sponsor has  a  sister-in-law.
             The letter from the consultant orthopaedic surgeon at page  91
             records that other family members attend hospital appointments
             with Mr Khan.  The care  assessment  made  by  Leicester  City
             Council refers to other relatives.


         23.   If  the  Appellant  and  sponsor  returned   to   India   any
             difficulties would be caused to the sponsor's parents and  not
             to the Appellant and sponsor".


12.   In  my  judgment  the  reasoning  set  out  in  those  paragraphs   is
    unsustainable  and  otherwise  fails  to  engage  adequately  with  the
    detailed supporting evidence.


13.  Indeed, Ms Cunha on behalf of the Secretary of State acknowledges  that
    she cannot support the Judge's finding at paragraph 19 in respect of Mr
    Khan,  and  that  it  is  in  error.   The  reference  to  no  surgical
    intervention being planned masks the reality that surgical intervention
    has been suggested and  recommended,  but  that  Mr  Khan  for  reasons
    essentially related to anxiety has resisted that suggestion.   This  is
    evident from the documents that the Judge  states  he  has  taken  into
    account. For example, the University Hospital of Leicester letter dated
    8 June 2015 notes that Mr Khan was accompanied by his  daughter  whilst
    attending pain clinic; it records that he complains of  "bilateral  hip
    and knee pains which  started  in  2010"  albeit  without  any  obvious
    precipitating  factors;  he  is  described  as  bedbound;  it  is  also
    indicated that there were plans to install a bed hoist but at that time
    Mr Khan was in too much pain  to  engage  with  such  an  option.   The
    following is then stated in respect of management:

         "I have noticed that Mr Khan and his daughter do not have  a  clear
         idea about whether or not surgery  would  be  an  advisable  option
         which is the reason why they are reluctant to go ahead.  I think it
         is important for them to be referred to an  orthopaedic  consultant
         so that they can be given  all  the  options  with  the  risks  and
         possible benefits and then they can make an informed decision about
         surgery".




14.  I also note in passing that the author of this letter, a consultant  in
    anaesthesia and pain management, observes that it is Mr Khan's daughter
    (the Appellant's wife) who reports Mr Khan's progress and  reaction  to
    the medication that he has been receiving.  This is an illustration  of
    the  Appellant's  wife  being  the  go-between  for  her  parents   and
    healthcare professionals - a circumstance that is very much a theme  in
    the medical documents and social services assessments.




15.  The GP's letter of 18 April 2016  mentioned  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision confirms the longstanding  diagnosis  of
    osteoarthritis of the hip and avascular necrosis of  the  head  of  the
    femur, dating back to 2011 and 2012  respectively.   This  demonstrates
    the chronic nature of Mr Khan's  underlying  medical  conditions  which
    have not received any surgical intervention in all of that  period,  or
    since.  These are conditions that are degenerative in  nature  and  are
    necessarily  not  conditions  that  are  likely  to   improve   without
    intervention.


16.  There is also on file a letter from Spire Leicester Hospital  based  on
    a clinic date of 4 August 2015 (Appellant's bundle  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at page 91), which again refers  to  concerns  about  the
    absence of any surgical intervention.  The letter states in part:

         "I think that Mr Khan has had bad hips for a period of time but  he
         is frightened of having an operation and has therefore in the  past
         refused.  In the past three years he has pretty much lived  on  the
         bed with minimal movement.  He feels severe pain with all  movement
         of his hips and knees".


    It is also to  be  noted  that  there  is  a  passing  reference  to  a
    discussion with Mr Khan "and his son who attended with  him  and  other
    family members".  In this context I am told, and see no reason  not  to
    accept, that Mr Khan in fact only has two daughters and  the  reference
    to a son is a reference to a son-in-law, specifically the Appellant.


17.  It seems  to  me  manifestly  the  case  that  the  supporting  medical
    evidence explains with clarity why Mr Khan has a painful  hip.  He  has
    osteoarthritis of the hip and  necrosis  of  the  head  of  the  femur.
    Surgical intervention has been recommended, but this has been declined.
    Whilst strictly accurate to say that no such intervention  is  planned,
    the fact that it has been recommended at such a relatively young age is
    indicative of the gravity of the underlying  condition.  These  matters
    give the context of why Mr Khan is essentially bedbound.




18.  Further documents on file set out in considerable detail the nature  of
    the  underlying  medical  conditions  and  care  needs  of   both   the
    Appellant's mother-in-law and his father-in-law.   In  so  doing,  they
    also provide a considerable degree of  emphasis  on  the  role  of  the
    Appellant's wife.  For example, she  is  the  appointee  for  both  her
    parents in respect of their relationship with the  Department  of  Work
    and Pensions (Appellant's bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    pages 87-89).  Further, a care  plan  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    father-in-law, and assessments carried out by the  local  authority  in
    respect  of  both  in-laws  describe  functional  limitations  and  the
    Appellant's wife's role. The assessment in respect of Mrs Abdulaziz  in
    particular makes repeated references to the role  of  her  daughter  in
    both her care  and  her  contact  and  interrelationship  with  medical
    healthcare professionals: it may be  seen  that  the  Appellant's  wife
    answered the questions on behalf of her mother during  the  assessment;
    that she supports her mother in respect of transfers from  the  bed  to
    the toilet; that she supports her mother in her incontinence; and  that
    she supports her mother in taking medications; it is stated "family and
    friends visit regularly but Mrs Abdulaziz does not recognise  them  and
    will also not engage in conversation.  She will only  communicate  with
    Shama and  Yahya",  that  is  to  say  the  Appellant's  wife  and  the
    Appellant; it is also recorded that "Mrs Abdulaziz is  unable  to  make
    decisions or choices related to her life.  She  receives  support  from
    Shama who  has  got  appointeeship  and  is  happy  to  make  important
    decisions about Mrs Abdulaziz's care and life  including  managing  her
    finances".


19.  In all those circumstances it seems to me that the  supporting  medical
    evidence overwhelmingly indicated both the nature of the care needs and
    the fact that those care needs were being met in part by the Appellant,
    and more particularly by the Appellant's wife.


20.   Whilst  it  may  be  that  the  Appellant's  wife  receives  financial
    remuneration for this, and whilst it may also well be  that  in  theory
    other people could perform the practical duties required -  though  not
    necessarily those of communication which are likely achieved by  reason
    of the family relationship - none of this negates the clear and obvious
    inference that there exists a substantial quality  of  family  life  as
    between the Appellant's wife and her parents, notwithstanding that they
    are all adults. There is a more than the  usual  degree  of  dependency
    such that the test explored in Kugathas is plainly and obviously met on
    the available evidence.  This does not find its way into any particular
    finding or consideration of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


21.  It may be unobjectionable in the context of paragraph EX.1  to  observe
    that the difficulties that might arise in consequence of the  Appellant
    and his wife continuing family life together outside the UK  "would  be
    caused to the sponsor's parents  not  to  the  appellant  and  sponsor"
    (paragraph 23) - although even then it is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    impact upon the Appellant's wife of leaving  her  parents  without  her
    care to which they have become habituated would not entail a degree  of
    hardship for the Appellant's partner that would  require  to  be  given
    very careful consideration within the framework of  the  definition  of
    insurmountable obstacles in  paragraph  EX.2.  More  particularly,  the
    disruption to the family life between  the  Appellant's  wife  and  her
    parents were she to relocate to India with the Appellant  is  a  matter
    that requires consideration in the  wider  context  of  a  freestanding
    consideration of Article 8.


22.  There is no such consideration. After the heading 'Article 8  ECHR'  in
    the Decision, at paragraph 25 it is apparent that the Judge  considered
    the element of interference with family life only in the context of  "a
    relationship between husband and wife".


23.  In my judgement the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  errs  in  failing  to
    recognise that the continuation of family life  between  the  Appellant
    and his wife outside the UK would cause a significant disruption to the
    family life between the Appellant's wife and  her  parents  -  who  are
    clearly vulnerable individuals in need of a high degree of support  and
    habituated to receiving that support from the Appellant's  wife.   This
    is a significant  omission  from  the  analysis  and  findings  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and I am ultimately satisfied that
    it is material to the overall consideration of the Article 8 issues  in
    the appeal.


24.  Notwithstanding, and not without some merit and good reason,  Ms  Cunha
    argued that the reality of the situation was that the Appellant did not
    satisfy the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules and in such
    circumstances could not reasonably  expect  to  be  granted  a  further
    period of leave  subsequent  to  the  'probationary'  period  of  leave
    granted initially as a spouse.  In substance Ms Cunha submitted that it
    was open to the Judge in any event to refuse the appeal on this  basis.
    She suggested that this was the  import  of  the  Judge's  comments  at
    paragraphs 28 and 30, which were based on the premise that he  did  not
    meet the Rules but could potentially now remedy that by  making  a  new
    application in circumstances where he claimed that he did now meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.


25.  At paragraph 28 the Judge notes that there are other options  available
    to the Appellant and his wife - "The Appellant could  return  to  India
    and make an application for leave from there when his wife is  able  to
    meet the financial requirements".  At  paragraph  29  the  Judge  makes
    reference to the Appellant's  claim  that  he  now  met  the  financial
    requirements and the  supporting  evidence  filed;  however  the  Judge
    declined to make any evaluation of this stating  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellant to make an application relying on such evidence, but  "It  is
    not for me to decide its outcome". At paragraph 30 the Judge stated:

         "If the Appellant says that he now meets the financial requirements
         then there need to be no interruption to his family  life  at  all.
         He can make a new application.  Interference with his  family  life
         would amount to  no  more  than  him  being  required  to  pay  the
         appropriate fee for the application".




26.  I am dubious as to the propriety  of  declining  to  make  findings  on
    evidence duly filed before the First-tier Tribunal.   It  seems  to  me
    that it would have been more prudent to give further  consideration  to
    these matters: the future prospects for the Appellant were  potentially
    relevant to his present  circumstances;  further,  the  merits  in  any
    possible application for entry clearance was potentially relevant to  a
    consideration  of  the  Chikwamba  principle  on  the  facts  of   this
    particular case.  Indeed, Ms Amin countered Ms Cunha's  submissions  by
    arguing that if it was going to be suggested that it was  proportionate
    for the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom to make an application to
    return again, then as part of that it was  necessary  to  consider  the
    extent to which there would be an interference with his family life  as
    between not only himself and his wife but between himself and  his  in-
    laws given that he had a role in ensuring their care.  There  is  merit
    in this, given that it was suggested that  they  need  around-the-clock
    care this was not something that could readily or easily be  discharged
    in its entirety by their daughter  -  she  likely  benefited  from  the
    support she received from her husband.


27.  On the very particular facts of this case I am not persuaded  that  the
    appeal can simply be answered on the basis that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules, or that it is now proportionate  to
    expect him to make a new application whether from within the UK or  for
    entry clearance from outside the UK.


28.  I conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law, and requires to be set aside.


29.  After discussion with the representatives it  was  common  ground  that
    the appropriate way forward  was  to  retain  the  case  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and the Appellant  be  afforded  the  opportunity  of  filing
    evidence compliant with the requirements for specified  evidence  under
    Appendix FM-SE in respect of his  financial  circumstances  and/or  the
    financial circumstances of his wife, with  a  view  to  permitting  the
    Tribunal to have a full  and  proper  consideration  of  the  available
    options - including a consideration of the Chikwamba point.  It may  be
    that if such evidence demonstrates that there are no financial concerns
    in this case the Secretary of State will wish to take  a  view  on  the
    case before the matter comes back to the Tribunal.  However, that is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State and I offer no indication and make no
    comment one way or the other as to merit or propriety.  It seems to  me
    that it would also be helpful if the Appellant were to file and serve a
    brief statement/s from either or both him and his  wife  detailing  the
    breakdown of the pattern of care that they  offer  to  her  parents  to
    provide an insight into his role bearing in mind that he is also now in
    employment.


30.  The case is accordingly adjourned on the basis that there is  an  error
    of law, and the decision in the appeal requires  to  be  re-made.   The
    appeal is reserved to me for  further  consideration  pursuant  to  the
    filing of evidence in accordance with the following Directions.


                                 DIRECTIONS

         1. The Appellant is to file and serve within 14 days  of  the  date
         given as  the  promulgation  date  of  this  document  any  further
         evidence upon which he wishes to rely in his appeal. In this regard
         it is anticipated that the Appellant will seek to file evidence  as
         to his financial circumstances consistent with the requirements  of
         Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules insofar  as
         that is possible, as well as a statement or  statements  addressing
         the division of the care duties for his in-laws between him and his
         wife. (See paragraph 29 above.)

         2. The appeal is to be relisted,  reserved  to  me,  on  the  first
         available date after 21 days from the  promulgation  date  on  this
         document.


                              ----- Ends -----
