
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04135/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th October 2017                      |On 09th November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            MASTER VISHAY UNAUTH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J Carroll, promulgated on 2nd June 2017, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 16th May 2017.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Mauritius, and was born  on  23rd
    December 1997.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 26th January 2016, refusing the Appellant leave to remain on  the
    basis that he had been living in  the  UK  for  seven  years  and  that
    requiring him to return back to Mauritius would not be reasonable given
    that he had spent the first ten years of his life in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge, at the outset of the determination, recorded extensively the
    poor immigration history of the Appellant's parents (see  paragraphs  2
    to 6), noting that the Appellant himself travelled to the UK  in  April
    2008 when he was 10 years of age, entering lawfully as a  visitor,  but
    then overstaying when his leave expired.  Evidence in  support  at  the
    hearing was given by his mother, Sooreka  Unauth.   A  feature  of  the
    appeal before  Judge  Carroll  was  that  there  had  been  a  previous
    determination in 2014, where the judge had  concluded  that  "the  very
    poor  immigration  history  of  the  parents  over  the  last   decade"
    (paragraph 75) was such that it would outweigh  the  interests  of  the
    family (see generally paragraphs  71  to  76  of  that  determination).
    Accordingly the principles in Devaseelan applied, and  were  recognised
    as applying, by Judge P J Carroll.

 4. Events, however, had moved on by the time that the  appeal  hearing  of
    May 2017 was heard by Judge P J Carroll, which was three  years  thence
    from the earlier determination of  2014.   As  the  judge  now  clearly
    recognised, there had been "two relevant changes which have altered the
    balance of  competing  interests  so  as  to  tip  the  proportionality
    assessment in the Appellant's favour ..." (paragraph 10).   These  were
    firstly, that the Appellant had been in the UK for seven years  by  the
    time of the application and  that  this  was  not  the  case  in  2014.
    Secondly, that the Court of Appeal had in the  case  of  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 clarified the significance of the seven  year  Rule
    principle  and  emphasised  the  proper  approach  to  the  Article   8
    assessment.

 5.  What  appears  to  have  rendered  the   judge's   eventual   decision
    questionable, however,  was  the  observation  that  after  that,  "the
    evidence falls very  far  short  of  demonstrating  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom"
    (paragraph 12).  This was because the Appellant confirmed in  his  oral
    evidence that he was about to finish secondary  school,  had  taken  no
    steps to find out about the availability  of  university  education  in
    Mauritius, had made no applications to  study  in  the  United  Kingdom
    itself, and he had other family members living in Mauritius still.

 6. Having made these observations, the judge  went  on  then  to  consider
    Article 8 in  the  context  of  the  seven  year  Rule,  which  is  now
    incorporated in the Respondent Home Office's policy in  Section  11.2.4
    of the Immigration Directorate Instructions Family Migration:  Appendix
    FM (Section 1.0(b)), which states that this principle "recognises  that
    over time children start to put down roots and integrate into  life  in
    the UK, to the extent that being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
    unreasonable".

 7. The judge then also applied the dicta of  Elias  LJ  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph 46.  The  judge  went  on  to  further
    reflect upon the observations of Elias LJ that, in assessing the  "best
    interests" of the child, "the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
    for seven years would need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
    proportionality exercise", and that this principle  "establishes  as  a
    starting point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary" (see paragraph  47  of  Elias  LJ's  judgment,
    quoted at paragraph 17 by the judge.

 8. On this basis, the judge went on to note that the skeleton argument  of
    Mr Spurling  of  Counsel  (who  appears  in  this  Tribunal  also)  had
    explained the matter by pointing out that what the seven year Rule does
    is to show that the child has become so integrated  into  the  national
    fabric of the UK that  it  would  be  unreasonable  (absent  strong  or
    powerful countervailing  factors)  to  rupture  those  social  ties  by
    requiring relocation to the country of origin (see paragraph 20 of  the
    determination).

 9. The judge concluded that  in  this  case,  "the  Respondent  failed  to
    identify any strong or powerful reasons to displace the starting  point
    ..." (paragraph 21).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that it was incongruous for the  judge
    to have stated at paragraph 12 of the determination that, "the evidence
    falls very far short of demonstrating that it would be unreasonable  to
    expect the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom",  but  then  also  to
    have concluded that the Respondent had failed to identify any strong or
    powerful reasons to displace  the  starting  point  that  seven  years'
    residence normally pointed to the grant  of  leave  to  remain  because
    significant weight would have to be  attached  in  the  proportionality
    exercise to this fact.

12. On 14th August 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

13. On 28th  September  2017,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Appellant, acting through Mr Spurling of Counsel once again.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 19th October 2017, Mr Avery, on  behalf  of
    the Respondent, made  two  submissions.   First,  that  the  judge  had
    abrogated his responsibility  in  not  conducting  a  proper  balancing
    exercise given that the family as a whole would be required to relocate
    back to Mauritius.  Second, that, although the immigration  history  of
    the family is set out at the outset by the judge at paragraphs 2 to  6,
    one had to note that the family had overstayed  since  2006  when  they
    lost their appeal to remain, and thereafter lost another  human  rights
    appeal in 2014, and the reference to MA  (Pakistan)  was  to  no  avail
    given that in that case also the family applying for  leave  to  remain
    had lost out in the end.

15. For his part, Mr Spurling submitted that he would have to  accept  that
    the judge's observation at paragraph 12 that "the evidence  falls  very
    far short of demonstrating that it would be unreasonable to expect  the
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom" was an error  of  law,  but  the
    question was whether it was a material error of law, and  that  it  was
    not, because  the  judge  had  eventually  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise in the context of the clarification of the law by the Court of
    Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  in  2016,  and  had  rightly  required  the
    Respondent Secretary of State to  show  that  there  were  "strong"  or
    "powerful" reasons to displace the starting point that, on the basis of
    the Appellant's seven years' residence, the Appellant should be granted
    leave to remain.

16. The judge here had not overlooked the poor immigration history  of  the
    Appellant's family (see paragraphs  2  to  6)  and  had  conducted  the
    overall  assessment  in  the  context  of   the   Court   of   Appeal's
    clarification in MA (Pakistan), and this could not be  said  to  be  an
    error that was material to the judge's  decision.   The  Appellant  was
    socially integrated into  the  fabric  of  UK  society  and  the  judge
    properly gave significant weight to that.  The fact remained that there
    was a very strong presumption established by the seven year Rule.

17. In reply, Mr C Avery submitted that the poor immigration history of the
    Appellant's family (at paragraphs 2 to 6) was  a  matter  that  weighed
    heavily with the last judge in 2014 and,  applying  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan, with the great passage  of  time  since  then,  the  public
    interest in favour of immigration control would weigh even more heavily
    now.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

19. First, it  is  right  that  the  conclusion  at  paragraph  12  is  not
    sustainable.  But, it was not sustainable only in the  sense  that  the
    judge was not there entitled to conclude  that  the  removal  would  be
    reasonable, when in the conclusion, it was stated that the Secretary of
    State had not given any strong or powerful reasons to justify  removing
    a child with seven years' residence, who had come to the UK at the  age
    of 10, and had remained here thereafter.  It is  true  that  there  had
    been a poor immigration history.  However, this is  amply  recorded  by
    the judge at paragraphs 2 to 6 right at the outset.

20. Nor, does the judge ignore the findings of the previous Tribunal.  What
    is expressly stated, however, is that two relevant changes  have  taken
    place since 2014 and these are set out.  This was also not a case where
    either parent or child had criminal convictions so that there could  be
    said to be powerful  or  strong  reasons  for  maintaining  immigration
    control.

21. Neither, was it the case that the Appellant child had only spent  seven
    of his earlier years in the UK.  What he had done was to have spent the
    most formative part of his life in the UK after the age of 10.  He  had
    become integrated into UK life and had cast down roots here.

22. As against that, the  judge  properly  applied  the  strictures  in  MA
    (Pakistan) and took as his  starting  point  the  position  that  leave
    should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary,
    recognising that significant weight  in  the  proportionality  exercise
    needs to be given to a child who has been in the UK for seven years  of
    his life.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction is made.

25. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th November 2017











