

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/04399/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 January 2018                        |     On 12 February 2018            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                           mrs florence ebun bello
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer promulgated on 3 April  2017  which  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decision refusing her  entry  clearance
    as a returning resident.

 2. It is undisputed that the appellant was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 3 November 2002. Her evidence also does not dispute that  she
    returned to Nigeria for extended periods thereafter  to  care  for  her
    husband who was unwell. Sadly, he died in January 2015.  The  appellant
    then applied for entry clearance as a returning resident.

 3. The respondent's decision refusing entry clearance  is  dated  15  July
    2015. The appellant lodged her appeal and in those appeal  papers  gave
    an address of [         ].  The Tribunal also  issued  a  notice  of  a
    pending appeal to her at that address on 29 September 2015.

 4. A notice of hearing was issued by the First-tier Tribunal on 20 October
    2016  again  to   [                   ].   Nothing  in  the   materials
    indicates that by that time the Tribunal had been informed of a  change
    of address. By the time of the hearing in front of Judge Mailer  on  13
    March 2017 there was again nothing indicating that  the  appellant  had
    not been given proper notice of the hearing.

 5. Judge Mailer found himself in a  position  where  no-one  attended  the
    hearing for the appellant and  the  respondent  also  did  not  provide
    representation. No explanation for that state  of  affairs  was  before
    him. He proceeded to determine the case on the basis  of  the  evidence
    before him on the papers.  He refused the appeal.

 6. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mailer  was  issued  to  the
    appellant on 3 April 2017. It was sent to the [         ] address.   It
    undoubtedly arrived because the appellant appealed against it in time.

 7. The appeal forms  lodging  that  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    however, gave a different address for the  appellant's  representative,
    seemingly her daughter. That address was [                      ].  The
    Tribunal has used that address since that time. The grant of permission
    to appeal dated 11 October  2017  was  sent  to  the  [               ]
    address.

 8. The grounds argue that there was procedural unfairness as the appellant
    did not receive notice  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  or  the
    respondent's bundle. The grounds maintained that when a telephone  call
    was made on 3 March  2017  chasing  an  appeal  date,  the  appellant's
    representative, her daughter, was told that the appeal had  been  heard
    and that a decision would follow in 4 days. The grounds also argue that
    the First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate reasons.

 9. On the day of the hearing before us there was no-one attended  for  the
    appellant.   The  Tribunal  telephoned  the  telephone   number   given
    consistently in the papers for the sponsor in the UK but there  was  no
    reply.  On that basis we considered that we should proceed to hear  the
    appeal, nothing indicating other than that proper notice of the hearing
    had been provided to the address given for representation in the appeal
    forms.

10. The material before us  did  not  support  the  appellant's  procedural
    unfairness arguments. The notice  of  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was sent to the address provided for service. The decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was later received  at  that  address.   It  is
    difficult to accept that the account of the information  given  by  the
    Tribunal in a telephone call on 3 March 2017  as  the  appeal  was  not
    heard until 13 March 2017.  This  ground  is  supported  only  by  bare
    statements in the grounds.

11. It is our view that the materials here do not  show  good  grounds  for
    accepting that the appellant did not have proper notice of the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  We do not find that a procedural error
    occurred.

12. It is not arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons. He addressed at  [20]  the  correct  question
    from paragraph 19 of the Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  had  not
    lived in the UK for most of her life; see [21] and [22]. He was clearly
    aware of the history; see [13]-[17]. The Article 8 claim was considered
    in [24]-[26] and the First-tier Tribunal made a rational  finding  that
    nothing showed family life with anyone in the  UK  or  a  private  life
    where she had been resident in Nigeria for many years. The grounds fail
    to  identify  evidence  or  factors  capable  of  showing   exceptional
    circumstances such that the judge was in error.

13. For these reasons we do not find that the grounds had merit.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 1 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

