
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/04987/2016
     HU/04990/2016
     HU/04991/2016
     HU/04992/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                harpreet [a]
                                KULWINDER [A]
                                   [GP A]
                                   [Gn A]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E I Raw, of Counsel, instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  They are  respectively  husband,
    wife and two children.  The dates of birth of the children are [ ] 2009
    and [ ] 2015 respectively.

2.   The first, second and third appellants came to the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors on 2 September 2010.  They did not leave upon  expiry  of  the
    visa but rather overstayed.  In September 2014 the second appellant was
    encountered by Immigration Officers and arrested.  Upon being  released
    it was then recorded that both first and  second  appellants  absconded
    from immigration controls  until  encountered  in  November  2015  when
    Immigration Officers executed a warrant at their home.

3.   The appellants sought to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    private and family life  but  the  applications  were  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision of 10 February 2016.

4.   The appellants sought to appeal against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill on 14 July 2017.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 25 July 2017 their claims  were  dismissed
    in all respects.

5.   The appellants sought to challenge that decision as being one  made  in
    fundamental error of law.  Permission to make that challenge before the
    Upper Tribunal was granted on 17 January 2018 on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the Judge may  have  given  insufficient  regard  to  the
    hostility claimed to be exhibited to the appellants by their respective
    families.

6.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.

7.   The burden of the case, as presented on behalf  of  the  appellants  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, was that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to integration, not least the hostility of  their
    respective families by reason of their marriage in the first place.

8.   The evidence of the first appellant in  his  statement  of  7  December
    2015 was to confirm that the  parents  were  against  the  marriage  in
    India.  It was a love marriage and the parents were furious  and  angry
    with them.  They disowned the first  and  second  appellant,  who  then
    found themselves living in a friend's house in India as the family  had
    disowned them.  He said that  his  mother  disinherited  him  from  her
    property because he married against  her  wishes.   He  said  that  the
    second appellant's family had threatened to kill them because they  had
    gone against their wishes and got married.

9.   The evidence of the second appellant in her witness  statement  was  in
    identical terms.

10.  There is little by way of further details are set out other than  those
    in the statement.  The third appellant had been approximately 11 months
    old when the appellants had come as visitors to the United  Kingdom  in
    2010.  The only other evidence in support of that matter would seem  to
    be a handwritten letter at page 70 of the appellant's  bundle  from  Mr
    Santeev Kumar who said that the first and second appellants had married
    against the wishes of their families and they ran away from  home,  got
    married and moved  to  his  village  and  started  living  there.   The
    families had stopped meeting both of them.  The mention  of  threat  is
    made in that particular document.

11.  Indeed, as a matter of commonsense, it is difficult to understand as  a
    matter of commonsense, that if they have  been  disinherited  by  their
    families and disowned the family would have any continuing interest  in
    them or would wish to attack them.

12.  It is clear, even on that evidence of the witness taken at it  highest,
    that the couple lived in his village for nearly two years.   There  was
    no indication that they  were  ever  subjected  to  threat  or  danger.
    Indeed no reason has been clearly established as to why they  left  the
    village and came to the United Kingdom.

13.  The Judge in paragraph 13 of the determination did not  find  there  to
    be any evidence as to ongoing hostility  towards  the  appellants  from
    their family.  Challenge is made to the wording of  that  paragraph  as
    the Judge has indicated that there  had  been  no  evidence  whatsoever
    adduced by the adult appellants to show some ongoing hostility  towards
    them and their respective families as a result of their  own  marriage.
    Clearly,  some  evidence  had  been  presented,  namely  that  of   the
    appellants themselves,  but  perhaps  a  commonsense  reading  of  that
    passage as a whole is that the Judge did  not  accept  what  they  have
    asserted, without more.  Indeed the point is made that if they had  any
    real fear from their parents then they  could  have  lodged  an  asylum
    claim for that matter to be properly tested  in  the  usual  way.   The
    handwritten statement, which presumably was that  referred  to  by  the
    first appellant in saying that he had evidence, did  not  support  that
    aspect.

14.  In any event the reality of the issue was whether there were  any  very
    significant obstacles to integration upon a return to India.  The Judge
    found that there was not.  The first appellant  had  been  involved  in
    agricultural work.  He and his wife had spent most of their life living
    in India and indeed the third  appellant  was  born  there.   There  is
    nothing to indicate that they could not otherwise make their living  in
    India, if need be without the support of the families.

15.  The best interests of the two children  was  also  properly  considered
    and significantly, although the third appellant  was  not  precisely  a
    qualified child at the time of the hearing, it is abundantly clear from
    the determination that the judge treated him as  such  and  accordingly
    had paid careful regard to Section 117B(vi) of the  2002  Act  provided
    that in the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal when  the  person
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.   Thus  the  Judge  not  only  focused  upon  the  best
    interests of the children to remain but whether it  was  reasonable  to
    expect them to depart with their parents as a family unit to India.

16.  In that connection a report of Jasmine Smith, a  social  worker,  dated
    12 July 2017 had been relied upon at the  hearing.   It  was  suggested
    indeed that the Judge had failed to give adequate weight to it  in  the
    determination.  It was noted that the first and second appellants  were
    said to be stable and integrated members of their community, living  in
    housing of their friend.  [GnA] attends a local nursery at a children's
    centre and [GpA] attends [ ] Primary School and attends  a  local  Sikh
    Temple and friendships and relationships have been established  in  the
    local area.  [GpA] indicated that he liked to  attend  the  local  park
    with his parents and enjoyed going  to  McDonalds  and  having  chicken
    burgers.  He presented as a pleasant engaging 6 year old boy,  speaking
    fluent English.  He said that he was happy at school.  He has been seen
    by the ophthalmology team in Great Ormond Street Hospital with  regards
    to an eye matter and an EEG  was  to  investigate  the  possibility  of
    epilepsy.

17.  Concerns as expressed by the first  appellant  was  the  difficulty  he
    might find in finding employment and accommodation for  his  family  in
    India and whether he can afford  any  medical  treatment  that  may  be
    necessary.  The conclusion of the report was that the best interests of
    the children were of course to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    report was considered in some detail by the Judge in  paragraph  17  of
    the determination.  There would seem to be no evidence to  confirm  one
    way or another whether the third appellant had epilepsy, nor indeed any
    indication that adequate care in India would not be available  to  him.
    Schooling and the friendships  were  noted  in  particular.   It  found
    however that there was no situation which would  make  it  unreasonable
    for the third appellant to return to India with his parents.  The  same
    would be said of the fourth appellant.

18.  In determining the issue of reasonableness the judge properly  followed
    judicial guidance on that matter.  Although the children should not  be
    punished  for  the  illegalities  of  their  parents,  nevertheless  in
    assessing whether it was reasonable  for  the  family  to  return,  the
    overall immigration context was properly  considered  as  well  as  the
    children's situation in particular.

19.  The Judge concluded that the public interest in removal was  tipped  in
    favour of the family being removed to India,  not  especially  heavily,
    the overall judgment being that  the  public  interest  should  prevail
    given the proper consideration of the  age  and  circumstances  of  the
    third appellant.

20.  Mr Raw contends that a lack of family support in  India,  that  balance
    may have tipped in favour of the appellants to remain.  I  find  little
    merit in that contention.  The Judge had looked at the family situation
    in India and had concluded that it was not quite as dire as was painted
    but nevertheless that the  appellants  could  live  as  a  family  unit
    economically in India.  The Judge's conclusion was there  was  no  very
    significant obstacles to integration and clear reasons were  given  for
    that finding.

21.  It was clearly a  situation  where  none  of  the  appellants  met  the
    Immigration Rules or were there any  compelling  circumstances  outside
    those Rules which would render return in breach of a fundamental  human
    right.  The parents had very little basis to  remain,  particularly  in
    the light of their adverse immigration history.  The  strongest  factor
    in permitting the family as a whole to remain  lay  of  course  in  the
    situation of the third appellant as a qualifying child.  That was well-
    recognised by the judge in the proportionality assessment that was made
    with the overall conclusion that the family could reasonably return.

22.  I find that the reasoning of the judge was clear and properly  open  to
    be made and that no error of law results therefrom.  It was  a  careful
    determination.

23.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely
    that the appeals in respect of the Immigration Rules and  human  rights
    stand to be dismissed in all respects.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed in all respects.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            [pic]                      Date 26 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD






