
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04307/2019
                                                               HU/04309/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                                     and
                                   [M K D]
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    No attendance by sponsor or Paragon Law
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred
to are in a bundle of XX pages, the contents of which I have  noted  and
taken full account of. The order made is described at the  end  of  these
reasons.

 1. Notice of the hearing was sent to the  parties  by  email  on  17.7.20,
    listing the hearing for 2:30pm. There was no attendance  on  behalf  of
    the appellants. I caused a telephone call to be made to Paragon Law but
    it could not be verified that anyone was planning to attend. No  person
    having conduct of the case could be  located  by  the  receptionist  at
    Paragon Law. The Tribunal informed that the previous  casework  Melanie
    Vasselin had left the firm. We waited a further 20 minutes without  any
    response from Paragon Law. In the circumstances, I was  satisfied  that
    it was consistent with the Tribunal's overriding duties  to  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of
    any representation on behalf of the appellants.

 2. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge  promulgated  20.11.19,  dismissing  their  linked
    appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State, dated 18.1.19,
    to refuse their applications for entry clearance  to  the  UK  to  join
    their brother and sponsor, Mr Samuel [K], pursuant to paragraph 352D of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Swaney  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.4.20.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. The appellants are now 17 and 8 years of age.   The  sponsor,  Mr  [K],
    fled Eritrea in 2014 and came to the  UK,  where  he  recognised  as  a
    refugee in August 2018 and granted limited leave to remain,  to  expire
    15.8.22.  It is claimed that the sponsor previously  lived  in  Eritrea
    with the two appellants and helped  look  after  them  following  their
    mother's departure for Saudi Arabia in 2013. At that time  the  sponsor
    was about 13 years of age and the youngest child was said to still need
    bottle feeding. He left them the following year and has not  seen  them
    since.

 6. It is claimed that the two appellants were kidnapped  from  Eritrea  in
    March 2018 and were taken to South Sudan, from where they were sent  to
    reside in Kampala, Uganda, with a former neighbour  (Byanesh),  who  is
    not related to them and is no longer able  to  look  after  them.  They
    claim to have no contact with their mother and do not know where  their
    father is. In November 2018 the appellants applied for  family  reunion
    with their brother in the UK.

 7. The application for entry clearance was refused  under  paragraph  352D
    because the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  on  the  limited
    evidence provided that either of the  appellants  formed  part  of  the
    sponsor's pre-flight family at the time he  left  the  country  of  his
    habitual residence in order to seek asylum, as required under 352D(iv).
    Neither was the Entry Clearance Officer satisfied that  the  appellants
    were not leading an independent life as required under 352D(iii).

 8. For the several  reasons  set  out  in  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found the factual matrix  advanced  by  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellants entirely implausible and ultimately not credible. The  judge
    was prepared to accept that the  appellants  were  now  in  Uganda  but
    concluded that the story of how they came to be  there  was  concocted.
    Amongst other matters, the judge at [37]  pointed  to  the  effort  and
    resources that must have gone into assisting the appellants with  their
    applications for entry clearance. At [36] of the  decision,  the  judge
    was not satisfied that they were not still in contact with their mother
    and did not continue to have the support  of  their  their  mother  and
    wider family members. Neither did the judge accept that it was  in  the
    best interests of the two minor appellants to come to the UK. The judge
    found no exceptional circumstances to justify granting leave  to  enter
    the UK on the basis that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in
    Uganda.

 9. The grounds of appeal focus on identifying matters  which  it  is  said
    were never put to the sponsor in evidence, relying on  a  statement  of
    truth of a caseworker he had conduct of the appellants cases.  However,
    this person was not the legal representative at the hearing and in fact
    was not at the hearing. Instead, reliance is placed on  (1)  a  heavily
    redacted document, what is said to be counsel's notes from the hearing.
    This is not supported by any statement  from  counsel,  Ms  Mottershaw.
    Document (2) is another  heavily  redacted  document,  described  as  a
    Telephone Note,  in  which  the  caseworker  asked  for  the  sponsor's
    response to the adverse matters addressed in the  Tribunal's  decision.
    As stated above, this caseworker is no longer employed by  Paragon  Law
    and did not attend the hearing. The evidence relied on in  this  regard
    is far from satisfactory.

10. In granting permission, Judge Swaney  considered  that,  based  on  the
    representative's note of the proceedings, material matters on which the
    judge made negative findings, which were  not  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter, were not put to the sponsor at the hearing.  "That  this  gives
    rise to unfairness is arguable."

11. Whilst the only right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was on human
    rights grounds, the extent to which the appellants met the requirements
    of the Rules is highly relevant to any article 8 ECHR  claim.  However,
    as the First-tier Tribunal noted, the appellants cannot  in  any  event
    meet 352D as the sponsor is the sibling  and  not  the  parent  of  the
    appellants. It is not at all clear  why  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    considered 352D at all. There was no purpose in the  judge  considering
    paragraph 353D. In fact, there does not appear to be any  valid  family
    reunion route under the Rules under which  the  appellants  could  ever
    have succeeded in an application for entry clearance for settlement, as
    Mr McVeety confirmed. The only possible ground of  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision lies outside the Rules under article  8  ECHR  on
    the basis of their being exceptional circumstances justifying the grant
    of leave.

12. On human rights grounds, there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate
    that at the date of application the appellants enjoyed any family  life
    with their brother sufficient to engage article  8  ECHR.  Even  taking
    their case at its highest, the sponsor was only 12-13 years of age when
    their mother left in 2013 and they have not  lived  with  or  seen  him
    since 2014. In the refusal decision, the respondent raised a number  of
    credibility issues and was not even satisfied that they  had  ever  met
    him. For example, it is not at all clear who provided for them  in  the
    approximately three years between 2014 and 2017.  The  judge  found  at
    [38] of the decision that they were safe in Uganda  and  there  was  no
    evidence that they were  anything  other  than  fit  and  healthy.  The
    sponsor himself is in care and is unable to provide for the  appellants
    even if they came to the UK. The judge was not satisfied on  the  facts
    of the case that it was even in the best interests of the appellants to
    come to the UK.

13. The evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal was woefully inadequate
    and left many questions unanswered. In criticising the judge for taking
    credibility points against the appellants without notice,  the  grounds
    and the grant of  permission  miss  the  point  that  even  taking  the
    appellants' case at its highest, there was  no  basis  upon  which  the
    decision  of  the  respondent  could  lead   to   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences or be disproportionate to their article  8  rights.  I  am
    satisfied that on the facts of this case their appeal could never  have
    succeeded. It follows that any alleged unfairness in the points made by
    the judge in explaining the implausibility of the core  claim  are  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

14. In any event, I accept Mr McVeety's  submission  that  credibility  was
    obviously an issue from the  outset,  as  is  clear  from  the  refusal
    decision. There  was  little  satisfactory  evidence  to  support  many
    aspects of the appellants' claimed circumstances,  which  were  largely
    dependent on mere assertion. It was, I am satisfied, open to the  judge
    to disbelieve the claim that their mother left the  appellants  in  the
    care of their brother, himself still of young age. It  remains  unclear
    exactly what their true circumstances are and the judge was entitled to
    conclude  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  any  compelling
    circumstances  to  justify,  exceptionally,  granted  entry   clearance
    outside the Rules.

15. It is not incumbent on a judge to have to put every adverse finding  to
    an appellant for comment or other response. If that were the case  then
    almost every case would have to  be  brought  back  for  the  judge  to
    outline the findings and invite comment from the appellant.  As  stated
    above, credibility was an obvious issue from the outset. The judge  has
    given cogent reasons open on the limited  evidence  for  rejecting  the
    core factual claim.

16. Even if the judge had erred in taking points that were not put  to  the
    sponsor in evidence, there was no basis on which the appeal could  have
    succeeded without such error. In Anoliefo (permission to appeal) [2013]
    UKUT 00345 (IAC), at para 16, the President said that "Where  there  is
    no reasonable prospect that any error of law alleged in the grounds  of
    appeal could have made a  difference  to  the  outcome,  permission  to
    appeal should not normally be granted in the absence of some  point  of
    public importance that it  is  otherwise  in  the  public  interest  to
    determine." It follows that  such  error  cannot  be  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.


Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal of each appellant remains dismissed.

     Signed DMW Pickup


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 5 August 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

