
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04528/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 January 2020                             |On 13 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     wA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Fraczyk, Counsel instructed by D & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Boylan-Kemp in which she allowed the appeal of WA, a  citizen  of
    Jamaica, against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    deportation order  on  human  rights  grounds.  For  the  avoidance  of
    confusion, I will refer  to  the  parties  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State's decision was made on 26  February  2019.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge  Boylan-Kemp  on  10  June  2019  and  was
    allowed. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  His application was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio on 8 October 2019 but on renewal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith in the following terms

       The respondent's grounds, in effect, challenge the insufficiency  of
       reasons given for the finding that the  effect  of  the  appellant's
       deportation on his wife, ex-wife and children would be unduly  harsh
       (it being assumed for these purposes that they would remain  in  the
       UK whilst he goes to Jamaica). I would not have  granted  permission
       on this basis alone, particularly in light of the recitation of  the
       evidence at [15] to [21] of the decision. Much of what is argued  in
       the grounds is merely a disagreement with the  judge's  findings  on
       that evidence.


       However, it is arguable that the judge has failed to recognise  that
       whether the impact is "unduly harsh" is  a  high  threshold.  I  say
       that, in particular, in the light of the judge's failure to  mention
       section 117C  when  purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the
       immigration rules and having regard to the public interest  only  in
       the maintenance of effective immigration control and  not  also  the
       prevention of crime and disorder  (with  the  recognition  that  the
       deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest - section
       117C(1)). The  appellant's  offending  included  offences  involving
       class A drugs for which offences he was sentenced  to  2  years  and
       four months in prison. The decision barely mentions  those  offences
       let alone the public interest involved in deportation.


       It may be that, ultimately, any such  error  will  be  found  to  be
       immaterial given the judge's  finding  within  the  rules  that  the
       effect is unduly harsh. However,  since  the  judge  has  taken  the
       approach that the assessment of Article 8 is outside the rules  ([5]
       of the decision), it is arguable that the error is  material.  As  I
       have already observed, it is also arguable that the  materiality  of
       the error outside the rules impacts on the judge's finding under the
       rules.




Background


 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica born on 7  June  1978.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2001 and was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2005.  He
    is married to a British citizen  and  they  have  two  British  citizen
    children and the Appellant also has two British citizen  children  from
    another relationship. On 7 October 2015 the Appellant was convicted  of
    two offences of possession of class A drugs with intent to  supply  and
    sentenced to 28 months imprisonment. As a result of this conviction the
    Secretary of State decided to make  a  deportation  order  against  the
    Appellant. The Appellant exercised his right of appeal on human  rights
    grounds.

 4. At the appeal  hearing  it  was  agreed  that  the  sole  issue  to  be
    determined was whether it was unduly harsh for the Appellant to  remain
    in Jamaica leaving his wife and children behind in the  United  Kingdom
    (paragraph 11). In allowing the appeal, the Judge found that  it  would
    not be in the best interests of the Appellant's  children  from  either
    relationship for him to be required to leave the country  and  that  in
    balancing the Appellant's family life against the  public  interest  it
    would be disproportionate to refuse the Appellant leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

 5. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  assert  that  the  Judge
    failed to give clear reasons as to how the  high  threshold  of  unduly
    harsh consequences had been made out noting that the Appellant's wife's
    cancer is in remission and that the mother  of  the  Appellant's  other
    children could look  after  the  children  on  the  weekends  when  the
    Appellant would have assisted.


Submissions

 6. For the Secretary of State Mr Howells said that the main point was that
    the Judge did not self-direct or apply the test in KO and others [2018]
    UKSC 53. There was no undue harshness resulting from  the  deportation.
    KO and others  at  paragraph  23  explains  the  undue  harshness  test
    requiring  something  over  and  above  the  due  level  of  harshness,
    something going beyond. The context is set by section  117C(1)  of  the
    2002 Act. Paragraph 35 of KO and others approved the test set  in  both
    MK v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) and MAB v SSHD [2015] UKUT 435.  Unduly
    harsh does not equate  with  uncomfortable,  there  must  be  something
    considerably more. The recent  case  of  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";
    offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) held that  the  high
    threshold guidance must be followed.  Mr Howells said that  it  is  not
    clear from decision that the Judge recognised  that  the  test  was  so
    stringent. Referring to the grounds of appeal Mr Howells said that  the
    Appellant's wife was in remission from cancer and  the  possibility  of
    its return was speculative. There was no evidence that the  removal  of
    contact with the twins would result in undue  harshness.  Their  mother
    can look after them. The report of the  social  worker  refers  to  the
    strong bonds that the Appellant has with the children, but this is  not
    uncommon and there must be a degree going beyond what would normally be
    faced. The fact that one of  the  children  is  severely  autistic  and
    unable  to  communicate  does  not  prevent  the  Appellant  continuing
    communication with that child in  some  way  using  modern  methods  of
    communication.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Fraczyk referred to his detailed skeleton argument
    which, he said, addresses the KO  and  others  issues.  It  was  not  a
    perverse finding of fact to suggest that there was a possibility of the
    Appellant's  wife's  cancer  returning.  Indeed,  her  current   health
    condition showed the ongoing effects of her  cancer.  This  is  not  an
    ordinary case where the consequences of deportation would  be  what  is
    normally expected. It involves a mother with a difference and  a  child
    with a difference. There is nothing perverse or  irrational  about  the
    Judge's findings.

 8. I gave an  extempore  decision  dismissing  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal. My reasons are given below.



Decision


 9. The issues involved in this appeal are straightforward. At the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal it was agreed that the only question  to
    be decided was whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to be
    deported to Jamaica  leaving  his  wife  and  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom. There was never any suggestion that it would be reasonable for
    the Appellant's wife  and  children  from  different  relationships  to
    relocate to Jamaica.




10. In considering the issue the Judge took  into  account  the  particular
    circumstances of the family. As Mr Fraczyk rightly points out  both  in
    his skeleton argument and in oral submissions the family  circumstances
    are not what is normally to be expected involving as they do  a  mother
    with a difference and a child with a difference. In  her  decision  the
    Judge refers to both of these differences.


11. So far as the mother is concerned the Judge refers to  the  Appellant's
    wife's cancer at paragraph 15. She notes that the cancer  is  presently
    in remission but also notes


    "...she has had significant and inavasive surgery in  order  to  tackle
    the disease ... she has been left with ongoing health concerns such  as
    tiredness and aching  joints  as  a  result  of  the  chemotherapy  she
    received, and ... she is at high risk of the cancer  returning  due  to
    the nature of the underlying disease"




    In my  judgement  the  Respondent's  assertion  (ground  4)  that  "any
    possibility the disease could return is speculative" not only  displays
    a  misunderstanding  of  the  nature  of  cancer  and  the  meaning  of
    'remission' but also flies in the face of  the  Judge's  findings.  The
    assertion (ground 3) that extensive support could be obtained from  the
    NHS and other support groups such as Macmillan whilst correct in itself
    does not detract from the fact that  close  familial  support  is  also
    desirable.




12. There is in my judgement no error of law in the Judge's finding that it
    would not be in the children's best  interests  to  be  separated  from
    their father when their mother's health is  in  such  a  fragile  state
    (paragraph 16). There is no error of law in the  Judge  including  both
    the state of the mother's health and the effect that this has upon  her
    children in the positive side of the proportionality balance or in  her
    assessment of undue harshness.




13. Turning to the other children the Judge notes (at  paragraph  17)  that
    the Appellant is "an involved carer" who  "provides  respite  care  for
    them and their mother on a regular basis". The Judge notes that the one
    child is severely autistic and that he is "unable to communicate due to
    the extent of his autism and so (the) parental relationship  could  not
    be adequately maintained if the Appellant  were  to  be  removed".  The
    Judge deals with the suggestion that the parental relationship could be
    maintained via social media finding


    "it is  clear  from  the  evidence  before  me  that  D  is  unable  to
    communicate or verbalise his feelings and so it  is  unlikely  that  he
    would be able to maintain his relationship with his father through  the
    means of  modern  technology.  I  find  that  D's  limited  ability  to
    communicate  would  mean  that  he  could  not  continue  to  have  any
    meaningful parental relationship with his  father  if  his  father  was
    removed from the United Kingdom".




    There is my judgement nothing that could be  said  to  be  perverse  or
    irrational in the Judge's findings in this respect.


14. Having made these findings, the Judge goes on to deal with  the  social
    work  report  and  the  cross   family/sibling   relationships   before
    concluding at paragraph 21 in the following terms


    "Overall, when taking the evidence in the round I find that it would be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's children to remain in the  UK  without
    the Appellant due  to  the  adverse  effect  it  would  have  upon  the
    Appellant's five children both emotionally  and  practically  and  upon
    their respective mother's ability to adequately care for  them  in  the
    Appellant's absence".




    This is in my judgement a comprehensive and adequately reasoned finding
    and one that is made on the clear basis that there are  matters  "above
    and beyond" the normal consequences of  deportation  for  this  family.
    Whereas the Judge does not  spell  out  her  understanding  of  'unduly
    harsh' and the stringency of the test and does not  specifically  self-
    direct to KO and others it is very clear that the  principles  involved
    whether taken into account or not are met  by  the  facts  as  recited.
    There is in my judgement no error of law but if the  failure  to  self-
    direct did amount to such an  error  then  it  would  not  be  material
    because given the particular circumstances as found the effect  of  the
    Appellant's  deportation  upon  his  children  and   his   wife   would
    undoubtedly be unduly harsh.



Summary of decision

15. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date: 3 January 2020


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

