
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04389/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 15 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 Fatima [c]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines.  She was born on 29 July
    1976 and is 42 years old.  In 2002, she married the  sponsor,  [EC],  a
    British Citizen.  He was born on 25 April 1937 and so is 81 years  old.



 2. The appellant and sponsor lived together  in  the  Philippines  between
    2002 and 2012 when the sponsor returned to the UK for  health  reasons.
    He has very poor health.  He lives in Clevedon and is supported by  his
    two sons, [MC] and [SC].

 3. In 2004, the appellant applied to join the sponsor as his spouse.   Her
    application was, however, refused, and her subsequent appeal  dismissed
    in July 2015.

 4. On 15 December 2016, the appellant made a further application to  enter
    as the sponsor's spouse.  That application was, however, again  refused
    by the ECO on  10  February  2017.   The  sole  basis  upon  which  the
    application was refused under the 'partner' provisions in Section  EC-P
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended)  was  that
    the appellant had not passed the required English language test  at  A1
    level of the Common European Framework of Reference for  Languages  (E-
    ECP.4.1(b)).  That decision was upheld by the ECM on  21  August  2017.
    Both the  ECO  and  ECM  concluded  that  there  were  no  "exceptional
    circumstances" to justify the grant of entry clearance under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The sponsor did not
    attend the hearing due to his health problems.  His two sons, Mark  and
    Simon did so and gave oral evidence before Judge Rolt.  It  was  common
    ground  before  the  judge  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the 'partner' provisions in Appendix FM because she had
    not passed the required English language test.   The  case,  therefore,
    centred around whether the appeal should be allowed under Art 8 outside
    the Rules.  Judge Rolt dismissed the appellant's appeal concluding that
    there was nothing "exceptional" to outweigh the public interest and  so
    the decision was a  proportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
    family and private life.  The judge's reasoning is at paras 14 - 22  of
    his determination as follows:

         "14. The history of the Appellant's claim is not in  dispute.   The
             Appellant and sponsor are married and lived  together  in  the
             Philippines for 10 years.  For health reasons the sponsor  had
             to return to the UK.  His health has continued to deteriorate.
              He cannot travel back to the Philippines due  to  his  health
             problems.  He is cared for by his sons and with  the  help  of
             medical practitioners and social services.  A care package  is
             being put in place.  It is hoped that he can  continue  to  be
             accommodated at home but he might have to move to a care home.
              Help from his wife, if allowed to travel to the  UK  to  join
             him would aide  his  care  and  possibly  avoid  a  care  home
             placement.

         15.  It is clear that the Immigration Rules are not met and I  note
             that the Appellant is not taking any further steps to  reapply
             for an English language test which is  her  only  obstacle  to
             coming to the UK.

         16.  I must also consider the appeal under Article 8.  I take  into
             account that Article 8 is a qualified right and does not  give
             an unconditional entitlement for the Appellant and Mr  [C]  to
             choose where they might wish to live.

         17.  In reaching my decision in this appeal  I  have  followed  the
             judgement of Lord Bingham in Razgar v Secretary of  State  for
             the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.

         18.  The sponsor and Appellant are married and lived  together  for
             several years.  They would continue to do so if the  Appellant
             was able to travel to the UK.  The sponsor is in  poor  health
             and I accept that his care could be aided by the  presence  of
             the Appellant.  However, he is clearly  adequately  cared  for
             now by his sons and because of  the  excellent  care  services
             available to him.  A care package has been  applied  for.   He
             may have to be accommodated in a care home whether or not  the
             Appellant is able to travel to  the  UK.   The  Appellant  can
             continue to learn English and apply for the language test.

         19.   The  Respondent's  decision  clearly  interferes   with   the
             enjoyment  to  family  life.   However,  I   find   that   the
             interference is in pursuit of the legitimate aim sought to  be
             achieved by the  Respondent,  namely  the  maintenance  of  an
             effective system of immigration control.

         20.  I find that the decision is proportionate when weighed against
             the public  interest.   I  have  in  this  regard  taken  into
             considerations section 117B of the Nationality and Asylum  Act
             2002.

         21.  I find that the Appellant's inability  to  pass  the  language
             test and seeming reluctance to continue to improve her English
             by taking lessons and applying for another test weighs against
             her  in  the  public  interest  considerations  that  must  be
             applied.

         22.  Whilst there are compassionate aspects I do not find  anything
             exceptional such that the interference is  outweighed  by  the
             public interest and therefore I must dismiss the appeal  under
             Article 8."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  On 27 February 2018, the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  E  M  Simpson)  granted   the   appellant
    permission to appeal.  The judge's lengthy grant of permission  can  be
    summarised as follows:  it was arguable that the judge's  decision  was
    irrational, having  overemphasised  the  importance  of  the  appellant
    complying with the relevant Rules and failing  adequately  to  consider
    the sponsor's circumstances, in particular his deteriorating health.

 7. The respondent did not file a rule 24 notice.

Discussion

 8. As I have already noted, it was accepted  before  the  judge  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules because she  had
    not passed the required English language test.   Indeed,  the  evidence
    before the judge was that she had not taken any further steps to do  so
    having previously been unsuccessful in  seeking  entry  clearance.   It
    was, however, accepted before the judge that the appellant met all  the
    other  requirements  of  the  'partner'  provisions  in  Appendix   FM,
    including the financial requirements.

 9. Mr Howells, who  represented  the  ECO,  accepted  that  that  was  the
    position.  Nevertheless, he submitted that the judge had  been  correct
    to  take  into  account,  in  considering  proportionality,  that   the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  which  was  a
    "weighty" but not "determinative" factor.  He relied upon the  decision
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) for that
    submission.  He submitted that the judge had properly  applied  the  5-
    stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  had  reached  a
    decision  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  that  the  public  interest
    outweighed the competing factors relevant  to  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

10. Whilst I accept Mr Howells' submission relying upon Mostafa,  that  the
    judge was entitled to take into account (indeed required to  take  into
    account) as an aspect of the public interest that the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules (see  s.117B(1)  and
    (2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002),  I  am,
    however, persuaded that the judge has failed properly to carry out  the
    balancing  exercise   required   under   Art   8   in   assessing   the
    proportionality of the respondent's decision not to grant the appellant
    entry clearance.

11. In approaching that question, the judge was required to decide  whether
    there were any "compelling" circumstances such that the effect  of  the
    decision would result in "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"  for  the
    appellant (and the sponsor) (see R (Agyarko and another) v SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 at [57]-[60]).  In dismissing the appellant's appeal, the judge
    made  no  specific  reference,  or  self-direction,  in  those   terms.
    Instead, he referred to there being nothing "exceptional" sufficient to
    outweigh the public interest (see para 22 of his determination).   That
    raises, at least, the possibility that the  judge  failed  properly  to
    direct himself.  But even if that was not a wrong self-direction, I  am
    satisfied that the judge failed properly to consider  the  impact  upon
    the sponsor of continued separation from  the  appellant,  his  spouse.
    There was no prospect, reasonably at least, of expecting the sponsor to
    live with the  appellant  in  the  Philippines.   His  health  problems
    effectively prevent that.   This  was,  therefore,  a  case  where  the
    decision has the foreseeable effect of separating  the  appellant  from
    the sponsor.

12. The medical evidence before the judge was particularly telling.   There
    was a letter from his GP, Dr McCloskey dated  21  November  2017  which
    stated that he suffered from "significant health  issues".   These  are
    stated  to  include  "extensive  osteoarthritis,  previous   myocardial
    infarction, ischemic cardiomyopathy, type 2  diabetes  and  emphysema".
    The letter notes that he takes five different types of medication on  a
    daily basis to manage his condition.  The letter continues:

         "we have significant concerns about his ailing  health  and  he  is
         certainly becoming very frail".

13. The letter notes that:

         "In addition to  this  gentleman's  physical  health,  there  is  a
         separation that he has had to endure from his wife which has caused
         a great deal of emotional distress".

14. The letter then continues:

         "it is also becoming apparent that he  is  needing  more  and  more
         support, not only to help look after him physically but  also  help
         with regards to managing his medication regime".

15. In addition, there was the evidence from the sponsor's two sons.   They
    help provide care and, at that time, there was an  application  seeking
    help and a care package from the Social Service which was pending.

16. It was not, in my  judgement,  a  sufficient  characterisation  of  the
    sponsor's circumstances for the judge to state at para 18 that:

         "he is clearly adequately cared for now by his sons and because  of
         the excellent care services available to him."

17. The support of a caring and loving spouse is, as  a  matter  of  common
    experience, an important part of the support  that  an  elderly  person
    would regard as significant in their day-to-day well-being.   There  is
    no doubt that the appellant's sons provide  excellent  care  for  their
    father.  Notwithstanding that, the support of a caring,  loving  spouse
    who is living with the individual adds to the overall  bundle  of  care
    needed and, indeed perhaps expected, in later life.

18. In my judgment, the  judge  failed  properly  to  have  regard  to  the
    importance of the support that the appellant could afford  her  spouse,
    the sponsor if she came to live with him in the UK.  They have now been
    married  for  16  years  and  lived  together  for  ten  years  in  the
    Philippines.  The sponsor's health is deteriorating, and he  is  frail.
    He lives on his own albeit with  support  from  his  son  and,  at  the
    present as [MC] told me, with the support of carers a few times a  day.



19. In my judgment, therefore, on the evidence before him, the judge failed
    adequately to take into account the sponsor's circumstances in reaching
    a finding on whether there were "compelling"  circumstances  such  that
    there would be "unjustifiably harsh consequences" to the appellant  and
    sponsor if she were not allowed to enter the UK.  That was  a  material
    error of law and I set aside the judge's decision.

20. Mr Howells indicated in his submissions that he was content for  me  to
    remake the decision on the basis of the evidence if I were  to  find  a
    material error of law.

21. I apply the 5-stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD.

22. Art 8.1 is engaged.  There is plainly a significant  interference  with
    the family life of the appellant and sponsor.

23. Under Art 8.2, the decision is in accordance with the law and is for  a
    legitimate aim.  The central issue is that of proportionality.

24. The sponsor's circumstances have not improved.  I  have  an  up-to-date
    letter from his GP dated 24 September 2018.  [MC] also told me that the
    appellant's English has improved.  He has spoken to her many  times  on
    the phone and he submitted a letter dated  27  September  2018  from  a
    private  tutor  in  the  Philippines  speaking   to   the   appellant's
    improvement in her English communication  skills.   The  fact  remains,
    however, that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    because she has not passed the required English language test.  I  take
    that into account as an aspect of the public  interest  (see  s.117B(1)
    and (2) of the NIA Act 2002).

25. This is not a case where the appellant and sponsor can be  expected  to
    live together in the Philippines.  The  medical  evidence  denies  that
    possibility stating that his "complex health issues make it unable  for
    him to  travel  to  the  Philippines  to  be  with  his  wife".   Their
    separation is, therefore, for the foreseeable  future  'set  in  stone'
    unless and until the appellant passes  the  required  English  language
    test.  Their marriage is a long one, namely some sixteen years and they
    lived together for ten of those years until  2012  in  the  Philippines
    when the sponsor's health caused him to return to the UK.  Despite  the
    fact that he is cared for by his two sons and  has  professional  help,
    the respondent's decision denies him the support  and  comfort  of  his
    long-term spouse.  That is, as I have already noted, a matter  of  some
    significance in depriving the sponsor (and of course the appellant)  of
    the mutual support and care which, perhaps, only a spouse  can  provide
    emotionally (and otherwise) living with the sponsor.  The  GP's  letter
    remarks upon the emotional impact upon the sponsor  of  the  separation
    from the appellant.  This is a case where, in the words of Lord Bingham
    in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 at [20]:

         "the ultimate question ... is whether the refusal of leave to enter
         or remain, in circumstances where the life  of  the  family  cannot
         reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account
         of all considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices
         the family life of the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious
         to amount to a breach of the fundamental right protected by article
         8."

26. In my judgment, the decision to refuse the appellant entry clearance in
    this case does prejudice the family life of the appellant (and sponsor)
    in a manner "sufficiently serious" to breach Art 8.  The  circumstances
    of the sponsor are "compelling" in the sense that to deny the appellant
    entry clearance so as to live with the sponsor  and  provide  emotional
    and other support to him given his  deteriorating  health  and  frailty
    amounts to "unjustifiably harsh  consequences"  on  the  appellant  and
    sponsor.

27. Bearing fully in mind the public interest based  upon  the  appellant's
    inability to satisfy all the requirements of the Immigration Rules  (in
    fact solely on the basis that she has not passed the  required  English
    language test), I am satisfied that the public interest  is  outweighed
    by the appellant and sponsor's circumstances such that the  refusal  to
    grant the appellant entry clearance is a disproportionate  interference
    with her and the sponsor's family and private life.

Decision

28. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the  making  of  an
    error of law.  I set that decision aside.

29. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.
                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              9 October 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and I consider it appropriate to make a  full  fee
award of any fee paid or payable in respect of the appellant's  application.





                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              9 October 2018



