

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                Appeal Number: HU/04772/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 14 June 2017                        |On 21 June 2017                |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                SANDEEP SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Samra of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Parkes ('the Judge') promulgated on 14 October 2016  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
        refuse his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


Background

     2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 9 July 1984 who claimed
        to have entered the United Kingdom illegally in July  2008  and  to
        have remained ever since. On 15 June 2015,  the  appellant  applied
        for Leave to Remain based upon his family and private life  in  the
        UK. The application was refused on 17 August 2015.
     3. The decision-maker considered the application initially  under  the
        Immigration Rules by reference to Appendix FM.  It  was  noted  the
        appellant has no children in the UK whilst he  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting  relationship  with  his  British  partner,  who  it  is
        acknowledged has lived in the UK all her life and is employed here,
        it was found no evidence was provided of  insurmountable  obstacles
        in accordance with EX.2 preventing the  appellant  from  continuing
        his relationship in India.
     4. In relation to the private life element, the appellant  was  unable
        to satisfy the requirements of 276ADE (1) as it was  not  made  out
        that  they  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
        reintegration into India.
     5. In relation to circumstances making the  decision  disproportionate
        outside the  rules,  the  decision-maker  noted  the  core  of  the
        appellant's case that he had established family, friends  and  ties
        in the UK, that he has been away from India for too long to be able
        to establish his life there once more, and that it is not  possible
        for his partner to leave the UK as she is  a  British  citizen  and
        cannot relocate as a result of employment in the  UK.  It  is  also
        said  the  partner  relies  upon  the  appellant   physically   and
        emotionally and that the future in India would  be  uncertain.  The
        decision-maker, however, found the appellant had not  provided  any
        evidence to show he could not continue family life with his partner
        in India. Although relocating may cause a degree  of  hardship  the
        appellant could assist with his  wife  emotionally  and  physically
        whist they became used to living in India.   It  was  open  to  the
        appellant to obtain employment in India with  a  view  to  securing
        property or land. It was also noted the  appellant  has  family  in
        India and there was no reason to suggest they would not  adequately
        support and assist him and his partner upon return. Accordingly, it
        was not made out that exceptional circumstances had been  shown  to
        exist sufficient to warrant a grant of leave pursuant to Article  8
        ECHR.
     6. The appellant appeared before the Judge represented by counsel. The
        nature of the hearing and evidence provided,  both  in  written  in
        documentary form, is noted by the Judge whose findings,  from  [11]
        of the decision, can be summarised in the following terms:


                i. There was a  conspicuous  absence  from  the  appellant's
                   bundle of any medical evidence. There was nothing to show
                   the sponsor had suffered any undue medical problems, that
                   she continues to suffer from them or would be at risk  of
                   relapse [11].
               ii. There was nothing in the evidence to suggest the  sponsor
                   receives medical treatment or assistance now or that  any
                   treatment or medication she needs would not be reasonably
                   available in India [11].
              iii. The evidence does not show the sponsor could not live  in
                   India [11].
               iv. The appellant's entire time in the UK has been spent here
                   illegally. He has worked illegally [12].
                v. The focus of the decision has to  be  whether  there  are
                   insurmountable   obstacles,   i.e.    very    significant
                   difficulties to their continuing life together  in  India
                   which could not be overcome or which  would  entail  very
                   serious hardship [13].
               vi. There is no evidence to show the appellant and  his  wife
                   could not live in India [13].
              vii. The appellant has shown he is adaptable and  has  made  a
                   life for himself in circumstances  that  show  resilience
                   and capability, qualities he can use in  India  where  he
                   will be able to live legally [13].
             viii. The sponsor may not wish to live in India but that is not
                   a reason not to move somewhere. The sponsor  married  the
                   appellant knowing what his status was and must have  been
                   aware that the situation was not stable, with there being
                   no guarantee the appellant would be permitted  to  remain
                   [14].
               ix. There is nothing in the evidence that would  suggest  the
                   appellant and his wife  could  not  live  in  India.  The
                   ordinary consequences of such relocation cannot  be  said
                   to be insurmountable obstacles [15].
                x. The appellant's situation  is  not  contemplated  by  the
                   Rules  meaning  the  Rules  have  anticipated  he  cannot
                   satisfy those requirements. The fact  the  appellant  has
                   built up a life whilst here illegally counts against  him
                   and accords it little weight [16].
               xi.  As  the  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the   Rules,
                   consideration has been given to Article 8  ECHR  but  the
                   evidence does not show there are circumstances that  make
                   this case particularly unusual and there  is  nothing  in
                   the facts that would suggest that the appellant's removal
                   would be disproportionate [17].
              xii. It is open to the appellant to return to India and  apply
                   for re-entry as a spouse in the proper way. The appellant
                   has not shown that he could not reasonably do so or  that
                   it would, given his immigration history, be unfair [18].
             xiii. The fact a person could not meet the Immigration Rules on
                   an out of country application would not  be  an  argument
                   for allowing them to remain under article 8 [19].
              xiv. The evidence does not show that the sponsor  is  able  to
                   remain  in  the  UK  and  does   not   show   there   are
                   insurmountable obstacles to their continuing  their  life
                   together in India. The appellant can,  if  they  wish  to
                   live together in the UK, return to  India  and  make  the
                   application he should have made some time ago [20].


     7. It is noted that the hearing of this  appeal  occurred  at  Sheldon
        Court in Birmingham on  6  July  2016  yet  the  decision  was  not
        delivered until 14 October 2016. The Judge was aware of this  delay
        and writes in [2]:


        2.       Before dealing with the substance of  the  appeal  I  must
             apologise to the Appellant for the delay in  the  promulgation
             of this appeal. This was  my  fault  and  came  about  when  I
             misplaced this file in with other less urgent work,  this  was
             only  appreciated  when  the  other  work  was  addressed.   I
             understand that the uncertainty of not knowing the result will
             have  unsettled  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  and  I  again
             apologise.


     8. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        Acting Resident Judge Appleyard on 29 December 2016, on  the  basis
        the grounds seeking permission to appeal are arguable in  asserting
        the delay in promulgation  of  some  three  months  or  thereabouts
        prejudices the appellant and that the Judge  failed  to  deal  with
        various issues within the appeal.


Error of law

     9. The appellant sets out seven heads of challenge in his  application
        for permission to appeal which shall be taken in order.
    10. The first of these relates to the statement the decision  has  been
        promulgated more than three months after the date  of  the  hearing
        when the decision should have made sooner and not in excess  of  13
        weeks. This is accepted by the Judge who has tended his apology and
        provided an explanation.
    11. Delay is not determinative of  legal  error  per  se  although  the
        longer the delay a greater  degree  of  concern  may  arise.  Early
        guidance from the Senior Courts was given in Sambasivam v Secretary
        of State IATRF 1999/0419/4 in which Potter LJ  said  "In  cases  of
        delay .... the matter is best approached from the  starting  point,
        where important issues of credibility arise, a delay of over  three
        months between hearing and determination will  merit  remittal  for
        rehearing unless, by reason  of  particular  circumstances,  it  is
        clear that the eventual outcome of the application, whether by  the
        same or a different route must be the same."
    12. The matter was considered  more  recently  in  Arusha  and  Demushi
        (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC) in  which
        it was held that to establish that a delay in the promulgation of a
        decision has led to an error of law it has to  be  shown  that  the
        decision was not safe and therefore  unlawful.   There  must  be  a
        nexus between the  delay  and  the  safety  of  the  decision:  see
        Secretary of State v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868. The decision
        in RK (Algeria) was relied  upon  by  Mr  Samra  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal.
    13. In this case, the appellant has failed to  establish  the  required
        nexus and failed to establish that the decision  is  not  safe  and
        therefore unlawful. The Judge accepted the factual matrix  outlined
        by the appellant and his partner in the evidence meaning no adverse
        credibility issues arise to the appellant's  detriment,  but  found
        that applying the relevant jurisprudence to the facts  relied  upon
        by the appellant did not entitle him to succeed with his appeal. No
        arguable legal error material to the decision is made out  on  this
        ground.
    14. The second ground asserts the  normal  rule  of  thumb  is  that  a
        decision will be promulgated  within  three  months  but,  for  the
        reasons given above, that is not definitive.
    15. Ground three asserts in the interest of justice the  matter  should
        be remitted to be heard afresh  and  determined  swiftly  to  avoid
        delay. This does not identify an arguable error of law  but  rather
        contains the appellant's suggestion for how the  matter  should  be
        determined in the future. This is only  an  issue  that  arises  if
        arguable legal error material to the  decision  is  made  out.  The
        ground does not in isolation establish such error.
    16. Ground four asserts medical evidence was provided and  the  sponsor
        gave oral evidence  before  the  Judge  about  her  needs  and  the
        assistance provided which it is  claimed  the  Judge  has  made  no
        findings on. The Judge noted in the decision the absence  from  the
        appellant's bundle of  any  medical  evidence  which  is  factually
        correct, bar one brief letter from a GP.  The Judge noted the  oral
        evidence provided and at [9] refers to the appellant's own evidence
        and objection to returning to India on the basis his wife is unwell
        and there would be no one to look after her and that  when  she  is
        unwell the appellant does the cooking, gardening and cleaning.  The
        Judge  was  fully  aware  of  the  evidence  relating  to   medical
        conditions  but  also  noted  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  the
        appellant's wife receives  medical  treatment  or  assistance  that
        would not be reasonably available in India.  The  Judge  finds  the
        medical matters either make it disproportionate for the appellant's
        wife to live with him in India or satisfy the relevant  test  under
        the Rules. These are decisions fully open to the Judge based on the
        evidence provided and do not disclose arguable legal error.
    17. Ground five asserts the Judge has not considered section 117B.  The
        appellant claims to have integrated into society,  speaks  English,
        and is not a burden on the taxpayer. The Judge was fully  aware  of
        the appellant's circumstances but the fact the appellant is able to
        satisfy these requirements does not enable  him  to  claim  greater
        weight should have been placed upon this element, as the ability to
        speak English and not be a burden on the  taxpayer  is  in  fact  a
        neutral aspect of the case. It is  also  important  to  note,  with
        regard to dependency, that  the  appellant  himself  is  not  self-
        sufficient. Any work the appellant has undertaken to date has  been
        unlawful and  is  was  not  made  out  that  he  himself  is  self-
        sufficient, although it is accepted he may not be a burden  on  the
        public purse as a result  of  his  wife's  lawful  employment.  The
        reason such issues are neutral is because  it  means  there  is  no
        adverse finding made against the appellant on the basis  he  cannot
        speak English, but the Judge made  no  such  finding.  No  arguable
        legal error is made out on this point - AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]
        UKUT 260 (IAC) considered.
    18. Ground six asserts the Judge erred at [11]  claiming  the  evidence
        did not show the appellant's wife could not live in India as she is
        a British citizen born in the UK, has a life, friends,  and  family
        here. It is asserted it was not reasonable to expect her  to  leave
        the UK or EU.  The Judge does not make a decision that compels  the
        appellant's wife to leave the United Kingdom. The appellant's  wife
        is an adult. The Judge finds there was no evidence to suggest  that
        the appellant and his wife could not live in  India.  The  evidence
        did not show that, even allowing for some adjustment in relocation,
        finding work, and accommodation, any difficulties experienced could
        not be overcome or would  entail  very  serious  hardship.  On  the
        evidence this is factually correct. The Judge also noted  that  the
        appellant's wife may choose to remain in the United  Kingdom  [20].
        The finding by the Judge that family life could continue  in  India
        is a finding within the range of those reasonably open to the Judge
        on the evidence. No arguable legal error is made out on this point.
    19. Ground seven asserts the judge should have considered Chikwamba  as
        they met the financial requirements and Appendix FM as they have  a
        genuine bond. The Judge considered this issue by reference  to  the
        more recent case of R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix
        FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]
        UKUT 00189 (IAC) in which it was held that (i) Appendix FM does not
        include  consideration  of  the  question  whether  it   would   be
        disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to  his  home
        country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join  family
        members in the U.K. There may  be  cases  in  which  there  are  no
        insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the
        U.K. but where temporary separation to enable an individual to make
        an application for entry clearance may be disproportionate. In  all
        cases, it will be for the individual to place before the  Secretary
        of State evidence that such  temporary  separation  will  interfere
        disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be enough  to
        rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]
        UKHL 40.
    20. The evidence before the Judge did not establish that if  there  was
        temporary separation whilst the appellant returned to India to make
        an  application  to  enter  the  UK  lawfully,  there  will  be   a
        disproportionate interference with any protected right. This  is  a
        case in which all family  and  private  life  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant has been formed at  a  time  his  status  in  the  United
        Kingdom  has  been  illegal,  a  fact  the  Judge  also  found  the
        appellant's wife  was  clearly  aware  of.  Applying  both  UK  and
        Strasbourg jurisprudence the weight to be attached to  private  and
        family life formed  in  such  a  situation,  when  undertaking  the
        balancing exercise, will be substantially reduced.
    21. The final ground asserts third-party rights of the sponsor have not
        been considered but such claim has no arguable merit as  the  Judge
        clearly heard evidence about the  appellant's  wife  situation  and
        properly considers the same during the body of the decision.
    22. The appellant has failed to  establish  any  arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
           (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14 June 2017



