
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04973/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th January 2019                 | On 15th February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mr TARANJIT SINGH TOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull, Counsel instructed by M & N
Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  13th  March  1977.   The
    Appellant claims to have entered the UK  on  5th  September  2007  with
    entry clearance as a visitor for the period from 28th April 2008  until
    28th October 2008.  The Appellant overstayed that visa.  On 15th  April
    2014 he applied for  an  EEA  residence  card  as  a  non-EEA  national
    spouse/civil partner with his  Sponsor,  [BD].   This  application  was
    refused on 28th April 2014.  A further application was made refusing  a
    similar visa on 25th November 2014.

 2. On 1st November 2016 the Appellant made a  human  rights  claim  in  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK  under  Appendix  FM  on  the
    basis of his family life with his partner [PC].  That  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 23rd January 2018.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mathews sitting at Newport on 5th September 2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 26th September 2018 the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  8th  October
    2018.  On 6th December 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Simpson noted that there were four
    grounds maintained and granted permission on all grounds.  The grant of
    permission sets out succinctly the basis of the Appellant's application
    for permission to appeal:

      i) It was asserted that when assessing the Appellant's appeal  against
         the Respondent's refusal of his human rights application for  leave
         to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  his  family  life  with  his
         British partner and by date of hearing stating that they  were  now
         married,  that  damaging  credibility   findings   concerning   the
         genuineness of their relationship arising from the Appellant's oral
         evidence about the timeline of their relationship  as  set  out  at
         paragraphs 15 and 19 to 21 of  the  determination,  including  with
         reference to timeline of his previous marriage and divorce from  an
         EEA national, that with reference to the Record of  Proceedings  it
         appeared arguable that those  damaging  credibility  findings  were
         based  on  a  partial  account   of   the   Appellant's   evidence.
         Furthermore,  it  was  arguable  that  absence  of  a  latitude  of
         understanding of witness evidence when  coming  to  the  matter  of
         memory and chronology this was likely even more to  the  fore  when
         under the glare of a court hearing.


     ii) Judge Simpson noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had observed
         that there had only been provided a photocopy  of  the  Appellant's
         certificate of marriage to his current wife at the hearing but  did
         not otherwise state in the decision whether sight of  the  original
         certificate had been sought.  The judge noted in the grounds  there
         was an assertion that Counsel had handed up to  the  judge  at  the
         hearing the original certificate of which  latterly  there  was  no
         mention in  the  decision.   These  were  matters  that  the  judge
         considered of arguable materiality given the judge's  findings  not
         only that there had not been shown that the Appellant and [PC]  had
         had a genuine relationship and/or cohabited, but  furthermore  that
         it had not been shown that they had married either.


    iii) It was arguable that there  had  not  been  produced  any  original
         documentation by the Appellant at the hearing, with no  mention  of
         the concern having been raised and given  that  such  documentation
         was arguably material in  going  to  the  relationship,  residence,
         etc., there appeared as a matter  of  fairness  that  these  issues
         required to have been raised directly at the hearing.


     iv) Fourthly, it was raised that the judge had erred  when  citing  the
         name of a person unknown in the appeal in the  concluding  part  of
         the decision.


 5. On 19th December 2018 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis  that  the  appeal  comes
    before me to determine whether or not there is a material error of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel, Ms Turnbull.  The Secretary of State
    appears by his Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Turnbull points out that there is an error in the  date  quoted  for
    when the Appellant entered his present relationship  and  I  note  that
    factual  amendment.   She  contends  that  despite  the  principles  of
    Devaseelan the fact that the Appellant had been found to  have  entered
    previously a proxy  marriage  was  not  determinative  of  the  current
    application and that it was appropriate for the judge to have given due
    consideration to the Appellant's  current  relationship  and  also  the
    position  so  far  as  it  would  relate  to  his  current   wife   and
    stepdaughter.  She further submits that the judge was under a  mistaken
    belief that the appeal was also based on an attempt by the Appellant to
    clear his name of allegations of his  previous  sham  marriage  on  the
    basis that that clearly was  not  in  his  case  accepted  despite  the
    findings of the court.  Ms Turnbull submits that the Secretary of State
    had a duty to provide cogent  evidence  regarding  that  and  that  the
    Appellant had repeatedly stated that he was "not good with  dates"  and
    the fact that he had guessed dates had  been  held  against  him.   She
    submits  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife   were
    consistent.

 7. Secondly, she turns to the issue relating to the  fact  there  were  no
    original documents provided and submits that this  is  incorrect,  that
    the original marriage certificate had been given to the judge but  then
    returned to the instructing solicitors, and that the  original  P60  of
    the Appellant's spouse had been retained on the court file.  So far  as
    other documents were concerned it is Ms Turnbull's submission that  the
    judge had never asked for them but they were available at court.

 8. Thirdly, she takes me to paragraph 53 of the decision  where  there  is
    reference to a Ms Kirkwood.  She submits that there is no  such  person
    with any involvement in the proceedings.

 9. Finally, she submits that the judge gave no  reasons  why  he  did  not
    accept the Appellant's explanation that he did not change  his  address
    at the bank immediately when he moved because his brother  still  lived
    there and he would have been able to receive statements.

10. In response, Mr Bramble takes me as his starting point to the  Rule  24
    response.  Quite often these days Rule 24 responses  are  not  provided
    but in this  one  he  submits  that  the  relevant  paragraphs  are  of
    importance.  I set them out:

         "3.  The fact that the Appellant claims to be poor with dates  does
             not mean that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  in  any  way
             bound by that claim.  It is for  a  judge  to  decide  on  the
             Appellant's credibility  and  when  there  were  such  glaring
             inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence and  that  of  his
             'wife', the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entirely entitled to
             find that the relationship was not genuine.


         4.   In addition the mere fact the Appellant still  maintains  that
             his previous EEA application  was  genuine,  when  a  previous
             First-tier Tribunal Judge and Upper Tribunal found it was not,
             does not mean that the First-tier Tribunal Judge is unable  to
             make a negative credibility finding against the Appellant".


    He submits that Ms Turnbull is attempting  to  sidestep  the  important
    issue with regard to the findings made by the judge and takes me as his
    starting point to paragraph 19 of the  judge's  decision.   This  is  a
    paragraph where the judge has made findings, he  submits,  relating  to
    evidence given by the Appellant's current spouse, and  that  the  judge
    had been correct thereinafter to  make  findings  following  Devaseelan
    principles regarding the Appellant's  sham  marriage  to  Ms  [D].   He
    emphasises to me that the reason for refusal was based  on  suitability
    under Section S-LTR and that all that is set out therein in the  Notice
    of Refusal remains valid.  He submits that the judge has made  a  clear
    finding regarding the EEA application and that it is not  possible  nor
    has it been shown in any way  how  the  Appellant  can  get  over  that
    decision.  In a sense he submits that the appeal should basically  stop
    there on the basis that the Appellant cannot succeed under  the  Rules.



11. However, he goes on to address the other grounds.  He  relies  strongly
    on the Rule 24 and takes me firstly to paragraphs 15 and 18, 19 and  20
    of the judge's decision which sets out the evidence that the judge  has
    heard and led to his making findings with regard to the credibility  of
    the Appellant's testimony.

12. As to  the  production  of  an  original  marriage  certificate  he  is
    uncertain as to whether this actually assists the Appellant at all  and
    points out that the Home Office minute does not refer to the  marriage.
    He is critical (as am I) of Ms Turnbull for the manner in which she has
    addressed this.  Ms Turnbull has effectively sought to give evidence as
    to what happened at  the  previous  hearing  and  it  is  Mr  Bramble's
    submission that had she wished  to  do  so,  she  should  have  recused
    herself from the current hearing and given evidence by way  of  witness
    statement.  Having said that, I am not sure that the evidence  she  has
    given adds anything to the issues that are extant before me.

13. Regarding the reference to a Ms Kirkwood, he submits  that  that  is  a
    typographical error and in any event,  it  does  not  add  anything  or
    detract from the judge's decision.  Fourthly, he submits that the judge
    has listened to the evidence so far as the  position  relating  to  the
    bank statements are concerned and was entitled  to  make  the  findings
    that he did.  He asked me to find that there is no  material  error  of
    law in the judge's decision and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

16. I start by briefly addressing  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  Ms
    Turnbull has given evidence.  I think it is clear that she  has  but  I
    would also like to emphasise that  all  she  has  effectively  done  is
    assist the court and I do not seek to go behind what she has had to say
    or to consider that that in any way decries from  the  appeal  that  is
    before me or should influence it.   What  does  influence  me  are  the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Firstly, the judge has
    given due consideration  to  the  position  regarding  the  Appellant's
    purported sham marriage with Ms [D] which is to be found  at  paragraph
    15 of his decision.  The judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  give  due
    consideration as his starting point  to  the  authority  of  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Further, whilst Ms Turnbull argues that the  judge
    has to look at other matters, in particular the position of Ms [C]  and
    stepdaughter, the judge has addressed these matters.  It  is  clear  at
    paragraph 16 where the judge states:

         "I have  read  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Upper
         Tribunal and Court of Appeal on the issue of this man's marriage to
         Ms [D].  I do not treat those  decisions  as  definitive  upon  the
         issue, but take them as an informed starting point.   I  note  that
         beyond the Appellant's assertions that it was  in  fact  a  genuine
         relationship, I have no fresh evidence on the point".


17. It is consequently clear that the judge has only treated that  evidence
    in the proper manner in which he should have done and that he has  gone
    on to consider the  issue  with  regard  to  the  current  relationship
    afresh.  The judge has dealt with this at paragraphs  18  to  24.   The
    judge has made clear findings regarding that evidence.   He  has  noted
    the contradictions and the failure of the Appellant to get dates right,
    in particular the failure of the Appellant to note the  exact  date  of
    his marriage.  The judge has thereinafter gone on to  make  conclusions
    as to the Appellant's credibility.  A proper  approach  to  credibility
    would require an assessment of the evidence and of the  general  claim.
    Such factors could consist of the internal consistency  of  the  claim,
    the inherent implausibility of it, and external factors.  I acknowledge
    that theoretically a claimant need do no more than state his claim  but
    that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and  inherent
    implausibility.  It seems to me that that process is exactly  what  has
    been undertaken in this matter by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   So
    far as the issues of consideration of  documents  are  concerned  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has looked at the  documents  that  were  made
    available.  Regarding the reference at paragraph 33 to a  Ms  Kirkwood,
    it is accepted this is an  error  but  I  do  not  consider  it  to  be
    material.  It adds nothing to the appeal one  way  or  the  other,  and
    finally, I endorse the approach adopted by the judge with regard to the
    bank statements in that namely the judge has listened to  the  evidence
    and was entitled to make the findings that he did.

18. What the judge has done here is to consider, as Mr Bramble  put  it  to
    me, some building blocks.  The starting block was  the  finding  of  an
    original sham marriage.   Thereafter,  the  judge  has  considered  the
    inconsistencies in the current  testimony  that  was  before  him,  and
    thirdly has noted that  the  further  evidence  failed  to  assist  the
    Appellant in the submissions that were made.

19. In all the circumstances I find that this is a judge who has  gone  and
    given full and  due  consideration  to  the  facts  and  set  out  very
    thoroughly his findings and assessment of the Appellant's  claim  based
    on human rights grounds.  The decision discloses no material  error  of
    law and for all the above reasons, the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
