
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04000/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2018                              |On 06 April 2018              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Dorah Bugosi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Finsbury Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I will refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Therefore the Secretary of State is once more the Respondent
    and Miss Bugosi is the Appellant.

 2. This is a challenge by the Respondent to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough (the judge), promulgated on 16 June  2017,  in
    which he  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 29 January 2016, refusing her human rights claim.

 3. The Appellant, a national of Uganda, arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
    2006. By virtue of various  grants  of  leave,  and  the  operation  of
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, by the time the hearing  before
    the judge took place she had clocked up ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in this country.  That being said, the application which  led
    to the Respondent's decision was predicated on a  claimed  relationship
    with a British citizen partner and her private life.   It  was  not  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.

The judge's decision

 4. It is quite apparent from paragraphs 22 to 25 of his decision that  the
    judge was decidedly unimpressed with the Appellant's  credibility.   He
    rejected  her  claim  insofar  as  the  Article  8-related  Rules  were
    concerned and concluded at paragraph 25 that, "it is difficult  not  to
    conclude that the Appellant's application and this appeal were part  of
    a ruse to keep the clock ticking in the hope that she would accrue  ten
    years' lawful residence before her Section 3C leave ran out."

 5. The judge then went on to consider Article  8  in  its  wider  context,
    having regard to section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  He notes the precarious  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    status and found  at  paragraph  29  that  there  were  no  special  or
    compelling circumstances in her case.  The  focus  of  her  claim,  the
    judge concluded, was solely the  length  of  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  At paragraph  30  it  is  noted  that  the  Presenting
    Officer did not challenge the assertion that the Appellant had  accrued
    the relevant period of lawful residence, nor did  he  assert  that  the
    long residence issue was a "new matter" within the meaning  of  section
    85 of the 2002 Act.

 6. Based upon submissions made  by  the  Appellant's  representative,  the
    judge considered the possibility that the Appellant could have met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276A1 of the Rules (paragraph 276B could  not
    be fully satisfied because the Appellant had not passed a Life  in  the
    UK test).  Having found that there was no  evidence  before  him  which
    suggested bad conduct and/or character on the  Appellant's  particular,
    and noting that she spoke fluent English and appeared to be financially
    independent, the judge ultimately  concluded  that  the  Appellant,  by
    virtue of her ten years' lawful residence in  this  country,  would  in
    effect be entitled to the grant of further leave to remain on the basis
    of paragraph 276A1.  As a consequence of this the judge found that  the
    refusal of the human rights claim and a removal in consequence  thereof
    would be disproportionate.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds note that the Appellant had never  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to  remain  using  the  appropriate  form  and  having  paid  the
    requisite fee.  At paragraph 7 of the grounds the questions of  whether
    the lawful long residence issue constituted a "new matter"  or  whether
    the judge was able to consider a public interest proviso question as  a
    primary decision maker are put to one side.  In other words,  they  are
    not specifically raised as part of the challenge.

 8. Reference is then made to the decision in MU ('statement of  additional
    grounds' - long residence -  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  442
    (IAC).  Paragraph 9 of that decision is cited and it is submitted  that
    the judge erred in failing  to  appreciate  that  only  those  who  had
    applied for indefinite leave to remain could potentially  benefit  from
    the provisions of paragraph 276A1 of the Rules.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by  Resident  Judge  Appleyard  on  28
    December 2017.

The hearing before me

10. Mr Duffy reiterated the fact that  the  Appellant  had  never  actually
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  paragraph  276B
    or for further limited leave to remain on a basis of  paragraph  276A1.
    In  addition,  and  as  a  result  of  the  failure  to  make  such  an
    application,  the  Respondent  had  not  been  able  to  exercise   her
    discretion as to any issues relating to character and/or  conduct.   Mr
    Duffy submitted that the  Appellant  could  and  should  have  made  an
    application under paragraph 276A1 during the course  of  the  appellate
    proceedings thus far.

11. Mr Karim submitted that compliance with the Rules was  highly  relevant
    to  an  assessment  under  Article  8.   The  Rules   constituted   the
    Respondent's view of where the balance lay between the public  interest
    on the one hand and the rights of individuals on the other.   The  lack
    of an application on the basis of paragraph 276A1 and  the  payment  of
    the requisite fee was essentially immaterial.  This was in part because
    the Appellant would have been prevented from making such an application
    by virtue of section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the provisions of paragraph 276A1  were  met.
    The judge was also entitled to conclude that there was no  evidence  to
    indicate any bad character and/or misconduct on the Appellant's part.

12. Mr Karim submitted that it would be wrong to require the  Appellant  to
    make an application  under  paragraph  276A1  after  this  appeal  were
    dismissed (if that were the case) because  she  would  then  become  an
    overstayer.  Her section 3C  leave  would  immediately  cease  and  any
    disregard of breach of Immigration Rules for what is now a fourteen-day
    time thereafter was simply on the basis of a grace period permitted  by
    the Rules.

13. In reply Mr Duffy submitted that the judge was not entitled to consider
    paragraph 276A1 in any way.

14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on error of law.

Decision on error of law

15.  After  careful  consideration  I  conclude  that  the  judge  has  not
    materially erred in law.

16. It was an undisputed fact that the Appellant had by  the  time  of  the
    hearing accrued ten years' lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This significant lawful residence was clearly part and  parcel  of  the
    Appellant's private life claim and as such it fell to be considered  by
    the judge when considering Article 8 in its wider context.   It  was  a
    relevant  factor  notwithstanding  the  judge's  conclusion  that   the
    Appellant could not meet Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
    Rules.  The lawful residence was clearly not a "new matter",  at  least
    it was not regarded as such by the Respondent's representative  at  the
    hearing, and the grounds do not take the point.  The  judge  was  aware
    that all the provisions of paragraph 276B could not be met  because  of
    the absence of the Life in the UK test.

17. In my view the judge was entitled to consider the particular provisions
    of paragraph 276A1, at least insofar  as  they  were  relevant  to  the
    proportionality exercise.  It is the case that the Rules represent  the
    framework set out by the Respondent as to where the public interest  in
    the need to maintain effective  immigration  control  is  appropriately
    balanced against the rights of individuals.  As with  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph  276ADE,  compliance  with  relevant  Rules  must  be  highly
    relevant to an overall assessment as to whether refusal  of  the  human
    rights claim and removal as a consequence thereof is  proportionate  or
    not.

18. The judge addressed his mind to the existence of  any  public  interest
    factors relating to the Appellant's character and/or conduct.   He  was
    entitled to conclude that no such issues  arose.   There  had  been  no
    overstaying, criminality, or other significant breaches of  immigration
    laws.  The judge was entitled to consider that his adverse  credibility
    findings did not constitute a sufficient basis for finding  that  there
    were such adverse public interest issues.  He  had  already  noted  the
    precariousness of the Appellant's status and he also addressed his mind
    to the Appellant's ability to speak English and  to  maintain  herself.
    These were of course relevant factors under section 117B.

19. The point taken by Mr Duffy as to the inappropriateness  of  the  judge
    purporting to exercise a discretion reserved to the Respondent is, with
    respect, misplaced. Whilst it would have had merit in  an  'old  style'
    appeal in which  there  might  be  an  outcome  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not otherwise in accordance  with  the  law,  this  is  no
    longer possible. Judges make their own primary judgments on  issues  of
    conduct and character in human rights appeals.

20. In my view there is force in Mr Karim's submission that  the  Appellant
    was not able to actually make  an  application  under  paragraph  276A1
    because of the effect of section 3C(5) of  the  1971  Act.   She  could
    remedy her situation by that route.  Were  the  Appellant  to  make  an
    application to the Respondent following the dismissal  of  this  appeal
    she would do so as an overstayer because the section 3C leave which she
    now enjoys would immediately come to an end.  This would place  her  in
    an invidious situation where she would be liable for detention and  for
    her immigration record to be adversely affected.

21. Taking the judge's decision as a whole, it was open  to  him  to  place
    significance  upon  the  Appellant's  lawful  long  residence  and  the
    hypothetical ability to meet all of the requirements of paragraph 276A1
    of the Rules.  He did not commit the error of purporting to  allow  the
    appeal "under the Immigration Rules", but instead  considered  relevant
    factors (which included compliance with a Rule) in the context  of  the
    job in hand, namely to assess whether a fair balance had been struck by
    the Respondent's decision.

22. I appreciate that at paragraph 29 the judge stated that  he  could  not
    see any special or compelling factors in play, but the  effect  of  his
    assessment of  the  long  residence  issue  is  that  this  did  indeed
    constitute a strong 'stand-out' factor. As a matter of substance, I  do
    not see any material contradiction here.

23. In light of the above the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
I agree with the view of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Appellant  has
only succeeded because of a change in her circumstances, namely the  accrual
of lawful residence.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

