
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04590/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2019                            |On 4 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Janoi [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Rhind, legal representative, IR Immigration Law
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica aged 18.  He applied  when  still
    a minor for entry clearance to join  his  father  in  the  UK.   On  17
    February 2017 the Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  his  application,
    considering that it had not been shown he was related  as  claimed  and
    that  in  any  event  he  had  not  shown  that  his  father  had  sole
    responsibility for him.  The appellant appealed this refusal.  In  time
    for the hearing he produced a certificate of  the  registry  of  births
    dated 20 April 2000 and a birth registration form dated 10  June  2009.
    On 5  October  2018  Judge  Lucas  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    dismissed his appeal.  The judge set out her reasons for dismissing the
    appeal at paragraphs 27-35:

         "27. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant and the standard  of
             proof is of the balance of probabilities.

         28.  The Tribunal does not accept that the  Appellant  and  sponsor
             are related  as  claimed.   The  issue  and  question  of  the
             relationship was raised quite clearly in the Refusal decision.
             The burden of proof in this respect does  not  fall  upon  the
             Respondent.  There was nothing at all to prevent the Appellant
             from  obtaining  a  DNA  Report  in  order   to   prove   that
             relationship. This is almost as commonplace when a  biological
             relationship is said not to be proved before this Tribunal.

         29.  It is accepted that there is evidence of money  transfers  and
             visits to Jamaica by the sponsor. There is  also  evidence  in
             the form of letters from witnesses who  did  not  attend  this
             Hearing, to state that the sponsor  is  the  father.  However,
             this is not convincing evidence and the issue could have  been
             disposed of simply by obtaining a DNA  Report  in  respect  of
             paternity.

         30.  The Tribunal does not accept that the details contained  on  a
             birth certificate issued long after the birth of the Appellant
             is a reliable document.

         31.  The Tribunal does find it significant  that  there  is  not  a
             single  photograph  of  the  sponsor  and  Appellant  together
             despite the - what is said - frequent trips by the sponsor to
             Jamaica.

         32.  The Tribunal does not accept that the sponsor has or had  sole
             responsibility for this Appellant in Jamaica. The sponsor left
             the Appellant in Jamaica to come to the UK in  2007  when  the
             Appellant was aged seven years. He has not attempted to  apply
             to bring him to the UK until the present application in  2016.
             His stated reasons for not so doing are not convincing and the
             Tribunal finds that the present application  was  made  simply
             because the Appellant was approaching the age of 18, which  he
             now is.

         33.  Despite the evidence from school, friends and  relatives,  the
             Tribunal does  not  accept  that  the  sponsor  has  had  sole
             responsibility for the Appellant and  Jamaica.   It  is  quite
             obvious that the Appellant's emotional and material needs were
             and continue to be looked after by  other  family  members  in
             Jamaica. The Appellant currently lives in a property owned  by
             the sponsor and his other family in Jamaica.  His mother  also
             lives  there.  It  is  not  therefore   accepted   that   sole
             responsibility for this Appellant falls at  the  feet  of  the
             sponsor in this case.

         34.  The asserted relationship is not accepted in this case and  it
             is not accepted that there is or has been sole  responsibility
             by the sponsor.

         35.  For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed."

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal assail  both  limbs  of  the  judge's
    decision.  They firstly submit that the judge  wrongly  approached  the
    evidence of paternity.  Whilst there was no  DNA  evidence,  there  was
    birth certificate documentation,  together  with  surrounding  evidence
    from relatives, a bank account manager and a football  coach  attesting
    to the fact that the appellant was the son of the sponsor.

3.   I am persuaded that this ground identifies  legal  error.   The  reason
    the ECO gave for not accepting paternity was because the appellant  had
    produced a birth certificate stating that his birth was registered on 3
    April 2014, nearly fourteen years after he was born.  However,  by  the
    time of the hearing,  the  appellant  had  produced  a  certificate  of
    registry of birth naming the sponsor as his father and  signed  by  the
    registrar  on  20  April  2000.   Thus  the  judge's  understanding  as
    expressed at paragraph 30 was clearly incorrect.  The document  in  the
    appellant's bundle is only a copy, but Ms  Jones  did  not  dispute  Ms
    Rhind's statement that originals had been produced.  Further, the judge
    seems to have considered that the evidence from relatives, friends  and
    the school was irrelevant or very peripheral to the issue of  paternity
    and only went to the issue of sole responsibility.   However,  although
    indirect evidence, it was evidence that had a  bearing  on  the  issue,
    especially because to the judge's (mistaken) understanding there was no
    birth certificate created  soon  after  the  birth.   To  merely  state
    without  explaining  why  that  this  evidence  was  "not   convincing"
    (paragraph 29), was inadequate.

4.   However, the judge's erroneous treatment of the issue of  paternity  is
    not enough for the appellant to succeed in this appeal, since the judge
    went on to find that in any event the appellant had not shown that  his
    sponsor had sole responsibility under paragraph 297 of the  Immigration
    Rules.  All hinges, therefore, on which the appellant's  second  ground
    of appeal is made out.

5.   The appellant's grounds  submit  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant had not established sole responsibility on the  part  of  the
    sponsor was against the weight of the evidence in the form of not  only
    the letters from relatives, friends and school officials, but also  the
    oral evidence of the sponsor.  It was pointed out that the ECO did  not
    conduct interviews with any or all of the  witnesses  before  making  a
    decision on the application.  The appellant's grounds also submit  that
    the judge's finding that the appellant's emotional and  material  needs
    were being met by other relatives was  simply  a  presumption,  as  the
    evidence submitted by the appellant was plainly to  the  contrary.   In
    any event, if the judge had properly applied case law principles as set
    out in TD  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  she  would  have  realised  that  sole
    responsibility for a child does not preclude the possibility  that  the
    child will be looked after day-to-day by someone other than the sponsor
    parent and the proper test was whether the sponsor parent  had  control
    and direction over the child's upbringing.

6.   I would accept that the judge does not refer to the case of  TD  or  to
    the principles it establishes.  Nor does she specifically identify that
    the key  question  was  whether  the  sponsor  had  shown  control  and
    direction over the child's upbringing.  However,  I am  not  persuaded
    that her assessment misunderstood the  requirements  of  the  Rules  or
    applied the wrong test.  It is clear first of all that the  judge  gave
    careful consideration to all the sources of evidence  relevant  to  the
    issue of sole responsibility: see paragraphs 10-21.  It is  also  clear
    that  the  judge  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  (the
    appellant's representative before the judge was also Ms  Rhind  and  Ms
    Rhind did not suggest that her own submissions failed  to  identify  TD
    principles: see paragraphs 22-26).  Third, the judge's reasons identify
    a number of  factors  pointing  strongly  against  the  sponsor  having
    control and  direction  over  the  appellant's  upbringing,  noting  at
    paragraph 31 that despite what were said to be frequent trips  paid  by
    the sponsor to Jamaica,  there  were  no  photos  of  the  sponsor  and
    appellant together (paragraph 31); that the sponsor had  not  attempted
    to call the appellant to the UK until 2016, some nine  years  after  he
    (the sponsor) had come to the UK (paragraph 32); that  the  appellant's
    emotional and material needs were being met and could  continue  to  be
    met by family members in Jamaica (paragraph 33);  and  that  he  had  a
    mother in Jamaica (paragraph 33).  Ms Rhind submits  that  the  written
    evidence from school, friends and  relatives  did  not  show  that  the
    appellant's emotional and material needs were being met, as  the  judge
    presumed, by other family members in Jamaica.  However,  having  looked
    through the body of evidence before the judge, I consider the  judge's
    assessment of its effect was within the range of reasonable  responses.
    This evidence shows that the  appellant  has  been  cared  for  by  his
    paternal grandmother for most of his life until quite recently when his
    uncle took over care of him.  The appellant himself made no mention  in
    his letter to  the  sponsor  having  control  and  direction  over  his
    upbringing;  he  simply  stated  that  the  two  "have  a   very   good
    relationship".  The sponsor's letter catalogued the  financial  support
    he provided to the appellant and states that he was known by the school
    to be the only parent involved in the appellant's life, but he did  not
    assert that he had exercised control and direction over the appellant's
    upbringing.  The letter from the appellant's mother did assert that the
    sponsor had "had all the responsibilities" for the appellant,  but  she
    did  not  explain  why  she  played  no  part  except  to  say  it  was
    "inconvenient"; the appellant's paternal grandmother, who had borne the
    main responsibility for bringing up the appellant until recently,  made
    no mention  of  the  sponsor  having  control  or  direction  over  the
    appellant's upbringing, although she did mention his financial  support
    and his visits back to Jamaica so that he  could  be  involved  in  his
    son's life.  The letter from a teacher, Ms Lettman,  did  mention  that
    the sponsor has been "the sole provider and parent mainly  involved  in
    his son's supervision", but gave no examples.

7.   The letter from the football coach only confirmed that the sponsor  has
    been very supportive of the appellant "[w]henever he  is  back  on  the
    island"; it did not refer to any control and direction  exercised  from
    the UK.  The letter from the bank employee also confirmed the sponsor's
    active role in the appellant's life to  periods  when  he  has  visited
    Jamaica.  This body of evidence, much of which is unparticularised  and
    lacking in any concrete examples fell well short of  establishing  sole
    responsibility except for the periods when the sponsor paid visits.

8.   In short, I am unable to accept that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the appellant had not shown that his sponsor  had  exercised  sole
    responsibility.  The evidence considered by the  judge  (including  the
    oral evidence) was properly seen to be insufficient  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof resting on the appellant.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that although the judge erred  in  her
    treatment of the issue of paternity, her decision was free of  material
    error since the findings made on the issue of sole responsibility  were
    within the range of reasonable responses.

10.  Accordingly I conclude that the decision of the FtT  Judge  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  Date: 28 February 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

