
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:   HU/04193/2016
      HU/04208/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 March 2018                              |On 8 May 2018                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                       MISS RUWEIDA ABDIRIZAK ABDULLE
                            MR ABDINASIR ABDULLE
                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Chelliah
For the Respondent:     Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Somali nationals, a sister and brother both born  on
    20 January 1998.  They appeal against decisions of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer made on 13 January 2016 refusing their applications  for  entry
    clearance as the children of a person present and  settled  in  the  UK
    under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The ECO noted that in 2004 their father was issued family reunion as  a
    spouse.  At that time he was using a different  name.   Interviewed  in
    connection with that application he said he did not have any  children.
    In 2006 the appellants, their claimed step-mother and siblings  applied
    for family reunion to join their claimed father  in  the  UK.   It  was
    stated that their father had changed  his  name  to  Abdirisaq  Abdulle
    Hassan.  The applications were refused in 2007.


 3. For the current application it was stated that they had been traced  in
    2015  to  a  camp  in  Somalia  and  their  father,  the  sponsor,  had
    subsequently relocated them to Uganda.  The whereabouts of their mother
    and other siblings were not known.


 4. DNA results had been submitted but the ECO was not satisfied  that  the
    samples were taken from them and their sponsor.  As such  the  ECO  was
    not satisfied that they are related to the sponsor.


 5. Even if they are, the ECO was not satisfied that their father  has  had
    sole responsibility for their upbringing (paragraph 297 (i)(e)).  There
    was no evidence in support of that claim. There was  also  no  evidence
    that they  have  been  living  in  a  camp  in  Somalia,  or  of  their
    circumstances in Uganda.  Further, no evidence had been given as to how
    their father was able to locate them in Somalia.  Moreover, there was a
    lack of evidence as to contact and of financial support.


 6. The ECO, in addition, was not satisfied  that  there  are  serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which   make   exclusion
    undesirable (paragraph 297 (i)(f)).


 7. Finally, inadequate evidence had been provided to  show  the  sponsor's
    financial circumstances.  As such the maintenance requirement  was  not
    satisfied (paragraph 297 (v)).


 8. They appealed.


    First tier hearing


 9. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 June 2017 Judge of the  First-
    Tier Greasley dismissed the appeals which were on human rights grounds.


10. His findings are at paragraph 24ff.  He found that the  appellants  are
    related to the sponsor and that accordingly "they may have  established
    a limited right to family life with their sponsor."


11. However, he was not satisfied that sole responsibility had  been  shown
    or  that  there  were  serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which would make exclusion undesirable.


12. In considering these matters he found that there was no  evidence  from
    the appellants as to their circumstances in Mogadishu  or  in  Kampala.
    Nor had the sponsor made any effort to travel with them from  Mogadishu
    to Kampala [25].


13. There was no evidence as to the previous and current  circumstances  of
    the appellants [26].


14. Further, there was no evidence confirming that they  have  lived  in  a
    camp in Somalia and that they had relocated to Uganda, nor how  he  was
    able to locate them in Somalia [27].


15. There was no documentary  evidence  supporting  the  claim  of  ongoing
    contact between the appellants and the sponsor [27].


16. The judge did not believe the sponsor's explanation as to  why  he  had
    changed his name, namely that he had disliked his original name.


17. The judge did not make specific findings in respect of  paragraphs  297
    (v). He noted that no reliance was made on Article 8 outside the Rules.


18. In concluding, the judge stated that the lack of  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances in which they are living meant he could not be  satisfied
    that they are in Somalia or Uganda [30].  Such, together with the  lack
    of evidence as to regular contact, meant that the  decision  to  refuse
    the application was not  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  end  of
    immigration control.


    Error of law hearing


19. The appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  18
    December 2017.


20. At the error  of  law  hearing  before  me  Mr  Chelliah  confined  his
    submission to the claim that the judge had dealt inadequately with sole
    responsibility. He had failed to  give  consideration  to  evidence  of
    money transfers between the  sponsor  and  the  appellants  which  gave
    support to the claim that the sponsor has had sole responsibility.


21. It was accepted that there was  no  documentary  evidence  of  contact.
    However, they had only been in contact since 2017.  The appellants were
    almost adults.  It was understandable that there would be less  contact
    than had they been younger.  The judge had not taken that into account.


22. Further, the judge had failed to take into account that the sponsor had
    been found to be a credible witness in previous appeals in  respect  of
    others of his children.


23. In reply Mr Nath submitted that the judge's  decision  was  sustainable
    for the reasons he gave.  There was little information  in  support  of
    the claim of sole responsibility.  It was speculation to  suggest  that
    other decisions in different appeals could assist in this appeal.


    Consideration


24. In considering this matter  I  do  not  find  merit  in  Mr  Chelliah's
    submissions.  In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 49 the Tribunal  said  that  "sole  responsibility"  is  a
    factual matter to be decided  upon  all  the  evidence.   The  test  is
    whether the parent  has  continuing  control  and  direction  over  the
    child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in the
    child's life.  Such evidence is likely to include financial support and
    continuing interest and affection.


25. It does not seem to me that the judge (at [30]) was correct  in  saying
    that there was no evidence that the appellants are in Kampala,  because
    the DNA records indicate that their samples were taken there.  However,
    the judge was entitled to conclude  that,  despite  there  being  ample
    opportunity to produce such,  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  in
    respect  of  their  circumstances  there,  it  being  claimed  in   the
    applications that they are alone, or of their previous history, namely,
    living in a camp for the  displaced  in  Somalia.  Nor  was  there  any
    evidence as to how the sponsor was able to locate them.


26. On the issue of financial support the judge noted the  claim  that  the
    sponsor sent  the  appellants  $200-300  every  month.   There  was  no
    documentary evidence in support of that assertion  in  the  appellants'
    bundles before the judge.  Mr Chelliah, having been given time to  make
    enquiries, said he understood that while such was so, copies  of  money
    transfers had been shown to the judge on the day of  the  hearing.   He
    did not say what period it covered. Having checked the file there is no
    indication of such nor is it referred to in the decision, nor indeed in
    the judge's record of proceedings.   In  the  circumstances  I  do  not
    accept it.  On the evidence before the judge there was no  evidence  of
    the continuing monthly financial support claimed.


27. As for contact, Mr Chelliah accepted there was no documentary  evidence
    of contact.  His argument that as they were "almost  adults"  such  was
    understandable  does  not  assist  the  appellants'   claim   of   sole
    responsibility  by  the  sponsor.   Indeed  it  indicates  a  level  of
    independence. A further difficulty is that Mr Chelliah  said  that  the
    sponsor  had  only  been  in  touch  since  2017.  The  fact  that  the
    applications were made in September 2015 thus well over a  year  before
    he was in contact is another factor  against  the  claim  that  he  had
    continuing control and direction over the appellants' upbringing.


28. I also  see  no  merit  in  the  claim  of  support  to  the  sponsor's
    credibility that he had been believed in other appeals in  relation  to
    others of his children.  The judge made no findings on that matter.   I
    find that to be immaterial.  Mr Chelliah could not help as to what,  if
    anything, was produced at the First-Tier Hearing in that  regard.   The
    other determinations apparently referred to are  not  on  file  and  Mr
    Chelliah did not have them. Reference is said to have been made by  the
    solicitor who appeared before the First tier Tribunal (not Mr Chelliah)
    to a determination promulgated  in  February  2014  which  itself  made
    reference to an even earlier determination. Again, I find it not to  be
    established that these documents were lodged. In the circumstances,  in
    the  absence  of  any  clarity  on  the  matter,  a  matter  apparently
    concerning other children in different circumstances and  at  different
    times such does not assist these appellants.


29. The judge did not deal with best  interests  of  the  children  in  his
    decision. Although mentioned in the grounds Mr Chelliah did  not  raise
    the issue of best interests in his oral submissions. In any event I did
    not find the judge's failure to deal with it to be material.   As  well
    as the lack of evidence  as  to  the  sponsor's  involvement  with  the
    appellants, I note from the DNA papers that the person  giving  consent
    to the taking of samples gives her relationship as "aunt" and gives  an
    address  in  Kampala.   It  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  any  adult
    involvement with the appellants is with her and that  it  is  in  their
    best interests that such continues.  There is no reason why the sponsor
    cannot have involvement with the appellants in adulthood as he and they
    may wish by visits and other means of contact.


30. The crux of the judge's decision is the dearth of documentary  evidence
    in support of the claim of sole responsibility.   Whilst  the  decision
    could have benefitted from being somewhat fuller in  dealing  with  all
    the issues raised by the respondent, it is legally sustainable for  the
    reasons he gave, reasons which were open to him  on  the  evidence  (or
    lack of it) before him.


Notice of Decision


The making of the decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  shows  no  material
error of law and the decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.

No anonymity order made.



Signed                                             Date 3 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

