
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04192/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                        |On 17th January 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                            mr mohammed shahjalal
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Chowdhury (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. This is an application for permission to appeal which has been  granted
    at the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Birrell on the  basis  that,  as  a
    result of a procedural irregularity, the Appellant did not  attend  his
    hearing.

 2. Looking at the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 4th  May  2018
    and promulgated on 11th June 2018, it is quite clear that the judge was
    unaware of that correspondence or the fact that the Appellant  was  not
    in the country, and that that was the reason why  he  was  not  at  the
    hearing.  The evidence in support  of  the  application  following  the
    grant of permission establishes that the Appellant had written  to  the
    Tribunal on at least one occasion in October 2017, and followed that up
    by an email in May 2018, to the point that he was out  of  the  country
    and unable to attend his hearing and  requesting  that  the  matter  be
    adjourned to a different date.  There is no copy of that correspondence
    on the court file.

 3. Ms Everett has quite properly drawn to my attention that even  had  the
    letter been before the judge it would have been open to the  Respondent
    to argue that nonetheless the hearing  should  have  proceeded  in  his
    absence.  However, given that the letter was not  before  the  judge  I
    cannot be sure that had he seen that correspondence that he would  have
    reached the same conclusion on the basis of  any  such  submission.  In
    those circumstances I am satisfied that through no fault of the judge a
    procedural irregularity has occurred.

 4.  I find the Appellant has established  that  the  decision  reveals  an
    error of law and, exercising my discretion, I set  the  decision  aside
    and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.
[pic]
Signed                              Date 08 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the following reason, none is requested, and the  appellant  could  have
done more.
[pic]
Signed                              Date 08 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

