
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04478/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2021                               |On 10 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     RGW

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1980  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Jamaica. He first entered the United Kingdom in 1993 as a minor. He was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in 1996. On 4 October 2005,  he  was
    sentenced to 15 months and  2  weeks'  imprisonment  for  a  number  of
    driving offences and assault. A deportation  order  was  signed  on  30
    August 2006 and the appellant was deported from the United  Kingdom  to
    Jamaica on 12 October 2006.

 2. In July 2015, the appellant's wife (EW) wrote to the Secretary of State
    to ask for the appellant's deportation order to be revoked. A  decision
    to refuse to revoke the order was made on 9 February 2016.  There  then
    followed a  lengthy  period  of  correspondence  (including  under  the
    Judicial Review Pre-action Protocol) between the Home  Office  and  the
    appellant's  then  United  Kingdom  solicitors  which  resulted  in   a
    supplementary decision on 9  May  2018  reaffirming  the  Secretary  of
    State' decision not to revoke the  deportation  order.  Almost  a  year
    later, in March 2019, the appellant appealed against that decision, the
    time for appealing  having  been  extended.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Turnock) in a decision promulgated on 29 January  2020,  allowed
    the appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal took place remotely via Skype
    for Business. The appellant attended from his home in Jamaica. EW  also
    attended  from  her  home  in  Hull.  The  appellant  was  not  legally
    represented. Mr McVeety, who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    helpfully informed me that the Secretary of State now accepts that  the
    appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  two
    biological children, A and Am. Consequently,  Ground  1  is  no  longer
    pursued. Mr McVeety also said that the Secretary of State accepts  that
    the judge 'made a  mistake'  at  [110]  by  finding  that  Exception  1
    (section 117C of the 2002 Act) applied; it is clear from the wording of
    the section that it applies only to individuals resident in the  United
    Kingdom. He did not seek to argue that  that  mistake  amounted  to  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

 4. Mr McVeety's submissions focussed upon the judge's assessment at  [104-
    105] that the circumstances were such that it would be unduly harsh for
    A and Am to continue to be separated from  the  appellant.  Mr  McVeety
    accepted that the judge had identified the correct legal provisions and
    jurisprudence  and  had  applied  the  correct  legal  test  of  unduly
    harshness. However, he submitted that, on the  evidence,  the  decision
    had been perverse; the judge himself  had  accepted  that,  whilst  the
    children missed their father (with whom they have internet contact  and
    whom they have visited in Jamaica), there was 'no up to  date  evidence
    of ill-effects on the children'. In the absence of  the  evidence  that
    the children were suffering  significant  problems  as  result  of  the
    separation from their father, then there was no basis for finding  that
    the status quo required judicial interference.

 5. It is indeed the case that the appellant and EW have  no  provided  any
    independent or expert evidence (e.g. from an independent social worker)
    dealing with the reaction of the children to the continuing  separation
    but,  given  that  they  are  now  not  represented,  that  is   hardly
    surprising. Mr McVeety submitted that, on the evidence of  EW  and  the
    appellant, it had not been open to the judge to conclude that  for  the
    children to know that 'the only relationship they will have with  their
    father will be essentially a remote relationship with  the  possibility
    of only an occasional visit does fall within the category 'bleak.'

 6. The circumstances in this appeal are  unusual.  The  judicial  approach
    required in the case of a family which has endeavoured  to  maintain  a
    vestige of family life having been separated for a number of  years  is
    likely to be wholly different from that concerning a  family  currently
    living together in the  United  Kingdom  and  facing  the  prospect  of
    separation and remote  contact  over  the  next  10  years.  I  am  not
    satisfied that, even on the limited evidence available  to  him,  Judge
    Turnock reached  a  decision  which  can  accurately  be  described  as
    perverse. EW moved to live in Jamaica  in  2014  but  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom in March 2015 as the couple were unable to  support  the
    family on the low wages available in Jamaica (the respondent no  longer
    argues that the family  can  enjoy  life  together  in  Jamaica  -  see
    decision at [101]). EW was pregnant with her son, giving birth  on  her
    return so the appellant has  never  seen  his  son  face  to  face.  To
    describe the situation of a child who has never met his father but  who
    can only develop a relationship with him via the internet as  bleak  is
    not, in my opinion, either unreasonable or inaccurate.  I  am  reminded
    also of the comment of Underhill LJ in the case of  ZP  (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1197 which was cited before Judge Turnock:

         I am not sure that every tribunal would have reached the conclusion
         that was reached in this case, but I am not prepared  to  say  that
         the Judge's decision was perverse. Mr  Biggs  reminded  us  of  the
         authorities which emphasise  that  proportionality  assessments  of
         this kind require a difficult exercise of judgment which can  often
         not be said to be definitely right or definitely wrong, and that an
         appellate court should not intervene simply because it  might  have
         reached a different decision: see, e.g., AH (Sudan) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2007] HL 49, [2008] 1  AC  678,  per
         Lady Hale at para. 30 (p. 691 C-F).

 7. Even if I am wrong and the judge did err in law by making too  generous
    an assessment of the current circumstances of  the  appellant  and  his
    family, I should, pursuant to the  discretion  afforded  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by section 12 (2) (a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
    Act 2007, refrain from setting aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. When  the  appellant  first  sought  the  revocation  of  the
    deportation order in July 2015, the order still had nearly a year still
    to run to its expiry on 30 August 2016. Whilst it is  disturbing  that,
    in essence, that same application is still the  subject  of  litigation
    nearly 5 years after the expiry of  the  deportation  order,  the  fact
    remains that 10 years have no elapsed since the order was  made.  If  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal or if I allow it and remake the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal, the practical effect on the
    appellant and his family remains the same. Whatever  the  outcome,  the
    appellant will now be able (indeed, if he seeks to return to the United
    Kingdom, he will  be  compelled)  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.  Judge  Turnock  noted  this  at  [112].   The   appellant's
    application to revoke the deportation order is now of academic interest
    only; as the 10 year period has expired, he has, as the court expressed
    it in ZP (India) at [25], 'served' his time and  can  apply  for  entry
    clearance. The  only  material  difference  to  the  prospects  of  any
    application he may now make  is  that  I  have  upheld  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment that the continued separation  of  the  appellant
    from his children is unduly harsh; that is a matter which the appellant
    may wish to bring to the attention of the Entry Clearance  Officer  who
    considers any future application to readmit him the United Kingdom.

 8. For the reasons, I have given above, the Secretary of State's appeal is
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 3 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


















