
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/04834/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London          |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 21 September 2017                  |          On 25 September 2017       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between


                                REKHA SHARMA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr R Singer, of counsel, instructed by Woodgrange
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:      Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                             DECISION AND ORDER


 1. We are grateful to both representatives for their helpful submissions.

 2. In this appeal the first question considered by the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") was whether the Appellant's case fell  within  the  compass  of
    Policy GEN 1.2(4).  This states in summary that a  "partner"  is  inter
    alia a person who has been living together  with  the  applicant  in  a
    relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for at  least  two
    years prior to the date of application.  This provision  of  the  Rules
    throws up a series of distinct and separate questions.   The  first  is
    whether the two people concerned had been living together.  The  second
    is: if so, have they been living together in a relationship akin  to  a
    marriage or a civil partnership.  If yes, the third question is whether
    they have been so doing for at least two years prior  to  the  date  of
    application.

 3. The first reservation we have about the decision of  the  FtT  is  that
    while a case involving this provision of the Rules cries  out  for  the
    structured approach involved in formulating these questions in this way
    the judge failed to do so. Though not fatal,  this  is  an  unpromising
    beginning.

 4. We analyse paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision - the key passages  -  in
    the following way.  The judge appears to have found  that  the  Sponsor
    made visits to the Appellant in her home country of India.   The  judge
    also made findings about the parties taking holidays together.  What is
    strikingly absent from these key passages of  the  determination  is  a
    failure to examine the meaning of the words "living together".  They do
    not feature anywhere in the critical parts of the determination. In our
    judgement it was incumbent upon the judge  to  conduct  a  careful  and
    penetrating analysis  of  the  nature,  quality  and  duration  of  the
    individual periods during which the parties were, on whatever  showing,
    living their lives together.  These two words we consider ought  to  be
    given their ordinary and natural meaning. The judge failed to do so.

 5.  It is apparent that the judge was distracted by  the  characterisation
    of some of these periods as holidays.  While that may be  traceable  to
    the Appellant's own  evidence,  as  recorded  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    decision, it was not enough for the judge to complete the analysis - ie
    to stop - at the point of characterisation of the periods  in  question
    as holidays.  The kind of analysis which we consider that was necessary
    was simply not carried out.  We find a clear error of law as a  result.
    Another is apparent in the judge's adoption of the word "cohabitation".
     Cohabitation is nowhere to be found in paragraph 1.24  of  Policy  GEN
    1.2.  This simply reinforces the diagnosis that there was  an  outright
    failure to pose the question of whether they had been living  together.



 6. The same approach applies to the judge's consideration of  whether  the
    relationship had been akin to a marriage  or  civil  partnership.   The
    kind of detailed and penetrating analysis of this relationship required
    in order to provide a sustainable answer to that question is nowhere to
    be found in the decision of the FtT.

 7. As a result of these errors the judge did not reach the stage of posing
    the final question in the equation namely that of "at least  two  years
    prior to the date of application".  Rather this was conflated with  the
    nature of the relationship which the judge viewed through the prism  of
    cohabitation rather than living together -  not  necessarily  identical
    concepts - in the final sentence of paragraph 9 of the decision.

 8. As a result we do not know what  the  judge's  approach  to  the  final
    question was.  What is noteworthy about paragraph 1.24  of  Policy  GEN
    1.2 is that two of  the  favoured  words  of  the  Home  Office  namely
    "continuously" and "consecutively" are  nowhere  to  be  found  in  the
    formulation.  It is not necessary for us to  determine  this  issue  at
    this stage.  It suffices rather to observe that  it  is  arguable  that
    aggregation of discrete periods -   in  the  manner  of  in  which  the
    Appellant attempted to present his case to the  FtT  -  is  potentially
    compatible with the rule.  We go no further.  That will be one  of  the
    issues to be determined at the next stage of this appeal. As  a  result
    ground 1 of the appeal succeeds in substance.

 9. Ground 2 also succeeds in our judgement.  On the sole  basis  that  the
    couple "do not live together" (in the judge's  language)  a  conclusion
    was made that they did not have  family  life  within  the  compass  of
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  This was a quite  inadequate
    assessment in law Furthermore  there  was  no  attempt  once  again  to
    examine the nature and quality and  duration  of  the  various  periods
    during which the parties undoubtedly did live together. If and  insofar
    as the judge was purporting to say that they do/did not  live  together
    permanently or continuously that would not be  an  adequate  assessment
    for the purposes of Article 8 of the Convention.

10.  The  immediately  following  sentence  in  the  decision  is  strongly
    suggestive of further misdirection.  In accepting that the relationship
    was genuine and subsisting the judge was adopting a  phrase  which  has
    consistently belonged to the realm of family life under  Article  8  of
    the Convention rather than private life.   It  follows  that  the  next
    succeeding statement namely "I consider that the relationship  is  part
    of their private life" is confusing.  The judge's treatment of  Article
    8 of the Convention was plainly erroneous in law and the second  ground
    of appeal therefore succeeds in consequence.

11. It is unnecessary for us to deal with paragraph 3, that  is  the  third
    ground of appeal, in these circumstances.

12. While our initial inclination is to retain the case in the forum of the
    Upper Tribunal the main reservation about this is the absence of  clear
    findings of fact on key issues in the judgment. If  one  confines  this
    firstly to the  issues  that  were  addressed,  clear  and  unequivocal
    findings are difficult to  find  in  the  decision  and,  secondly,  it
    follows logically from our  error  of  law  ruling  that  a  series  of
    important questions requiring specific findings was not  posed  by  the
    FtT with the result that those findings have not been made. Our initial
    inclination to retain the case in  this  forum  is  counterbalanced  by
    these observations.

Order

13. The decision of the FtT is set aside as it is in error of  law  on  the
    grounds  and  for  the  reasons  elaborated.   We  have  given  careful
    consideration  to  the  competition  between  remittal  and  retention.
    Remittal is indicated for two basic reasons.

14. Firstly,  there  is  a  failure  by  the  FtT  to  make  necessary  and
    appropriate  findings  on  the  issues  which  were  addressed  in  the
    decision.

15. Secondly, a series of important issues was not addressed by  reason  of
    the failure of the Tribunal to pose the correct questions in law.

16. For this combination of reasons remittal is appropriate.  The case will
    be reheard by a differently constituted panel of the FtT.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 21 September 2017
