
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04784/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                          |On 17th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 Shofik Miah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - nede
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  21st  January
    1966.  He applied to the British  High  Commission  in  Bangladesh  for
    entry clearance under Appendix  FM  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as the partner of  the  Sponsor,  [AB].   That
    application was refused for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    dated 28th July 2015 which decision was subsequently  confirmed  by  an
    Entry Clearance Manager.  The Appellant appealed, and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Owens (the Judge) sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 3rd April 2017.  He decided to allow the appeal for the
    reasons given in his Decision promulgated  on  11th  April  2017.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  19th  October
    2017 such  permission  was  granted  restricted  to  Ground  2  of  the
    application for leave.

 2. The Judge found that the Appellant had a  family  life  with  his  wife
    [AB], a British citizen whom he married on 24th March 2008, and his two
    children [AnB] born on [ ] 2005 and  [KM]  born  on  [  ]  2008.   Both
    children are British citizens.  The Judge also found that the  decision
    of the Respondent amounted to an interference with  that  family  life,
    but dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the
    Appellant was unable to satisfy the financial requirements of  Appendix
    FM.  The Judge then considered the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights
    outside the Immigration Rules.  He decided that the best  interests  of
    the children outweighed the public  interest  and  therefore  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not proportionate.   The  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal on that basis.

 3. At the hearing, Mr Kotas submitted that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    coming  to  this  conclusion.   The  Judge  failed  to  carry  out  the
    proportionality  exercise  properly.   He  failed  to  give  sufficient
    consideration  to  the  possibility  of  family  life   continuing   in
    Bangladesh.  Further, the Judge  did  not  say  why  it  would  not  be
    proportionate for the Appellant to make a fresh  application  now  that
    the Appellant was able to meet the financial requirements  of  Appendix
    FM.  The decision in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    was that this was a preferable course of  action.   The  Judge  further
    erred by taking into account the  fact  that  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was met by the  Appellant.
    The Judge failed to apply the emphasis set out at paragraph  15  of  SM
    and Others (Somalia) v Entry Clearance  Officer  (Addis  Ababa)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 223.

 4. In response, Mr Hasan argued that there was no such error of law in the
    decision of the Judge.  The Judge  produced  a  well-reasoned  judgment
    which gave clear reasons for his decision, for example at paragraph  31
    of the Decision.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  best
    interests of the two children outweighed all other considerations.  The
    Judge  considered  the  prospect  of  the  family  living  together  in
    Bangladesh at paragraph 50 of the Decision.

 5. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The issue before me is whether the  Judge  erred  in
    law in allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In a thorough and comprehensive Decision, the Judge
    followed the format given in Razgar (R on the application  of)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 and demonstrated  that  he  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise necessary for any consideration of  proportionality.   On  the
    evidence before him, it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  best
    interest of the children, although not a  trump  card,  outweighed  the
    public interest notwithstanding the  Appellant's  immigration  history.
    The Judge found that it was not reasonable for the  Appellant's  family
    life to take place in Bangladesh.  That again was a  decision  open  to
    the Judge and which he satisfactorily explained.  It is true  that  the
    Judge did not specifically  consider  the  prospect  of  the  Appellant
    applying for entry clearance again, but the evidence before  the  Judge
    was that at the date of the hearing before him the Appellant was  still
    incapable of meeting the financial requirements of Appendix FM.  It  is
    true that the Judge wrongly referred to Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act, but I find this not to be a material error of  law  as  the  Judge
    properly took the best interest of the children into account  elsewhere
    in the Decision.

 7. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date  15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


