
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04588/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24 April 2018                    |On: 26 April 2018                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         muhammad waqas amin bhatti
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, instructed by AWS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 26 February  1983.  He
      entered the UK on 11 August 2012 with leave  to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
      general student migrant. He was refused further  leave  to  remain  on
      that basis and, subsequently, on the  basis  of  an  application  made
      outside the immigration rules.

   2. On 3 November 2015 the appellant made a  human  rights  claim  on  the
      basis of  his  relationship  with  his  partner,  a  British  national
      previously of Thai nationality.  His  application  was  refused  on  3
      February 2016 and he appealed against that decision.

   3. The appellant's appeal was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Burns on 16 August 2017 and was dismissed.

   4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on three grounds. The first  ground  was  that  the  judge  had  acted
      outside her jurisdiction by considering a protection  claim  that  had
      not been made by the appellant. The second ground was that  the  judge
      had made findings on the sponsor's financial position  without  giving
      her an opportunity to explain her financial circumstances.  The  third
      ground was that the judge had failed, when considering the question of
      insurmountable obstacles, to take account of the difficulties faced by
      the sponsor in relocating to Pakistan by reason of her religion.


   5. In granting permission on 2 March 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb
      also referred to an arguable tension between the  judge's  finding  at
      [44]  that  the  sponsor's  business  would  not  meet  the  financial
      requirements of the immigration rules and that at [51] and  [53]  that
      the appellant could apply for entry clearance.


   6. At the hearing Mr Tarlow conceded that the judge had erred in law,  in
      particular with respect to the point made in the grant of  permission.
      He asked that the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr
      Sharma also asked that the matter be remitted  as  there  was  further
      evidence to be submitted and considered, and further  findings  to  be
      made, on the matter of the inter-faith marriage.


   7. In light  of  Mr  Tarlow's  concession  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision and agreed to remit the matter  for  consideration
      afresh.

DECISION


   8. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Burns.


   Anonymity


   The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I see no need  for  such
   an order and I therefore discharge the order, pursuant to Rule 14 of  the
   Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269).

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  24 April 2018
