
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04709/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th January 2019                          |On 6 February 2019            |
|Typed, corrected and sent to Promulgation     |                              |
|On 31st January 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  ALBAN [C]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brookes of Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     RESONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, who was born  on  24th  August
    2000 and who is now, therefore, 18 years of age.  He  made  application
    on 26th November 2016 for leave to enter the United Kingdom to join his
    mother [AK], the sponsor, a British citizen and  her  husband  [NC],  a
    national of Zimbabwe  with  limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The application was refused on 13th February  2017,  reviewed
    on 7th November 2017 and the decision to refuse was maintained.

2.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard at Birmingham on 6th December,2017 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Row.  It is apparent from the determination that the judge  heard  oral
    evidence from both the sponsor and her husband.  Whilst the judge  sets
    out parts of the evidence he heard, it is clear to me  having  examined
    the Record of Proceedings that he has not set  out  the  whole  of  it.
    Instead, it has been discussed by the judge  in  the  determination  in
    parts, but no clear findings of fact have been made on all of it.

3.   The judge concluded that there  were  no  compelling  family  or  other
    reasons that would make it undesirable to  exclude  the  appellant  and
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 297(f) of
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.   He  went
    on to consider Article 8, but found that there was no Article 8  family
    life between the sponsor, her husband and the appellant  and  that  the
    appellant's family life has been spent  in  Zimbabwe,  with  those  who
    cared for him since he was a baby.  That must be wrong  because,  there
    is always family life between a child and parent even if  they  do  not
    live together.

4.   The appellant has challenged the determination on the basis that  there
    are no  clear  findings  on  the  evidence  heard  by  the  judge.   In
    addressing me Mr Brookes was very careful not to give evidence himself,
    but it is clear to me having looked at the Record of  Proceedings  that
    there were aspects of the appellant's day-to-day life dealt with in the
    evidence, but not referred to anywhere in the determination.  Mrs Aboni
    accepted that she had not seen the Record of Proceedings, but felt that
    the determination was satisfactory.  I have concluded that  the  effect
    of failing to make clear  findings  on  the  evidence  means  that  the
    appellant has been denied a fair hearing.

5.   When oral evidence is given at least  a  brief  summary  of  it  should
    always be recorded in the determination. It is insufficient  to  simply
    say that it is recorded in the record of  proceedings,  because  unless
    they appeal, the parties will  not  know  what  is  in  the  record  of
    proceedings.  It is not possible, when reviewing  a  determination,  to
    know whether full or adequate findings have been made  without  knowing
    what oral evidence a judge has heard, and without a judge recording the
    evidence clearly and then going on to make clear findings,  one  cannot
    tell whether those findings are properly reasoned.

6.   I set aside the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Row  and
    remit the appeal for hearing afresh by a judge other than Judge Row.


Richard Chalkley
An Upper Tribunal Judge                                   5 February 2019
