

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04195/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision&Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 31 May 2017                        |on 2 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 O G ASHAYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr G Robertson, Advocate, instructed by First Law,
Solicitors, Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain
    in the UK based on family and private life for reasons explained  in  a
    decision dated 30 July 2015.

 2. FtT  Judge  Devittie  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  for  reasons
    explained in a determination promulgated on 26 September 2016.

 3. Deputy UT Judge Chapman granted permission to appeal on 26 April  2017,
    in a decision which sufficiently summarises the grounds of appeal:

      The grounds assert the  judge  erred  (1)  in  treating  the  previous
      decision by  FtT  Judge  Reid  as  the  starting  point,  rather  than
      objectively deciding the appeal on the basis of evidence  before  him;
      (2) in considering whether there would be insurmountable obstacles  to
      the appellant's wife relocating to Nigeria, failing  to  consider  her
      medical condition and failing  to  acknowledge  that  the  appellant's
      presence in the UK would also be necessary for IVF treatment;  (3)  in
      failing to take account of the change in the appellant's circumstances
      since determination of his previous appeal; (4) in failing  to  engage
      with the proportionality exercise and determine the article 8  appeal;
      and (5) in failing to consider the  cultural  barriers  and  practical
      possibilities of relocation with respect to the appellant's wife.

      While I consider that the judge was correct  to  apply  Devaseelan  in
      that the decision of FtT Judge Reid was  the  starting  point,  it  is
      arguable that the judge erred ... for reasons set out in  grounds  (2)
      to (5).

 4. Under cover of a letter dated 23rd May 2017 the appellant's  solicitors
    provided a supplementary appeal bundle together with an application for
    permission to produce further evidence. This comprises a  letter  dated
    22nd May 2017 from a private clinic confirming that the  appellant  and
    his  wife  are  currently  receiving  IVF   treatment.   Mr   Robertson
    acknowledged that this would be relevant only if error of law  were  to
    be shown.

 5. Mr Robertson submitted along the following lines.  The  judge  attached
    insufficient weight to the evidence for the appellant and his  partner,
    and the consequences upon them  of  the  adverse  decision.  The  judge
    "ticked  the  boxes"  but  did  not  meaningfully  engaged  with  their
    evidence.  On  a  properly  objective   judicial   view,   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being carried  on  outside  the
    UK. The judge acknowledged the relevant factors,  but  only  nominally.
    The appellant and his wife had not been found to meet the  criteria  to
    be placed on the waiting list for IVF treatment, as at the date of last
    hearing. At the time, his wife  had  been  advised  to  follow  certain
    protocols and was at least  in  the  "potential  pool"  for  treatment.
    Subsequently, upon advice, they had  obtained  private  treatment.  The
    letter from the clinic demonstrated that both parties  required  to  be
    available at short notice, which would not be practical  if  they  were
    living abroad or in different countries. It ought  to  be  factored  in
    that the appellant and  his  partner  are  married.  His  wife  owns  a
    property here, was brought up here and has her family here. Any  Indian
    roots are historical and of a holiday visit nature. The  appellant  did
    overstay his visa but that matters is also now in the past. His parents
    are deceased, his brothers are in the  UK,  and  he  has  only  distant
    relatives and ties in Nigeria. His wife has  no  familiarity  with  the
    culture there. Her parents are not in good  health,  and  she  provides
    them with an element of care. She  is  their  only  child.  Giving  the
    evidence its full weight, insurmountable  obstacles  should  have  been
    found. The case concerned a young couple seeking to establish a  family
    with IVF the only route available to them. It was highly  problematical
    whether they would be able  to  secure  such  treatment  in  any  other
    environment where they might live.

 6. Mrs O'Brien responded as follows. The question was  whether  there  was
    error of law based on the facts  and  evidence  before  the  first-tier
    tribunal, not on any subsequent matters. The  weight  to  be  given  to
    various  factors  was  essentially  for  the  judge.  The  grounds  and
    submissions amounted only to disagreement. The judge had not failed  to
    have regard to the "medical condition" of  the  appellant's  wife.  All
    that was shown at the stage  of  the  previous  hearing  was  that  she
    consulted her GP regarding infertility. The letter  from  her  GP  said
    that apparent infertility might be resolved by  natural  means  (weight
    reduction) and might not require IVF. She was not in need of or in line
    for IVF treatment from the NHS at the date of last hearing; that was at
    best an aspiration. Even now, it appeared that she was not eligible for
    treatment from the NHS. In any event, a wish to  secure  IVF  treatment
    was not capable of amounting to an insurmountable  obstacle.  Nor  were
    any other of the features pointed  to  by  the  appellant.  These  were
    simply the ordinary consequences of establishing family life where  one
    party has only precarious status. The judge had not found it  necessary
    to conduct a separate analysis in terms of article 8 outside the rules.
     That was not an error.  In any event, applying the law to  the  facts,
    there could only sensibly have been one outcome. Even if the case  were
    to be reassessed on the evidence now available, the outcome could  only
    be the same.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. The appellant's case was advanced as strongly as it properly  could  be
    on the evidence in the FtT, and again in the UT; but no  error  of  law
    has been shown.

 9. The discussion in the determination leaves no relevant  matter  out  of
    consideration.  The FtT's conclusion was plainly well within its scope.

10. For readily understandable reasons the outcome is disappointing to  the
    appellant, his wife, and other family members, but it is  difficult  to
    see that any  judge  might  sensibly  have  found  that  the  unwelcome
    consequences of the respondent's decision reached the  level  of  "very
    significant difficulties ... which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship".

11. There was no feature of the case which had not already been  considered
    in terms of the rules, or by which the appeal might sensibly have  been
    allowed outside the rules.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            31 May 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




