
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04457/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 April 2018                         |   On 18 April 2018                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                     Yolanda Del Pilar Perenguez Bustos
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Tait (Tait's Immigration Services)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ecuador, born on 2 November  1975,  appeals
    the determination of a First-tier Judge following a hearing on  25  May
    2017.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country in January 2000 using  a  Spanish
    passport in someone else's name.  She had a son, J, on  6  March  2007.
    On 29 October 2013 she made an application for leave  to  remain  using
    the name on the Spanish passport.  This application was refused  on  20
    December  2013  with  no   right   of   appeal.    She   made   further
    representations in her correct name on July 2015.  The decision  giving
    rise to this appeal was the refusal by the Secretary  of  State  on  31
    July 2015 to refuse these further representations.

3.   The judge found there were no exceptional circumstances preventing  the
    appellant's reintegration into Ecuador.  She spoke Spanish and  limited
    English.  She had a son in Ecuador and had  some  easily  transferrable
    skills developed in the UK.  Since the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    the appellant had had a daughter born in October 2016 who was a British
    citizen at birth.  She had two other daughters who had left Ecuador and
    had joined the appellant in the UK and they in turn had  children  born
    in this country.

4.   The judge found as follows in relation to the claim under the Rules:

         "22. I find that it would be reasonable to expect J and the  infant
             daughter to relocate to Ecuador. In coming to that  conclusion
             I note that:


             a.   My point of departure is that the best interests of  both
                  children  lie  in  remaining  with   their   mother,   the
                  appellant;


             b.   The father of J is not involved in his upbringing and his
                  parental focus is the appellant;


             c.   The appellant is not in a relationship with the father of
                  the infant daughter and his role in her upbringing appears
                  marginal: there was no evidence from or about him at  all;




             d.   The infant daughter is focussed on her mother and is  too
                  small to have formed relationships outside her family;


             e.   J speaks Spanish and is young enough to adapt  to  a  new
                  education system and make new friends; there is absolutely
                  no evidence before me in the form of social  work  reports
                  that tell me about him or where  his  best  interests  may
                  lie, other than by remaining with his mother; there is one
                  brief school report, from May 2015, which says that  J  is
                  working  two  years  below  age  expectations,   with   an
                  attendance rate below 90%; there is nothing in that report
                  to  suggest  removing  him  to  another  school  would  be
                  disruptive to his development;


             f.   The family unit is the appellant, J and  now  the  infant
                  daughter; the  claim  that  the  family  unit  extends  to
                  include the two older daughters and their children was not
                  put  to  the  Home  Secretary  and  appears   to   be   an
                  afterthought for this appeal; there is  limited  evidence,
                  in the form of unsigned statements  from  the  two  oldest
                  daughters, of their relationship with J, which consists of
                  looking after him as a  small  child  and  seeing  him  at
                  birthdays  and  Christmas;  there  is   nothing   in   the
                  statements or other  evidence,  such  as  photographs,  to
                  suggest that the bonds are anything more than  the  normal
                  familial ties of affection;".

5.   In relation to the appellant's Article  8  claim,  having  referred  to
    relevant authority, the judge found as follows:

         "26. I find that the interference with the  appellant's  article  8
             rights- and those of  her  family-  is  proportionate  to  the
             legitimate aim to be achieved. In coming  to  that  finding  I
             take into account that:


             a.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  using  a  false
                  instrument  in  2000  and  maintained  a  false  identity,
                  including in an application for leave  to  remain  on  the
                  basis of her  family  and  private  life  in  2013;  these
                  actions represent offences and  are  serious  breaches  of
                  immigration control;


             b.   The appellant has  remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
                  little  weight  can  be  afforded  to  her  private  life;
                  notwithstanding, there is  next  to  no  evidence  of  the
                  appellant's  integration  into  the  UK  in  the  form  of
                  relationships outside her  family;  participation  in  the
                  life of the country;


             c.   In 17 years, the appellant has not learned enough English
                  to speak more than rudimentary English, thereby decreasing
                  her chances of becoming economically independent and  less
                  of a burden on taxpayers;


             d.   There is no evidence that the appellant  has  contributed
                  to the public finances through the payment of  income  tax
                  or National Insurance Contributions; rather, she has  been
                  a burden to the taxpayer through the birth of two children
                  on the NHS and the education  of  three  children  in  the
                  state system; indeed, it appears the appellant  has  given
                  no thought to those costs;


             e.   For  the  reasons  I  have  outlined  above,  it  is  not
                  unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  relocate   to
                  Ecuador;


             f.   The family unit of the appellant and the two children who
                  live with her will be removed as a whole; the relationship
                  between that unit and the two eldest daughters  and  their
                  children does not extend beyond the normal  familial  ties
                  of affection;


         27.   In  an  allegation  as  serious  of  a  breach  of  the  UK's
             obligations under the  ECHR  I  would  expect  to  see  cogent
             evidence of the effect on the appellant and the  two  children
             and its absence in this matter is  fatal  to  the  appellant's
             case."

6.   Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds  and
    under the Immigration Rules.

7.   There was an application for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted on 16 February  2018  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  It was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to take into account the entitlement of the appellant's son  to
    be registered as a British citizen when assessing the Article 8  claim.



8.   On 6 April 2018 further evidence  was  lodged  confirming  that  J  had
    become a British citizen by registration on  21  March  2018.   Further
    material was submitted in  relation  to  the  first  named  appellant's
    daughter  who  was  born  a  British  citizen  and  had  a  forthcoming
    appointment to register the birth on 11 May 2018.  Evidence was  lodged
    concerning the settled status of the father of the appellant's  British
    daughters.  Mr Kotas had a copy of the material and took  no  exception
    to the lodging thereof.  An explanation was provided for the  delay  in
    providing the material.

9.   Mr Tait referred to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  and  Zambrano  [2011]
    INLR 481 CJEU.  The Tribunal had erred in failing to carry out a proper
    balancing exercise in the light of Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.
    The best interests of the children had not been considered in isolation
    from the appellant's immigration  history.   The  appellant's  children
    were British citizens with the right of abode and their best  interests
    outweighed the public interest.

10.  Mr Kotas submitted that as at the date of the decision on 31 July  2015
    only the  elder  son  was  in  the  picture  but  matters  had  changed
    significantly at the time of the appeal when the daughter was a British
    citizen and the son had attained the age of 10 years.

11.  He acknowledged that the judge had  failed  to  consider  properly  the
    best interests appellant's children.   He  referred  to  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  As he put it powerful reasons were required why a
    child who had spent seven years in the  UK  should  be  removed -  see
    paragraph 46 of MA (Pakistan).  The Court of Appeal had  also  referred
    to the guidance and  Mr  Kotas  referred  me  to  the  decision  in  SF
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).

12.  In that case the Presenting Officer had drawn the Tribunal's  attention
    to the guidance document  concerning  family  migration  on  the  topic
    "would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK?"  The policy was the applicable one in this case and a  British
    citizen child should not be forced to leave the UK.  Mr Kotas  accepted
    that the judge had not grappled with the point and  that  there  was  a
    material error of  law  and  that  further  he  was  in  difficulty  in
    resisting the appeal.

13.  Understandably Mr Tait did not seek  to  reply  in  the  light  of  the
    stance taken by Mr Kotas.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   It  is
    accepted by Mr Kotas that the decision is materially flawed in law  and
    that he was in difficulty resisting the appeal.   As  the  Tribunal  is
    able to consider the fresh evidence given the concession that the judge
    materially erred in law  it  is  apparent  that  the  position  of  the
    principal appellant and her family has strengthened given  the  changes
    that have taken place since the First-tier Tribunal were seized of  the
    matter, in particular in relation to J who is now a British citizen.

15.  Mr Kotas did not seek to distinguish the appellant's  circumstances  on
    the grounds of her reliance on a false instrument and in  my  view  was
    right not to do so.  I accordingly deal with the  case  as  invited  by
    application of the decision of SF and as in that decision I  set  aside
    the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appeals.  The period of leave to be granted is a matter to
    be determined by the Secretary of State.

16.  The appeals of the appellants are allowed.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity award and I make none.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award.  As the result in  this  appeal  has
been influenced by the subsequent lodging of material  I  am  not  satisfied
that a fee award would be appropriate.



Signed                                  Date: 17 April 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
