
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04172/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                mahbub hasan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Z. Malik, Counsel, instructed by Lawmatic Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  His  date  of  birth  is  1
      January 1988.

   2. On 10 November 2016 the Appellant made an application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain on the  basis  of  ten  years  long  residency.   This
      application was refused by the Secretary of State on 17 January  2017.
      The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg in a  decision  promulgated
      on 10 October 2019 following a hearing at  Taylor  House  on  27  June
      2019.  The  Appellant  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Finch on 9 December 2019.  Permission  was  granted  on
      all grounds.

   3. The matter came before me in order to determine whether the judge made
      an error of law.

The Appellant's Immigration History and the Respondent's Decision

   4. The Appellant was granted leave to enter as a student when he  entered
      the UK on 7 October 2006.   He was  subsequently  granted  periods  of
      leave until 17 January 2014.  He made an application for further leave
      to remain on 10 January 2014 and this was refused on 27 February 2014.
       The Appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 28 October 2014.   On
      17 October 2014 he made an application  for  an  EEA  residence  card.
      This was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  2  March  2015.   The
      Appellant's appeal against this decision was dismissed  by  FtT  Judge
      Maxwell on 22 June 2016. There  was  no  application  to  appeal.  The
      Appellant made an application for ILR on 10 November 2016.   This  was
      refused on 17 January 2017.  FtT  Judge  Scott  dismissed  his  appeal
      against this decision.  The decision of  FtT  was  set  aside  by  UTJ
      Saini. The matter was remitted to the FtT. It came  before  FtT  Judge
      Beg.

   5. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the Appellant
      has not had at least ten years' continuance lawful  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom.  The Respondent relied on the reasons for the decision
      on 2 March 2015 to refuse to grant the Appellant an EEA residence. The
      decision maker took the view  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  on  13
      October  2014  to  Diana-Elisabeta  Postolache  was  a   marriage   of
      convenience and that the relationship was not genuine.   The  decision
      was taken following an interview with the Appellant and Ms  Postolache
      which took place on  30  January  2015.   As  a  result  of  this  the
      Respondent decided that the Appellant did not have what would  qualify
      for leave under the long residence rules.    He  did  not  have  valid
      leave from 17 January 2014.  Thus the application  was  refused  under
      paragraph  276D  with  reference  to  paragraph  276B(i)(a)   of   the
      Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

   6. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by Judge  Maxwell  in  2016.  The
      appeal was determined in the absence of the Appellant.  He found  that
      the Respondent had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  that  the
      marriage was one  of  convenience;  however,  the  Appellant  had  not
      established that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights. The  appeal
      was  dismissed  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2016.

   7. The Appellant gave evidence before Judge  Beg.    The  judge  directed
      herself in relation to Devaseelan [2010] UKAIT 00702 with reference to
      Judge Maxwell's decision. She said that  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge
      Maxwell was the starting point.  She noted at paragraph  11  of  Judge
      Maxwell's decision he had stated in respect of the marriage  interview
      that none of the questions was so distinctive from  one  another  that
      looking at them individually or in the round they do not come anywhere
      near discharging  the  burden  of  proof  upon  the  Respondent.   The
      Appellant and the Sponsor did not  attend  the  hearing  before  Judge
      Maxwell.  Judge Beg said that Judge Maxwell did  not  make  clear  and
      specific findings with regard to  whether  the  marriage  between  the
      Appellant and the Sponsor was a marriage of convenience.   She  quoted
      the following from Judge Maxwell's decision;

         "I find no  evidence  to  prove  that  the  Appellant's  spouse  is
         exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom  and  accordingly  I
         find that the Appellant has failed to prove any  entitlement  to  a
         residence card as he has failed to prove any right of residence  by
         way of his relationship to his spouse".

   8. Before Judge Beg the Appellant produced evidence in order  to  explain
      why he was unable to attend the hearing before Judge  Maxwell.   Judge
      Beg made the following findings about this:

         "18. I find that the medical evidence does not make  it  clear  why
             the appellant would not have been able to attend a hearing  on
             15 June 2015 when he had already been given pain  relief  from
             10 June 2016 and again on 14 June 2016.  Clearly  on  14  June
             2016, he was able to travel to Cromwell Road, SW5  to  see  Dr
             Hasan.  I do not find that the medical evidence as  it  stands
             is cogent evidence that the appellant was unfit to attend  the
             hearing before Judge Maxwell on 15 June 2015."

   9. In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  the  judge  made  the
      following findings:-

         "20. I find that the  appellant  has  been  able  to  persuade  the
             sponsor to give a witness statement which appears at page 6 of
             the appellant's bundle dated 13 June 2019.  I do not  find  it
             credible that if she was prepared to give a witness  statement
             as recently as 13 June 2019, that  she  would  not  have  been
             prepared to come to the Tribunal hearing to  provide  evidence
             if her marriage to the appellant had been a genuine  marriage.
             I attach very limited weight to the witness statement.  I find
             that Ms Postolache, a Romanian national, intentionally  failed
             to attend the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  and  subject
             herself to cross-examination.

         21.  I take into account the marriage interview which took place on
             30  January  2019.   I  find  that  there  were  a  number  of
             discrepancies between the answers given by the  appellant  and
             the  answers  given  by  the  sponsor.   At  question  47  the
             appellant said that the sponsor did  not  have  an  engagement
             ring.  However the sponsor in her interview at  questions  279
             and 280 said that the appellant gave her engagement  ring  and
             that she went with him to buy it.   In  further  discrepancies
             the appellant said at question 143 that the appellant does not
             wish to drive but that she obtained a provisional  licence  as
             proof of address.  At question 143 the appellant said that the
             sponsor does not wish to  drive  and  obtained  a  provisional
             licence as proof of address.  The sponsor on  the  other  hand
             said that she does with to drive at question 455.

         22.  In relation to employment, the sponsor said that she  has  not
             worked since she entered the United Kingdom and has  not  been
             exercising treaty rights.  At question 384 she said  that  she
             came to the United Kingdom with �1000.  The appellant  between
             questions 351 and 355 said that  she  hopes  to  work  in  the
             Cooperative.  The sponsor said that she had found  a  job  and
             will be starting it at the end  of  February.   The  appellant
             said that she had found  a  job  and  was  starting  it  on  5
             February.    In respect of the relationship the appellant said
             that the sponsor worked in a clothes shop when  he  first  met
             her.  At question  29  he  said  the  clothes  shop  was  like
             Primark.  The sponsor said that she worked in  an  off-licence
             when she met the appellant.

         23.  The parties were also asked about their wedding.  The  sponsor
             said at question 302 that  she  married  on  a  Tuesday.   The
             appellant said at question 55 that  they  married  on  Monday.
             The sponsor said that she and the sponsor's  cousin  travelled
             with the applicant in a cab to  the  wedding.   The  appellant
             said that he,  the  sponsor  and  the  sponsor's  cousin  Kazi
             travelled in a  cab  to  the  wedding.   At  question  56  the
             appellant stated that his friend Kazi  attended  the  wedding.
             There is  no  explanation  as  to  why  there  is  no  witness
             statement from him.

         24.  At question 87 the sponsor said that she  did  a  three  month
             English language course in the United Kingdom.   I  find  that
             the appellant has finished a  Masters  degree  in  finance  in
             2013.  I do not find that the couple are compatible in respect
             of their educational background.  I also bear I mind that  the
             appellant is a Muslim while the sponsor is  a  Christian.   At
             question 513, the sponsor said that the appellant last visited
             a mosque on 24 January, as this is the date  that  his  mother
             passed away.  At question 521 she claimed that they  discussed
             changing religion but decided not to.

         25.  The appellant on the other hand said at question 157  that  he
             last visited the mosque two months ago.  At  question  155  he
             said that he goes to the mosque sometimes but  also  prays  at
             home.  At question 156 he said he usually goes to  the  mosque
             on Fridays unless he is working.  At question 159 he said that
             they have not discussed what religion their children would  be
             and that they can take any religion.  I find that there is  no
             evidence that the appellant and the sponsor have gone  through
             an Islamic ceremony of marriage despite the fact  that  Muslim
             men can marry a Christian woman.  Nor is there an  explanation
             as to why a religious  marriage  was  not  considered  by  the
             appellant given that he attends a mosque.

         26.  I find that there were  other  discrepancies  in  the  answers
             given in each interview.  The sponsor claimed  that  rent  was
             paid in cash whereas the appellant claimed that rent was  paid
             by bank transfer from his account.  Mr Malik submitted on  the
             appellant's behalf that the couple  have  evidence  that  they
             were living at the same address.  I find that even if they did
             live at the same address,  that  in  itself  is  not  credible
             evidence that they lived together as a couple.  I bear in mind
             that  none  of  the  sponsor's  family  members  attended  the
             marriage from Romania.  The appellant claimed an interview  at
             question 76 that they were planning to have a  celebration  in
             Romania.  I find that there is no credible evidence before  me
             that he has ever met any of the sponsor's family  members  nor
             are there any letters of support or  witness  statements  from
             them.  At question 77  the  appellant  claimed  that  she  has
             spoken to the sponsor's brothers.  I bear  in  mind  that  the
             sponsor had limited finances; she  was  not  working  and  was
             helped by her cousin and his friend as well as her brother.

         27.  In evidence  the  appellant  said  that  his  marriage  to  Ms
             Postolache was a genuine marriage.   In  cross-examination  he
             said that the relationship changed at the  end  of  2016.   He
             then went on to state that after the  marriage  interview,  he
             was unable to spend Christmas with  the  sponsor's  family  in
             Romania.  He said both in 2014 and 2015, he was  not  able  to
             travel with her and she was very unhappy with him  because  of
             that.  He then accepted that the relationship changed  not  in
             2016 but in 2015 and that that accords with paragraph 6 of his
             witness statement.  He said that  they  lived  together  until
             October 2016.  By the end of October 2016, they stopped living
             together and had separated.  He said that he was no longer  in
             a subsisting or genuine relationship with her by the summer of
             2018 when he filed for divorce.

         28.  In answer to my questions, he said that he met the sponsor  in
             Milan in 2011 when she was visiting a friend.  He claimed that
             he was in Milan to visit a friend for two days.  He said  that
             she came to see him for the very  first  time  in  the  United
             Kingdom in January 2014.  They married on 13 October  2014  in
             the United Kingdom.  He said that they separated at the end of
             October 2016 when she left the United Kingdom.  He  said  that
             he believes that she went to visit her mother in June 2015 and
             then returned.  I find that having stated that  after  October
             2016, he did not know what happened to  her,  he  then  stated
             that he saw her again in July 2018 to discuss the divorce.  He
             said they met in Stratford in a coffee shop.  They  met  again
             in March 2019 because  she  wanted  to  clarify  some  of  the
             divorce papers.  I find that it is clear that when he met  her
             in March 2019, it was to persuade her  to  provide  a  witness
             statement because her witness statement is dated 13 June 2019.

         29.  The appellant claimed that the sponsor during her visit to see
             him in January 2014 in the United Kingdom, stayed with him for
             a week and also saw her friend Christina  who  lives  in  this
             country.  In answer to Mr Malik, he said that he did  not  ask
             Christina  for  a  witness  statement  although  she  was  the
             sponsor's friend, because he is not in contact with  her,  and
             in any event the sponsor's  own  witness  statement  clarifies
             everything.  I find that he was in contact with the sponsor on
             his own evidence in March 2019; her witness statement is dated
             13 June 2019.  I find that he could have asked Christina  whom
             he claims knew about their relationship to come to the  appeal
             hearing to give evidence.  He made no such efforts to  contact
             her or to ask the  sponsor  about  her  contact  details.   In
             taking the evidence as a whole, on a balance of  probabilities
             I do not find the sponsor a witness of truth."

  10. The judge then at paragraphs 30 and  31  gave  a  self-direction  with
      reference to the cases of Rosa v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14,  Papajorgji  [2010]  UKUT  30  and  the
      Supreme Court decision in  Sadovska  [2017]  UKSC  54.   There  is  no
      challenge to the judge's self-direction.

  11. The judge made the following findings:

         "32. I find that the discrepancies in  the  answers  given  in  the
             marriage interview  provides  good  evidence  upon  which  the
             respondent has discharged the  initial  evidential  burden  of
             proof  upon  him  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  reasonable
             suspicion that the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and  Ms
             Postolache is a marriage of convenience.   The  appellant  did
             not attend the hearing before Judge Maxwell.   In  considering
             the evidence in the round, I find that the appellant  has  not
             been able to provide credible evidence in  rebuttal.   I  find
             that the respondent has discharged the burden of proof to  the
             civil standard that the marriage is one of convenience.

         33.  I take into account the decision in McCarthy, Rodriguez [2005]
             Imm  AR  493  from  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European
             Communities.  I find the appellant was not entitled to an  EEA
             residence card because he was not a spouse within the  meaning
             of Regulation 2 of The  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016.
             The sponsor was not exercising treaty rights  and  accordingly
             the appellant failed to  prove  that  he  was  entitled  to  a
             residence card.  Mr Malik accepted from the outset that if the
             issue of the marriage  is  not  resolved  in  the  appellant's
             favour, then the appellant does not meet  the  requirement  of
             ten years' continuous lawful residence.  He went on  to  state
             that he does not rely upon Article 8  outside  the  Rules  and
             accepted that it would not be in the public interest  for  the
             appellant to be able to remain permanently in this country  if
             he has undertaken a marriage of convenience.

         34.  In conclusion I find that  the  appellant's  marriage  to  the
             sponsor was a marriage of convenience.   Furthermore,  I  find
             that the sponsor was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
             United Kingdom as determined by Judge Maxwell.  The  appellant
             was not entitled to a residence card.  I take into account the
             Home Office policy which appears at page  167  dated  3  April
             2017 which  confirms  that  when  granting  a  long  residence
             application in which a person has  relied  upon  a  period  of
             leave in the United Kingdom exercising treaty rights as an EEA
             national or their family member any grant  of  leave  must  be
             made outside the Immigration Rules.  I find that the appellant
             does not qualify for indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the
             Rules."

The Law

  12. In Papajorgji (EEA spouse-marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  UKUT  38
      (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held as follows:

      i) There is no burden at the outset of an application on a claimant to
         demonstrate that a marriage to  an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
         convenience.

     ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]  UKAIT  31  establishes
         only that there is an evidential burden on the claimant to  address
         evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is
         entered into for the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
         rights.

    iii) The UT at [20] added:

             "This passage indicates that the AIT concluded that there  was
             no burden on the applicant in an EU case until the  Respondent
             raised the issue by evidence.  If there was such  evidence  it
             was for the applicant  to  produce  evidence  to  address  the
             suspicions.  In our judgment such an approach can be described
             as one of the evidential burden in  the  first  place  on  the
             Respondent and then shifting to the claimant in the  light  of
             the relevant information rather than a  formal  legal  burden.
             We agree with that approach".

  13. The Court of Appeal approving this approach in  Agho  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 at [13], held:

         "What it comes down to is that as a matter of  principle  a  spouse
         establishes a prima facie case that he or she is a family member of
         an EEA national by  providing  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
         spouse's passport; that the legal burden is  on  the  Secretary  of
         State to show that any  marriage  thus  proved  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience; and the burden is not  discharged  merely  by  showing
         "reasonable suspicion".  Of course in the usual way the  evidential
         burden may shift to the applicant by proof of facts  which  justify
         the inference that the marriage  is  not  genuine,  and  the  facts
         giving rise to the inference may include  a  failure  to  answer  a
         request for documentary proof of the genuineness  of  the  marriage
         where grounds of suspicion have been raised.  Although,  as  I  say
         the point was not argued before us, that approach seems to me to be
         correct ..."

  14. In Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      14the Court of Appeal at [29], held:

         "... the legal burden of proof  lies  on  the  Secretary  of  State
         throughout but the evidential burden can  shift,  as  explained  in
         Papajorgji.  In my judgment, that is the correct analysis."

  15. The Supreme Court in Sadovska  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2017] UKSC 54at [28] held:

         "One of the most basic rules for litigation is that he who  asserts
         must prove.  It was not for  Ms  Sadovska  to  establish  that  the
         relationship was a  genuine  and  lasting  one.   It  was  for  the
         Respondent  to  establish  that  it  was  indeed  a   marriage   of
         convenience."

The Grounds of Appeal

Ground 1

  16. The FtT erred in its approach to the burden  and  standard  of  proof.
      The approach adopted is inconsistent with the authorities.

  17. The FtT at paragraphs 18 to 29 found that Appellant not credible.   It
      is only after rejecting his evidence that  at  paragraph  32  the  FtT
      considered the Secretary of State's evidence (the interview notes) and
      concluded that  it  had  demonstrated  that  there  was  a  reasonable
      suspicion that the marriage  was  one  of  convenience  and  that  the
      Appellant  "has  not  been  able  to  provide  credible  evidence   in
      rebuttal".

  18. The FtT should have approached the evidence in the reverse order.   It
      was obliged to first consider the Secretary of  State's  evidence  and
      then,  afterwards,  if  it  had  discharged  the  evidential   burden,
      considered the Appellant's evidence.  It was an error of law  on  part
      of the FtT to first consider and reject the Appellant's  evidence  and
      then, afterwards to consider whether the Secretary of State discharged
      the evidential burden.

  19. At paragraph 32 the judge found that the Appellant "has not been  able
      to provide credible evidence in rebuttal". The authorities  show  that
      there is no burden on the Appellant to "provide credible  evidence  in
      rebuttal".  There is merely an evidential burden on the  Appellant  to
      address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion.

  20. The FtT found against the Appellant because of his failure to  provide
      supporting evidence and proceeded on the basis that  it  was  for  the
      Appellant to show that the marriage  was  genuine  which  is  a  wrong
      approach.

Ground 2

  21. The judge made adverse credibility findings at paragraphs  20  and  28
      because of the failure of the Appellant's wife to attend the  hearing.
      The expectation that she would attend the hearing is  unrealistic  and
      perverse.  The evidence  showed  that  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and his wife had ended.  The grounds query why an  estranged
      wife would come to the UK in  order  to  support  the  appeal  of  her
      estranged husband.  It was an error of law on the part of the  FtT  to
      attach "very limited weight"  to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
      because of her failure to attend the hearing.

  22. The FtT at paragraph 26 attached weight to the absence of evidence  of
      "letters of support or witness statements" from family members of  the
      Appellant's wife. This expectation is unrealistic and  perverse  given
      that they are  no  longer  a  couple.   As  is  the  expectation  that
      Christina could have attended the hearing.

Ground 3

  23. The approach of  the  judge  at  paragraphs  24  and  25  relating  to
      incompatible educational backgrounds of the Appellant and the  Sponsor
      and the failure to have gone through an Islamic ceremony  of  marriage
      are perverse and irrational.

Ground 4

  24. At paragraph 16 the judge referred to the decision  of  Judge  Maxwell
      and at paragraphs 17 to 18 considered  and  rejected  the  Appellant's
      evidence for not attending that  hearing.   This  was  not  the  issue
      before the FtT.  The issue was whether there was new  evidence  before
      Judge Beg that permitted the FtT to depart from the earlier  findings:
      Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2002]  UKIAT
      702.  There was an abundance of new evidence in the Appellant's bundle
      including evidence of the Sponsor's wife's employment showing that she
      was exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  at  the  relevant
      time.  The FtT was obliged to consider the  new  evidence  and  decide
      whether to depart from Judge Maxwell's decision.

  25. In any event there was no evidential basis for the FtT to go behind Dr
      Hasan's assessment of 14 June 2016 which was that  the  Appellant  was
      unfit to attend the hearing on 15 June 2016.

26. The FtT failed to appreciate the inherent flexibility in the Devaseelan
    guidelines as supported in the recent Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  BK  (Afghanistan)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1358.

Submissions

27. Both parties made extensive oral submissions. They addressed me on  the
    error of law and materiality. They agreed that if the grounds were made
    out and the decision set aside, I could go on and remake the  decision.
    They made submissions accordingly. No further evidence was relied on by
    either party.




28. I will summarise the parties submissions. In respect of  Ground  4,  my
    attention was drawn to paragraph 9 of the decision  of  Judge  Maxwell.
    He said, in so far as the marriage was concerned,




              "I find the basis upon which the respondent  claims  to  have
             discharged the burden does not, in  fact  discharge  that  the
             burden of proof. I would add that  it  is  made  significantly
             more difficult to analyse the responses of the parties by  the
             way in which respondent now chooses to record them ...  "




  29. Mr Malik submitted that properly  applying  Devaseelan,  the  starting
      point is that the Secretary of State has not discharged the burden  of
      proof. In the absence of a challenge  or  further  evidence  from  the
      Secretary of State on this issue, there was no lawful reason to depart
      from this finding.




  30. In respect of materiality Mr Malik said that following  Judge  Saini's
      decision it was not open to the Secretary of State to raise the  issue
      of the Sponsor not exercising treaty rights. This  was  not  an  issue
      raised by the Secretary of State in the decision letter.  He  drew  my
      attention to the decision of Judge Saini. The Respondent was given the
      opportunity to amend the decision letter and did not do so.  It  would
      be manifestly unfair to now allow the Secretary of State to raise this
      as an issue.  It is not an issue raised in the decision letter. It was
      not an issue before the FtT and it is too late for the  Respondent  to
      now raise it.


  31. Mr Kotas made submissions. He said that the Appellant  cannot  win  by
      default in respect  of  whether  the  Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
      rights. In any event, he challenged the evidence  in  the  Appellant's
      bundle relating to this issue.


  32. In respect of ground 1, Judge Beg applied the correct  the  burden  of
      proof.  Mr Kotas said the judge properly directed herself on  the  law
      (see paragraphs 31 and 32). The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
      the discrepancies in the interview were sufficient  to  discharge  the
      evidential burden. If the Appellant failed to attend his  own  hearing
      without good reason,  this  casts  doubt  on  his  evidence  that  the
      marriage was genuine. My attention was drawn to paragraph 13 of  Judge
      Maxwell's decision. He did not have the benefit  of  hearing  evidence
      from the Appellant. Judge Beg did. He  was  entitled  to  depart  from
      Judge Maxwell's findings.In  respect of the decision of Judge  Maxwell
      that the Respondent had not discharged the  burden of proof, there was
      no way of challenging this because the  Secretary  of  State  was  the
      successful party.




  33. In respect of ground 2, the findings of the  judge  are  more  nuanced
      than the grounds of appeal suggest.  The judge acknowledged  that  the
      Appellant was able to obtain a witness statement from the EEA national
      and reasonably inferred from this that she  could  have  attended  the
      hearing. Similarly, the finding in respect of his wife's family should
      be considered in the  wider  context  the  finding  of  the  judge  at
      paragraph 26 that there was no credible evidence  that  the  Appellant
      had ever met  the  EEA  national's  family  members.  Furthermore,  in
      respect of Christina, there was no evidence before the judge that  the
      Appellant had made efforts to contact her. She  was  in  the  UK.   In
      respect of ground 3, again Mr Kotas urged me to consider the  findings
      as a whole. The Appellant's evidence about attendance  at  the  mosque
      was inconsistent.  The  judge  drew  reasonable  inferences  from  the
      evidence.

Error of law

  34. The issue in this case is whether the Appellant's marriage to  an  EEA
      national on 13 October 2014 was a sham marriage.  If it was a  genuine
      marriage and the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights  from  the  time
      they were married up until 7 October 2016 (the Appellant came into the
      UK on 7 October 2006) then it is accepted  that  the  Appellant  could
      meet the substantive requirements of the long residence rules.

  35. The legal burden of proof in  relation  to  marriages  of  convenience
      relies on the Secretary of State. If the Secretary  of  State  adduces
      evidence capable of pointing to the conclusion that  the  marriage  is
      one of convenience, the evidential burden shifts to the Appellant. The
      Respondent's case is that the interview on 30 January 2015 was capable
      of discharging the burden of proof that the Appellant's  marriage  was
      one of convenience. In this regard there was no evidence before  Judge
      Beg that was not before Judge Maxwell. It is  difficult  to  see  how,
      properly applying Devaseelan, Judge Beg could lawfully  have  departed
      from Judge Maxwell's findings about the interview and  his  conclusion
      that the Secretary of State had not discharged the  burden  of  proof.
      There was no further evidence relied on by the Secretary of  State  in
      this regard. Judge Beg was mistaken when she said that  Judge  Maxwell
      had not made "clear and specific findings with regard to  whether  the
      marriage between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  was  a  marriage  of
      convenience." His unchallenged finding is unequivocal. It was open  to
      the Respondent to apply to appeal  against  Judge  Maxwell's  decision
      notwithstanding that the Secretary of State is the losing  party  (see
      Anwar v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2134).

  36. From what is said at paragraphs 16-19 of  Judge  Beg's  decision,  she
      attached  significance  to  the  Appellant's  none-attendance  at  the
      hearing before Judge Maxwell. However, it is difficult to see how this
      could undermine the decision  of  Judge  Maxwell  in  respect  of  the
      probative value of the interview and the failure of the Respondent  to
      discharge the burden of proof.   The  judge  did  not  properly  apply
      Devaseelan.

  37. The Devaseelan argument that developed at the hearing was not  on  all
      fours with that in the grounds (ground 4). However, putting aside  the
      Devaseelan point in respect of the sham  marriage,  the  judge  having
      properly directed herself on the burden of proof then failed to  apply
      it. I conclude that the judge's findings, at paragraph 32, disclose an
      error of law. The first task for the judge was to consider whether the
      Secretary of State had adduced evidence capable  of  pointing  to  the
      marriage  being  one  of  convenience.  She  considered  whether   the
      Respondent had discharged the burden after having made findings  about
      the Appellant's credibility.   I cannot be certain that when the judge
      considered  whether  the  Respondent  had   discharged   the   initial
      evidential burden of proof, she did not take into account the  adverse
      credibility findings, thus placing a burden on the Appellant.   Whilst
      the evidential burden may shift to the Appellant, there  is  no  legal
      requirement on the Appellant to  provide  evidence  in  rebuttal.   An
      evidential burden is an obligation to show if called  upon  to  do  so
      that there is  sufficient  evidence  to  raise  an  issue  as  to  the
      existence or non-existence of a fact in issue.  The use  of  the  word
      "rebuttal" by the judge supports an  argument  that  she  treated  the
      Respondent's case to be true and that there was an obligation  on  the
      Appellant to contest the Respondent's case and prove  otherwise.  This
      is supported by her  having  considered  the  Appellant's  credibility
      before considering whether the Respondent had discharged  the  initial
      evidential burden.  Ground 1 is made out.  The error is such that  the
      decision of the FtT must be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of
      the judge to dismiss the appeal.

  38. I will briefly engage with grounds 2  and  3.   I  am  satisfied  that
      ground 2 is made out. In my view it is irrational of the  Tribunal  to
      expect the Appellant's estranged wife to travel from Romania to the UK
      in order to give live evidence and  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
      finding based on her failure to attend. I find that ground 3  is  made
      out. The judge's findings in relation  compatibility  are  speculative
      and not grounded in the evidence before her.

Re-making

  39. Judge Maxwell found that the Appellant had not  established  that  the
      EEA national was exercising  treaty  rights.  There  was  insufficient
      evidence before him on the issue. There was evidence before Judge Beg.
      On the face of it, it was incumbent on her to consider this  evidence;
      however, she made no mention of it and in this  respect  Ground  4  is
      made out.   However, Mr Malik drew my attention to Judge  Saini's  set
      aside decision. Judge  Saini  observed  that  the  issue  of  the  EEA
      national exercising treaty rights  was  not  raised  in  the  decision
      letter of 17 January 2017. It was not an  issue  before  Judge  Scott.
      Judge Saini said that it was not a matter on which  the  Secretary  of
      State was entitled to  rely.   He  remitted  the  matter  to  the  FtT
      indicating that the Respondent was at liberty to amend  the  decision.
      Furthermore, he made a direction that should the  Respondent  seek  to
      amend or supplement  the  decision,  he  must  do  so  in  writing  in
      accordance with Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008. The decision relied on by the Respondent before Judge  Beg
      was the same as that before Judge Scott.  There had been no attempt by
      the Respondent to amend the decision letter to indicate  that  whether
      the EEA national was exercising treaty rights was an issue relied  on.
      I accept Mr Malik's submission that it is not an issue  on  which  the
      Respondent is now entitled to rely. If it had  been  an  issue  before
      Judge Beg,  she  did  not  take  into  account  the  evidence  in  the
      Appellant's  bundle  when  deciding  whether  to  depart  from   Judge
      Maxwell's findings. I have considered this evidence and I am satisfied
      that it establishes on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  EEA
      national was exercising treaty rights at the material  time.  However,
      there was no challenge to the evidence by the Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer at the  hearing  before  Judge  Beg.  Mr  Kotas  attempted  to
      challenge the evidence before me. However, I accept that to allow  the
      Respondent to raise this issue at such  a  stage  in  the  proceedings
      would amount to  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the  absence  of  an
      adjournment. There was no  application  for  an  adjournment.  In  any
      event, considering the history of the proceedings and  the  overriding
      objective enshrined in the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008, fairness does not demand an adjournment to allow the  Respondent
      to amend the decision letter.

  40. The only issue properly before Judge Beg was whether the marriage  was
      one of convenience. Properly applying Devaseelan there was  no  reason
      to depart from the finding of Judge Maxwell that  the  Respondent  has
      not discharged the burden of proof.

  41. The only reason for the decision maker having refused the  application
      was the assertion of a sham marriage.  Thus, I conclude  that  in  the
      absence of any other reason, the Appellant meets the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules and his appeal should therefore be allowed under
      Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 23 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



