
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04160/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 January 2019                             |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                muhammad [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi, instructed by Kingswell Watts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Muhammad [S], was born on 19 December 1985 and is a  male
    citizen of  Pakistan.   By  a  decision  dated  19  January  2018,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's human rights application  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with  his
    partner and child.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Dearden) which, in a decision promulgated on 21  June  2018,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child  (the  appellant's  child
    with his partner is a British citizen).  However, he found it would  be
    reasonable to expect "the child to leave the United Kingdom bearing  in
    mind her young age."  There is little  if  any  reasoning  behind  that
    conclusion although earlier in the decision [8] the judge observed that
    "the child is only 2 years of age and is obviously completely dependent
    upon her mother and father.  She has no life outside  the  family  home
    save with the extended family."  The difficulty for the judge  in  this
    case is that he appears to have made no reference to  the  respondent's
    own policy in respect of those who have subsisting  relationships  with
    qualifying children.  Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary  of
    State, told me that the Secretary of State had recently (December 2018)
    amended that policy in the light of the judgment in KO  (Nigeria)  2018
    UKSC 53  but she accepted that the judge  should  have  considered  the
    policy and, in the absence of any evidence of criminality on  the  part
    of the appellant, he should have allowed the appeal, the  Secretary  of
    State accepting (through his policy)  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to
    expect a British qualifying child to return to a  parent's  country  of
    origin thereby forego the advantages of  British  (and,  for  the  time
    being, European Union)  citizenship.   In  consequence,  Mrs  Pettersen
    offered no submissions in support of the judge's decision.

 3. In the circumstances, I  allow  the  appeal.   Further,  I  remake  the
    decision allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 21 June 2018  is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 19 January 2018 is allowed
    on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



