
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/05110/2017
                                                               HU/05007/2017
                                                               HU/05008/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2019                 |On 17 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               BUSHRA [R] + 2
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by MBS, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Gillespie dismissed the appellants'  appeals  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 June 2018.

 2. The FtT and  the  UT  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant
    petitioned the Court for judicial review.  In a  joint  minute  parties
    agreed that the UT erred in law "in proceeding on the  basis  that  the
    existence of a valid marriage had been a live issue  for  the  FtT  ...
    where the [respondent] had accepted that the only issue ... was whether
    there was a genuine and subsisting marital relationship (as opposed  to
    the validity of the marriage as a matter of law) ...".   On  12  August
    2019 the Vice President of the UT granted permission in  light  of  the
    Court's interlocutor and the joint minute.

 3. Mr Govan accepted that the ground was not only arguable, but of  merit,
    given the concession made by the presenting officer  in  the  FtT.   He
    said that the decision should be set aside,  and  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the FtT.

 4. Mr Caskie submitted that the decision should be re-made by the UT,  and
    that the outcome should be reversed.

 5. There is a presumption that on setting aside a decision of the FtT, re-
    making will take place at the same hearing in  the  UT,  based  on  the
    evidence which was before the  FtT,  and  on  submissions.   Directions
    issued with  the  grant  of  permission  required  parties  to  prepare
    accordingly.  Neither  party  applied  for  admission  of  any  further
    evidence.

 6. I saw no basis for remitting the case to the FtT.

 7. The reasons offered by the respondent for holding  that  there  are  no
    ongoing genuine and subsisting  relationships  among  the  four  family
    members are (a) the  family  registration  certificate  issued  by  the
    government of Pakistan was not valid in  a  court  for  inheritance  or
    property issues, and so of little evidential value, particularly as the
    sponsor was not present at the time of issue;  (b) the sponsor had  not
    visited Pakistan for 6 years; and  (c)  lack  of  evidence  of  regular
    communications.

 8. The sponsor explained that he chose to spend money on  the  support  of
    his family, including the education of his  children,  rather  than  on
    travel; and that communications were regular, but by  telephone,  which
    does not leave a written record.

 9. Reason (a)  conveys  nothing  against  the  existence  of  genuine  and
    subsisting relationships.  It seems to search for  reasons  to  refuse.
    Reason (b) is sensible enough, but hardly unanswerable.  Reason (c)  is
    weak, as many separated family members communicate for the most part by
    telephone.

10. The evidence about the legal validity of the marriage is imperfect  and
    open to doubt, but it is not disputed that the first appellant and  the
    sponsor have been in a relationship  of  which  the  second  and  third
    appellants are the children.  That is a strong starting point.  Why  do
    they seek to enter the UK, and why does the sponsor  wish  them  to  be
    here?

11. I find it much more likely than not, on  all  the  evidence,  that  the
    present proceedings reflect  the  existence  and  not  the  absence  of
    genuine and subsisting family relationships.

12. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the three appeals,  as  first  brought  to  the  FtT,  are
    allowed.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      13 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
