
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05925/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/05927/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/06315/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 C O [I] + 2
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellants are a mother and  her  two  children,  all  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  On 27 February 2019, the ECO refused  their  applications  to
    join the sponsor, the husband and father of the family, who is  settled
    in the UK.

 2. Due to a discrepancy  over  the  naming  of  the  sponsor  between  his
    passport and other documentation, the ECO was not satisfied  about  the
    claimed relationships among the parties.  The ECO also found  that  the
    eligibility financial requirement was not met, for non-production  with
    the applications of certain documentation.

 3. The refusal notices advised the appellants  to  submit  any  additional
    evidence they might have to meet the concerns raised, which  they  did.
    On review in light of the grounds of appeal and supporting  bundle,  an
    Entry Clearance Manager on 13 September 2019 maintained the  decisions,
    but referring  only  to  the  absence  of  documents  relating  to  the
    sponsor's employment.

 4. FtT  Judge  Eban  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 December 2019.  She found that the evidence  for  the
    appellants established the marital and parental relationships required.
     She found at [14] that the document in issue for financial purposes, a
    CT600 company tax return, was not with the applications when they  were
    made; at [15] that it was with the application to  the  respondent  for
    reconsideration; and at [19] that an application made at  the  date  of
    the hearing would succeed.  At [26] she dismissed the  appeal,  because
    there  were  no  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  in  requiring  the
    appellants to re-apply.

 5. By a decision issued on 13  August  2020,  UT  Judge  Lindsley  granted
    permission, on the view that it was arguably  an  error  to  admit  and
    accept new evidence about relationships, but not about finance, and  to
    weigh the public interest against the appellants,  when  they  met  the
    requirements of the rules at the date of the hearing.  The UT also  set
    directions with a view to deciding without a hearing  (a)  whether  the
    FtT erred in law and (b), if so, whether its  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

 6. Judge Lindsley observed that the  appellants  might  wish  to  consider
    whether to re-apply, given that success in their appeals might  in  the
    longer  term  be  relatively  disadvantageous.   They  have  presumably
    weighed that option, in continuing these proceedings.

 7. There are no  submissions  in  response  on  file  for  the  ECO.   The
    appellants' representatives responded on  19  August  2020,  making  no
    comment on any need for a hearing.  The UT may now proceed, in terms of
    rules 2 and 34, to decide (a) and (b), as above, without a hearing.

 8. The appellants submit that as documentary evidence, DNA evidence, and a
    subsequent English language test certificate were all accepted  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager and admitted  by  the  FtT  to  resolve  issues
    raised by the ECO, there was no good reason not to treat the form CT600
    in the same way.

 9. The scheme of the rules and the statutory  structure  for  appeals  are
    both designed, to a large  extent,  against  improving  cases  as  they
    proceed.  The requirement to submit documents with  an  application  is
    prescriptive, exists for good policy reasons,  and  is  usually  to  be
    enforced.  It is not often a disproportionate interference  with  human
    rights to expect someone to make an application which conforms  to  the
    rules.

10. Each case, however, turns ultimately on its own facts.   There is force
    in the  appellants'  argument  that,  given  the  way  their  case  has
    developed, it is impossible to see why other issues  were  resolved  by
    evidence which was not with the  original  applications,  but  not  the
    matter  of  the  form  CT600.   The  respondent  did  not   offer   any
    justification to the FtT for  drawing  a  line  of  distinction  within
    evidence  tendered  after  the  applications,  and  has  made  no  such
    submission to the UT.  I conclude that  the  FtT  erred  by  drawing  a
    distinction which was not justified on the facts as the FtT  had  found
    them to be, and that it should have struck the proportionality  balance
    on the other side.

11. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and the appeal, as brought to the
    FtT, is allowed.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    3 November 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

