
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05875/2018
                                                               HU/07109/2018
                                                               HU/07114/2018
                                                               HU/07119/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                 |                                |
|On 6 February 2019                     |On 12 February 2019             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              SADIA ABDUL RAHIM
                                 ABDUL RAHIM
                             MOMOONA ABDUL RAHIM
                              DUAA ABDUL RAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson counsel for the Appellants
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellants are a mother, father and two  children  born  28.2.1978;
    23.5.1969; 17.3.1998 and 26.6.1999.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated on 6 August 2018,  which  dismissed
    the Appellant' appeal against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated15
    February 2018 to refuse a human rights claim.

The Judge's Decision

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged in essence arguing that  that  the  Judge
    failed to engage with the argument that the Appellant  could  have  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules as  a  result  of
    her mental health problems.

 5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hollingsworth  on
    9.11.2018

Submissions

 6. At the hearing I/we heard submissions from Mr Timson on behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He relied on paragraph 2 of the grounds of appeal in that the Judge
         had failed  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  would  have  the
         capacity to participate in life in Pakistan if  she  were  returned
         there as that was the 'nib' of her appeal.

      b) He argued that the Judge did not  have  sufficient  regard  to  the
         medical evidence.

      c) He suggested that the thrust of the Judges findings  at  paragraphs
         80-81 was that she had mental health problems but would be  alright
         as her husband and family would return with  her.  Given  that  the
         medical evidence was that her condition would deteriorate this  was
         not taken into account.

 7. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bates submitted that:

      a) The Judge clearly took  into  account  including  the  most  recent
         evidence from Dr Miah which Mr Timson referred  to.  He  took  into
         account that the Appellants MH Issues while  they  appear  to  have
         started in 2015 were triggered by events in Pakistan in 2009

      b) The evidence before him was that the care provided was largely from
         her family as she does not engage outside the family and indeed her
         engagement with her husband and daughters is limited

      c) In terms of her return to Pakistan and integration there she is not
         integrated in the UK. She would be able to integrate  to  the  same
         limited extent that she had in the UK.

      d) The Judge was entitled to conclude that there would  be  disruption
         but beyond that her position would not change.

 8. In reply Mr Timson on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a) The Appellant was a victim of persecution and has severe depression
         and if sent back this would get worse

      b) The Appellants ability to integrate in her circumstances  would  be
         impacted as Pakistan caused her problems.

Legal Framework

 9. The Appellants claim is that she  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE1(vi) of the Rules in that at the time of her application  'there
    would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
    the country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.'

10. I assessing whether this Rules was met the grounds rely at paragraph  2
    on Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932 where at paragraph 8 it states:

|                                     |


         "In Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
         Civ 813, [2016] 4 WLR 152, Sales  LJ  said,  at  para.  14  of  his
         judgment:

             "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration'
             into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported
             ... is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
             find a job or to  sustain  life  while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration'  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. It cannot be argued that the Judge had not  identified  the  issues  in
    this case as she  recorded  the  Appellants  case  in  some  detail  at
    paragraphs 20 onwards highlighting Mr Thornhills  argument  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles arising out of  her  mental  health
    problems to her  participating  in  any  kind  of  meaningful  life  in
    Pakistan and thus this was the focus of her findings.

13.  The Judge also set out in  detail  at  paragraphs  61-67  the  medical
    evidence placed  before  the  Judge  and  there  is  no  merit  in  the
    suggestion that she did not take into account the evidence  of  all  of
    the medical professionals including the most up to date  report  of  Dr
    Mir as this was specifically referred to.The Judge  therefore  accepted
    at paragraph 74 that the Appellant was suffering from severe depression
    with psychotic symptoms and elements of PTSD. She accepted  that  there
    was stigma attached to mental health problems  in  Pakistan  (paragraph
    99) and  that  while  medication  and  mental  health  facilities  were
    available there were not as good as in the UK.

14. She had already recorded the evidence of both  the  Appellants  husband
    and two daughters that her life in the UK, her capacity to integrate in
    the UK even with all  of  the  available  support  and  medication  was
    significantly restricted in that she had limited engagement  even  with
    her husband and daughters and remained largely at  home  cared  for  by
    them but that this could continue in Pakistan (paragraph103 and 107)  .
    It was open to her to find that to the very limited extent that she was
    capable of engaging with life outside her immediate  family  she  would
    have the care and support of her family in doing  so.   She  recognised
    that there would be obstacles at paragraph 108-109 arising out  of  her
    mental health issues but reached the conclusion  that  they  would  not
    prevent the reintegration of the family.

15. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

16. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

17. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
11.2.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


