

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/05252/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 24 November 2017                |           On 4 December 2017        |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                TAHIR YASEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Z Malik counsel instructed by Awan Legal Associates
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was  born  on  20  February  1984  and  is  a  national  of
   Pakistan.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Evans promulgated on 28 February 2017 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  23
   January 2016 to refuse the Appellants application for indefinite leave to
   remain based on long residence..
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were in essence that :
   a) It was accepted that the Appellant had 10 years  continuous  residence
      in the UK.
   b) The Appellants  actions  in  not  submitting  his  tax  returns  until
      requested were such that his character and conduct made it undesirable
      to allow the Appellant to remain in the UK by reference  to  paragraph
      276B(ii)(c) of the Rules.
   c) In addition the Appellants conduct led to a  refusal  under  paragraph
      322(5) of the Rules: the provision does not lead to mandatory  refusal
      but his actions in not declaring income to HMRC when requested  to  do
      so was such that a refusal under paragraph 322(5) was appropriate.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Evans ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that the requirements of 276B(ii) and paragraph 322(5) of HC 395 are both
   discretionary ; a finding under paragraph 322(5)  requires  there  to  be
   deception in an application for leave to  remain;  the  Judge  failed  to
   recognise that the deception must have been carried out for  the  purpose
   of securing an advantage in  immigration  terms;  the  Judge  misdirected
   himself as to when the Appellant filed late returns; failed to take  into
   account the reasons for the Appellants confusion in the interview.
8.  On 9.9. 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird gave permission to appeal.

     a) At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Malik on behalf  of  the
        Appellant that: At paragraph 10 of the decision the Judge  set  out
        an incorrect version of paragraph 322(5) of  the  Rules  suggesting
        that these were grounds  on  which  leave  to  remain  'are  to  be
        refused' rather than 'should normally be refused.'

     b) The Appellant in this case did not file his tax returns on time  in
        that his tax returns for the annual periods between 2010-2013  were
        not filed until December 2015: there was delay and not  dishonesty.
        The Appellant gave an explanation for the delay.

     c) The Judge did not find that he acted dishonestly  at  paragraph  37
        but with a lack of integrity.

     d) The Judge did not consider whether  the  discretion  was  exercised
        lawfully.

     e) He referred to the JR case of Samant JR/6546/2016 which sets out  a
        test to be applied in establishing dishonesty at paragraph 10.

     f) The Judge in this case made no finding of dishonesty and a  finding
        of lack of integrity is not enough.

     g) Mr Mc Vitie conceded that a finding under paragraph 322(5) required
        dishonesty.

     h) The Appellant qualified for ILR but for this issue.

     i) The Judge failed to recognise that it was a matter of discretion.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted that:

   a) JR decisions are not binding on this Tribunal.

   b) The Oxford English Dictionary definition was that integrity  was  lack
      of honesty.

   c) The Judge clearly found that the Appellant was unwilling  to  pay  his
      taxes and only paid because of his impending interview with  UKVI  and
      therefore he was dishonest even if different terminology was used.

   d) In relation to whether the Judge  failed  to  recognise  that  refusal
      under paragraph  322(5)  was  discretionary  this  could  not  make  a
      material difference given the Judges finding that there was a  finding
      of 'persistent failure' and  this  provided  grounds  for  'substantia
      criticism of the Appellants character and conduct.'

10. In reply Mr Malik on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) There was no clear finding of dishonesty.

   b) The Rules were drafted so that some led to  mandatory  refusal  others
      there  was  a  discretion.  If  a  finding  of  dishonesty  does   not
      automatically lead to failure of an application the Judge has to stand
      back and decide whether to exercise the discretion to refuse.

The Law

11. The Appellants application for ILR on the basis of  long  residence  was
   considered under paragraph 276B of the Rules.  In  so  far  as  they  are
   relevant they provide:

   276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave  to
   remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are that:

    (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in  the
   United Kingdom.

    (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no  reasons  why  it
   would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave  to  remain  on
   the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

   (a) ..

    (b) ..

    (c) personal history, including  character,  conduct,  associations  and
   employment record; and

    (d) ..

    (e) compassionate circumstances; and




   (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

   (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
   for refusal.

   (iv)..

   (v) ....

12. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension of stay set  out  in
   Parts 2-8 of these  Rules,  the  paragraph  322  also  applies  and  this
   includes at 322(5):

   "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
   remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused

   (5) the undesirability of permitting the person concerned  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom in the light of  his  conduct  (including  convictions
   which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations  or
   the fact that he represents a threat to national security;"

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. The basis of the refusal in this case as set out in the  refusal  letter
   was that the Appellants actions in the late submission of his tax returns
   were such that it would be undesirable to allow him to remain in  the  UK
   by reference  to  the  public  interest  factors  set  out  in  paragraph
   276B(ii)(c) and that such conduct should also result in a  refusal  under
   the provisions of paragraph 322(5) of the Rules. The two  provisions  are
   worded differently and thus potentially contemplate different  behaviours
   and as noted above in relation to 322, it is clear that by virtue of  its
   opening words - "In addition to" - it supplements the grounds for refusal
   of extension set out in the preceding Parts 2 - 8 of the Rules.

15. It is clear that the behaviours set  out  in  paragraph  276B  may  fall
   short of criminality  or  require  dishonesty  such  as  for  example  an
   applicant who had received a caution for a behaviour that did not involve
   an element of dishonesty  but  where  the  public  interest  was  engaged
   because it reflected on his character and conduct.

16. The Judge summarised the contents of the refusal letter at paragraphs 4-
   12 and at paragraph 10 sets out an erroneous version of paragraph  322(5)
   making it a  mandatory  ground  of  refusal  rather  than  discretionary.
   However I note that thereafter he makes no other reference  to  paragraph
   322(5) and indeed when he set out 'The Law' at paragraph 18 he  only  set
   out paragraph 276B. I also  note  in  his  submissions  Mr  Bloomer,  who
   represented the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, made no submissions
   in relation to paragraph 322(5) but conceded that if the Appellant  could
   not satisfy paragraph 276B he would not succeed (paragraph 16) and sought
   to  categorize  his  behaviour  as  naive  or  indolent   and   in   such
   circumstances it would be disproportionate to refuse him leave.

17.   The Judge was entitled to consider  the  way  the  appeal  was  argued
   before him. Thus in relation to his findings he only made  a  finding  in
   respect of paragraph 276B at paragraph 38 there is no finding in  respect
   of paragraph 322(5). Therefore I am satisfied that while the  Judge  made
   an error of law in setting out an incorrect version of  paragraph  322(5)
   this would not be material if his assessment under paragraph  276B,  that
   the Appellant failed to meet the requirements, was open to him.

18. Moreover I also note that the caselaw presented to me by  Mr  Malik  all
   related to findings under paragraph 322(5) where dishonesty  was  clearly
   being alleged and sets out the test to be applied when such an allegation
   was being made. The basis of the refusal letter which the Judge  properly
   analysed was that the Appellant had submitted his tax returns  late.  The
   word 'dishonesty' does not appear in the refusal letter nor was in put to
   the Appellant or argued in the submissions made by the HOPO as summarised
   by the Judge (paragraph 13). Mr Mc Vitie,  I  note,  only  conceded  that
   paragraph 322(5) required dishonesty to be established not 276B.

19. The Judge therefore set out a  number  of  detailed  and  well  reasoned
   findings at paragraphs 29-36 as  to  why  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
   provide adequate explanations for his failure to file tax returns and how
   this reflected on his character and conduct  as  required  by  276B.  The
   grounds set out challenges to these findings that were not enlarged on by
   Mr Malik and rightly so as they were  no  more  than  disagreements  with
   conclusions that were open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

20. At paragraph  37  the  Judge  set  out  how  he  viewed  the  Appellants
   behaviour overall and summarised it in this way:

   "I find that the Appellant has failed to act with integrity  in  relation
   to his tax affairs.'

21. I am satisfied that it was thereafter open to him under  paragraph  276B
   to find that given the 'persistent' nature of the conduct' (it)  provides
   grounds  for  substantial  criticism  of  the  Appellants  character  and
   conduct'  and was therefore such that a grant  of  indefinite  leave  was
   against the public interest.

22. While the Judge does not  explicitly  state  that  the  public  interest
   factors set out in paragraph 276B impart a discretionary element  to  the
   decision under paragraph 276B having set out the paragraph in full in his
   decision there is nothing to suggest that he does not understand the Rule
   and I am entitled  to  conclude  that  he  did.  Given  his  findings  at
   paragraph 37 it was open to him to conclude that given such  conduct  the
   Respondent was correct to conclude that the Appellant could  not  satisfy
   the requirements of  Paragraph  276B  because  the  public  interest  was
   engaged by his behaviour and standing back any  rational  tribunal  would
   have reached the conclusion that refusal was proportionate.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
3.12.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





