
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: HU/05419/2019         |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                              |
|On 26 February 2020                                                         |
|On 20 April 2020                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|         |                          |        |                             |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |Mr MD Imamul Hasan                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the appellant:         Mr A Mortuza of Reliance Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer.

                           Decision and Directions


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Freer who, in  a  determination  promulgated  27  August  2019
    following a hearing on 14 August  2019  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant, a national of Bangladesh born on 15 April  1987,  against  a
    decision of the respondent of 8 March 2019 to refuse his application of
    5 October 2018 for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  Article
    8 (private life) of the ECHR.

 2. An important factual issue before the judge was whether  the  appellant
    had used a proxy test taker to take an English language test at Synergy
    Business College of London on 18  September  2012,  as  the  respondent
    contended in the decision letter, and in respect of  which  an  English
    language test certificate was issued and used by the appellant to  make
    his application of 23 October 2012 for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    student, such leave being granted on 18 April 2013.

Application for adjournment

 3. At 15:28 hours on the day before the hearing date, the  Upper  Tribunal
    received an email requesting that  the  hearing  be  adjourned  on  the
    ground that Counsel (Mr P. Lewis) had been accidentally  double-booked.
    The email stated that Counsel intended  to  attend  his  other  hearing
    which was at York House at Hatton Cross due to the  appellant  in  that
    case instructing him by direct access, being vulnerable and  an  expert
    witness attending.

 4. The application was refused by  Ms  L.  Watton,  Lawyer  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal (IAC), pursuant to delegated  judicial  powers,  by  email  at
    about 16:57 hours.

 5. On the hearing day, Mr A. Mortuza of Reliance Solicitors  attended.  He
    informed me that he would be requesting  an  adjournment  and  that  Mr
    Lewis was at his hearing at Taylor House, which  surprised  me  as  the
    Upper Tribunal had been informed in the email of the previous day  that
    the hearing was to take place at York House.

 6. Before I heard Mr Mortuza's adjournment request, I asked Ms Everett  to
    let me know whether it would be necessary for me  to  hear  submissions
    from both parties before deciding  whether  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law and whether the appeal  should  be  remitted.  Ms  Everett
    indicated to me that I did not need to hear submissions  and  that,  in
    her view, it would be necessary to set aside the decision of the  judge
    and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 7. Without hearing any submissions on any substantive issues, I  asked  Mr
    Mortuza to pass a message to Mr Lewis and inform him  that  Ms  Everett
    had agreed that the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the FtT. Mr Mortuza left  the  hearing  room  in  order  to
    contact Mr Lewis.

 8. Upon his return, Mr Mortuza informed me that Mr Lewis had  stated  that
    he was 'happy' with the decision of the judge being set aside  and  the
    appeal being remitted. He expressed his thanks to the Tribunal.

 9. I took this to mean that there would be no prejudice to  the  appellant
    if I proceeded to hear from Ms Everett as to the  reasons  for  setting
    aside the decision of the judge. Ms Everett informed me that she agreed
    that grounds 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 were established and  that  these  errors
    were material.

10. It was therefore unnecessary for me  to  hear  any  application  by  Mr
    Mortuza for an adjournment.

Assessment

11. The judge found that the respondent had discharged the burden of  proof
    upon her to show that the appellant had used a proxy test taker for the
    English language test at Synergy  Business  College  of  London  on  18
    September 2012. He gave his reasons at paras 40-56. I  will  deal  with
    such of these reasons as I consider necessary.

12. I am satisfied that grounds 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 are  established.  Dealing
    with these in a slightly different order, my reasons are as follows:

     i)  Ground 1: The judge misapprehended the evidence when  he  said,  at
         para 46, as follows:

         "I consider that a near fatal blow was struck to the  case  by  the
             appellant scoring of top marks, 200, very  improbable  from  a
             candidate who  certainly  fell  short  in  his  UK  degree  by
             obtaining a 3rd class Honours pass, ..."

         In fact, as stated in ground 1, the appellant did  not  score  full
         marks overall. He scored 170 out of 200 in his speaking  test.  The
         score of 200 out of 200 related to his writing test, on  which,  as
         contended in ground 1, no cheating had been alleged.

         This error was plainly material, as the judge  described  it  as  a
         "near fatal blow" to the appellant's case.

     ii) Ground 4: The judge's reasoning at para 44,  as  quoted  below,  is
         either perverse or entirely unsupported by evidence. At para 44, he
         said as follows:

         "There is a point in the evidence I need to treat  very  carefully.
             The appellant has made  a  self-serving  declaration  that  he
             wants to be a lawyer, with the implication or pressure that  I
             should believe he is innocent. The appellant is not  a  lawyer
             today. He has never achieved that in his home country. He took
             a business and management  course  when  he  could  have  been
             taking a law course. I suspect that I am being told a doubtful
             story to get me on side, because I am a lawyer. It  really  is
             not confirmed yet by cogent evidence that  the  vocations  for
             this appellant is lawyer in any country. He did  not  complete
             the only law course he attempted and then changed his subject.
             This sounds like somebody who gave up  on  becoming  a  lawyer
             after trying it out."

              (My emphasis)

         The grounds contend (which Ms Everett did  not  dispute)  that  the
         appellant had provided evidence that he had applied for  a  secured
         place to study law at a college accredited  by  the  University  of
         London; that the college ceased providing this qualification whilst
         the appellant was attending  the  course  and  was  closed  shortly
         thereafter with the result that the appellant lost all of the  fees
         that he had paid; and that he  had  provided  confirmation  from  a
         university that he had secured an unconditional offer to study  the
         Graduate Diploma in Law  (GLD)  course  (a  conversion  course)  in
         September 2020.

         It follows that the judge's reasoning  at  para  44  was  not  only
         unsupported by the evidence, it was contrary to  the  evidence.  In
         the alternative, he misapprehended the evidence.

         It is evident from the words I have underlined in relation to  para
         44 above that the judge played weight on this issue.

     iii)     Ground 2: The judge erred  by  relying  upon  the  appellant's
         demeanour in reaching his adverse credibility assessment,  when  he
         said, at para 45, as follows:

         "I was struck by his nervousness. Whilst  not  proof  of  guilt  or
             innocence, many lawyers find a level  of  self-confidence  and
             self-expression is part of their basic tool kit from early on.
             So, I say that I am sceptical for several  reasons  about  his
             claimed interest in a legal career."

         Although the judge said that  the  appellant's  demeanour  was  not
         proof of guilt or innocence, it is clear from the  second  sentence
         quoted above that he did  nevertheless  take  it  into  account  in
         making his adverse credibility assessment, contrary to the guidance
         in R (SS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1391 where  the  Court
         of Appeal said, in effect  (paras  36-37),  that  it  was  becoming
         recognised that drawing conclusions about a  witness's  credibility
         from their demeanour was unreliable and often dangerous; that  that
         was  particularly  so  where  the  witness  was  of   a   different
         nationality from the judge and was speaking English  as  a  foreign
         language or was giving evidence through an interpreter; that  while
         it was impossible, and perhaps  undesirable,  to  ignore  demeanour
         altogether, to attach any significant weight to impressions  formed
         from demeanour in assessing credibility risked judgments  that  had
         no rational basis  or  which  reflected  conscious  or  unconscious
         biases and prejudices; and that the only  reliable  way  to  assess
         whether oral evidence was truthful was to focus on its content  and
         determine whether it was consistent with other evidence.

         The fact that the judge expressed himself as he did  in  the  first
         sentence quoted above shows that he did indeed  attach  significant
         weight to the impression he formed from the appellant's  demeanour.
         In doing so, he erred in law.

     iv) Ground 5: The judge erred in stating, at para 48, as follows:

         "He could have afforded to pay a proxy. He was working for pay  and
             he was watching his money".

         However, the mere fact that a person can  afford  to  pay  a  proxy
         does not make him more likely to have done so,  just  as  the  mere
         fact that a person earns a low wage does not make him  more  likely
         to steal. The judge  therefore  took  into  account  an  irrelevant
         consideration.

     v)  Ground 6: The judge erred at para 55 when he said:

         "The degree in Bangladesh or the score of 6 at the British  Council
             in 2008 have little bearing on what happened in  2012.  It  is
             nonsensical and inconsistent to  take  a  business  degree  at
             Northampton over a number of  years,  if  you  want  to  be  a
             lawyer. I suggest he simply made up the desire to be a lawyer.
             The last time I heard such an argument, the person had already
             qualified as a lawyer in two jurisdictions, which is  quite  a
             contrast with the facts before me."

          The  judge  plainly  erred  in  assessing  this  aspect   of   the
         appellant's credibility by comparing his case with that of  another
         case to which he (the appellant) was not a party and  of  which  he
         was not aware.

13. Ground 1 was plainly material to the judge's finding that the appellant
    cannot meet the requirements  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  if  only
    because the judge expressed the issue  in  question  as  a  "near-fatal
    blow" to the appellant's case. In any event, taking grounds 1, 2, 4,  5
    and 6 cumulatively, the case for setting aside  the  judge's  reasoning
    and decision on the dishonesty in its entirety is unanswerable  because
    there is  insufficient  reasoning  in  the  remainder  of  the  judge's
    assessment from paras 40-57 that, on any legitimate view, could sustain
    his finding that the respondent had established that the appellant  had
    used a proxy test taker  for  the  English  language  test  at  Synergy
    Business College of London on 18 September 2012.

14. Given that the judge only had a human rights ground  of  appeal,  there
    being no right to appeal  against  a  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules inevitably affected his  decision
    to dismiss the Article 8 claim.

15. In any event, the judge's decision on the appellant's Article  8  claim
    stands to be set aside for the following reasons:

16.  The  judge  gave  his  reasons  for  finding  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate at paras 63-64, which read:

         "63. The appellant can speak  a  level  of  English  and  can  fund
             himself  but  these  are   neutral   points.   He   has   been
             conspicuously unsuccessful in most of his study  efforts.  One
             of his degrees was a 3rd  class  degree.  Many  courses  never
             reached fruition and the money  so  lost  could  have  been  a
             motive to cheat. There really is no  good  balancing  exercise
             that approaches the weight given on the respondent's  side  in
             the balancing exercise under Razgar of the five stages  ending
             in  a  proportionality  test.  However,  that  is  a  fallback
             position, since I do not consider  there  was  any  breach  of
             family or private life rights.  Even  if  I  had  cleared  the
             appellant of dishonesty, that is a huge problem for  him  with
             this appeal being limited to human rights.

          64.   For  these  reasons,  the  refusal  is   both   lawful   and
             proportionate.  The  upholding  of  law  and  order   requires
             cheating of immigration controls to be deterred...."

17.  Although  the  phrase  "Even  if  I  had  cleared  the  appellant   of
    dishonesty..." means that the judge was  saying  that  the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds would have been dismissed even if he had
    not found against the appellant on the  question  of  dishonesty,  that
    simply cannot be the case given the words underlined above in  relation
    to para 64 which show, in my view, that his decision on the  allegation
    of dishonesty affected his consideration of the Article 8 claim outside
    the Immigration Rules.

18. Accordingly, it is necessary to set aside  the  whole  of  the  judge's
    decision, save that his summary of the evidence at paras  21-30  stands
    as a record of the evidence that was given before him.

19. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

20. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). There is a  lot  of
    evidence in this  case.  It  is  necessary  for  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal to be re-made on the merits on all issues. In all of
    the circumstances, it would be simply unfair not to remit the appeal to
    the FtT.

21. Since Mr Lewis did not attend the hearing, it was not possible  for  me
    to  give  any  directions  or  conduct  any  case  management.  In  the
    circumstances, the most I could do was to take the steps  explained  at
    paras 6-9 above and avoid an unnecessary adjournment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  set  aside.
This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  on  the
appellant's appeal to be re-made on the merits on  all  issues  by  a  judge
other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Freer.

Directions to the parties

1.   The Appellant shall notify the Tribunal within five days  of  the  date
      on which these Directions are despatched the following:

     (a) if an interpreter is required  at  the  hearing,  the  language  in
           which an interpreter is required;

     (b) the number of witnesses who will give evidence.

2.   Any evidence the Appellant seeks to rely on must be  served  within  21
      days of the date on which this "Decision and Directions"  is  sent  to
      the parties. The Appellant's bundle must include:
      a.  Witness statements of the evidence to be called at the hearing.
      b.  A paginated and indexed bundle of all documents to be relied on at
           the  hearing.  Essential  passages  must  be  identified  in   a
           schedule, or highlighted.
      c.  A skeleton argument, identifying all relevant  issues  and  citing
           relevant authorities.
      d.  A chronology of events


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
