
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/05609/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision sent to parties on           |
|On 21 April 2017                      |On 8 May 2017                         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        ms shaki oritoke madkour-ali
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Ms P Yong, instructed by Greenland Lawyers LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of on 14 September  2015  to  refuse  the
    claimant leave to remain on the basis of private and family life with a
    British citizen of Nigerian origin.

Background

 2. The claimant has a poor immigration history.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 February 2003, using a multiple entry  visit  visa  which
    permitted her to enter and leave the United  Kingdom  until  2005,  but
    only for six months on  each  occasion.   At  [43]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision,  the  Judge  misdirected  himself,  approaching  the
    appeal on the basis that  the  claimant's  multi-entry  visa  made  her
    residence in the United Kingdom lawful until 2005.  There was no extant
    leave after 20 August 2003.

 3. The claimant did not embark for Nigeria when her visit visa ran out  on
    20 August 2003.  She has an ex-partner in Nigeria, who is  bringing  up
    their two children, whom it is  said  she  fears  because  of  previous
    violence and threats.  There is not and never has been an asylum  claim
    in relation to that asserted fear.

 4. The claimant married an Egyptian man in the United Kingdom in 2004  and
    on 1 September 2004 based on that marriage application she  applied  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a  settled  person.   The
    claimant had no extant leave when the spouse application was made.  The
    relationship between the claimant and her Egyptian spouse  broke  down,
    at some time before January 2008, although they remain married.

 5. In January 2008, the claimant met her British partner, and began living
    with him.  Their relationship has now lasted a  little  over  9  years.
    Her partner is of Nigerian origin and has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    for 30 years.

 6. The Secretary of  State  did  not  deal  with  the  spouse  application
    promptly.  The claimant did not inform the Secretary of State that  her
    relationship with her spouse had broken down, or that  she  was  living
    with someone else.  On 20 November 2008, the Secretary of State refused
    the spouse application.  The claimant appealed against the  refusal  of
    her spouse visa in December 2008.  The spouse appeal is not  before  me
    so I do not know  whether  she  disclosed  the  relationship  with  her
    British partner, which had then lasted almost a  year.  On  15  January
    2009 the claimant withdrew her spouse appeal:  once again she  did  not
    embark for Nigeria.

 7. The claimant remained in the United Kingdom,  without  leave,  until  4
    April 2011 when she made an application for leave to remain  on  family
    and private life grounds based on the  relationship  with  her  British
    partner.  That application was refused with no right of  appeal  on  26
    May 2011.  The claimant sought reconsideration of the decision and  the
    Secretary  of  State  made  a  further  decision  on  20  October  2011
    maintaining her refusal.

 8. On 18 June 2015, some four years later, the claimant made  the  present
    human rights application.  That application also was  refused  and  the
    claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. As stated above, the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected  himself  as
    to whether the claimant had extant leave at  the  date  of  her  spouse
    application.  That is an important error, which affected  the  rest  of
    his decision, and in particular, his partial assessment of the  factors
    which he is required to consider under  part  VA  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) at section 117B thereof.

10. At paragraph [40] of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  the  judge  set
    out the provisions of section 117B.  At  [46],  without  saying  so  in
    terms, he considered the effect of sub-sections  117B(2)  and  117B(3).
    However, the Judge failed to engage at all  with  the  'little  weight'
    provisions at sub-sections 117B(4) and 117B(5), the effect of which  is
    that little weight can be given to a private  life  or  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner while the claimant is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully, or to a private life established by a  person  when
    their immigration status is precarious.  In this case the claimant  had
    precarious immigration status for six months in 2003 and thereafter all
    of her residence in the United Kingdom has been  unlawful:  it  follows
    that little weight can be given to the relationship she  has  with  her
    British partner because of the effect of section 117B(4).

11. The observations in the decision in  relation  to  the  fear  that  the
    claimant has of return to Nigeria belong more  properly  in  an  asylum
    appeal, of which neither the First-tier Tribunal nor this Tribunal  are
    seised.  The credibility finding at paragraph 36 is  also  inadequately
    reasoned and unsustainable.

Conclusion

12. I am satisfied that there are errors of fact and law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, such that it must be set aside and remade.  It
    is not appropriate to remake the decision today.  The decision will  be
    remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings  of  fact  or
    credibility preserved.

13. The Secretary of State  is  expected  to  disclose  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the rehearing of this appeal  copies  of  the  applicant's
    spouse application and the Secretary of State's decisions thereon.

14. The claimant  is  expected  to  disclose  the  status  of  her  divorce
    proceedings and precisely when her marriage irretrievably  broke  down.



15. If either party fails to disclose the documents mentioned at  (13)  and
    (14) above, the First-tier Tribunal will take into account such failure
    when considering credibility and remaking the decision.




Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        5 May 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

