
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05301/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2018                       |On 14 February 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Sadequr Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel, instructed by E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen (the judge), promulgated on 29  October  2018,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim made on 7 March  2017  (although  the
    precise basis of this claim was varied on 14 September 2017).

 2. The essential thrust of the Appellant's case was that he  had  accrued,
    at  least  by  the  time  of  the  Respondent's  decision,  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.   This  was  highly
    relevant to his Article 8 claim.  In refusing the claim, the Respondent
    accepted that he had had continuous lawful residence from the point  of
    his entry into this country on 7 October 2007 until  21  January  2015.
    The lawful residence ceased as this stage, so the Respondent  asserted,
    because an appeal against the refusal of the relevant application (that
    being on 21 January 2015) had been made out of  time.   Therefore,  the
    Appellant had become an overstayer.  As a result of this, the Appellant
    had not accrued the necessary period of continuous lawful residence and
    was unable to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. Other matters were considered, but overall it was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's claim had to fail.

Paragraph 276B of the Rules

 4. Paragraph 276B provides as follows:

         276B. The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence
         in the United Kingdom.

        (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
        it would be undesirable for him to be  given  indefinite  leave  to
        remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

           (a) age; and

           (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

           (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
           and employment record; and

           (d) domestic circumstances; and

           (e) compassionate circumstances; and

           (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii) the applicant does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general
      grounds for refusal.

         (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
         English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
         Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
         laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies,  any
         current period of overstaying will  be  disregarded.  Any  previous
         period of  overstaying  between  periods  of  leave  will  also  be
         disregarded where -

           (a) the previous application was made before  24  November  2016
           and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or

           (b) the further application was made on  or  after  24  November
           2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.

 5. Paragraph 276A provides, insofar as is relevant here:

         276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).

         (a) "continuous residence" means residence in  the  United  Kingdom
        for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall  not
        be considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent from
        the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at  any  one
        time, provided that the applicant in question has existing  limited
        leave to enter or remain upon their departure and return, but shall
        be considered to have been broken if the applicant:

           (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971  Act,  section
           10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or  has  left  the  United
           Kingdom having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or

           (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so,  evidenced  a
           clear intention not to return; or

           (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could
           have had no reasonable expectation at the time of  leaving  that
           he would lawfully be able to return; or

           (iv) has been convicted of an offence and  was  sentenced  to  a
           period of imprisonment or was directed  to  be  detained  in  an
           institution other than a prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
           hospital or an institution for young offenders),  provided  that
           the sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or

           (v) has spent a total of more than 18  months  absent  from  the
           United Kingdom during the period in question.

      (b) "lawful residence" means residence which is  continuous  residence
      pursuant to:

           (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or

           (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971  Act  (as
           previously in force), or immigration bail within section  11  of
           the 1971 Act, where leave to enter  or  remain  is  subsequently
           granted; or

           (iii) an exemption from immigration control, including where  an
           exemption ceases to apply if it is  immediately  followed  by  a
           grant of leave to enter or remain.

The judge's decision

 6. It is of some relevance that the Respondent was not represented at  the
    hearing before the judge.  Having set  out  a  chronology  of  relevant
    events in the Appellant's immigration history at [2], the judge goes on
    in [4] to summarise  the  Respondent's  decision.   This  included  the
    acceptance the Appellant had had lawful  residence  between  his  entry
    into this country and 21 January 2015.  Notwithstanding this,  at  [16]
    the judge goes on to find  that  the  Appellant's  departure  from  the
    United Kingdom in March 2012 (an absence from this country which lasted
    until his re-entry on 6 September of that year) had broken  the  lawful
    residence.  This finding effectively put pay to the Appellant's ability
    to rely on paragraph 276B of the Rules.

 7. The judge goes on and deals with Article 8 in the context of  paragraph
    276ADE and in the wider context, but finds that there  was  nothing  to
    avail the Appellant.

 8. The appeal was duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. There are two grounds put forward.  The first argues that the judge was
    wrong to have found that the  Appellant's  departure  from  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012 broke his continuous  lawful  residence.   Reliance  is
    placed on paragraph 276A of the Rules and the Respondent's  own  policy
    guidance.  Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to make  any  finding
    as to whether or not the Appellant's leave to remain continued after 21
    January 2015.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker  on
    13 November 2018.

The hearing before me

11. It is fair to say that there was a certain amount of fluctuation on the
    part of the representatives as to the nature of the real issues in this
    appeal.  That is  no  criticism  of  either,  but  a  reflection  of  a
    combination of somewhat unclear approach by the judge, the absence of a
    Presenting Officer at the  hearing  below,  the  grounds  (which  might
    possibly have been more tightly  drafted),  and  the  need  to  address
    materiality of certain potential errors.

12. In essence, Mr Saini submitted that the judge was wrong to have taken a
    point about the break in residence  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's
    departure  in  2012.   This  was  contrary  to  the  Respondent's   own
    concession in the reasons for refusal letter and there was  nothing  to
    show that the judge had canvassed the point at  the  hearing.   In  any
    event he submitted that paragraph 276A(a)(iii) alone or in  conjunction
    with the Respondent's relevant guidance showed that  the  circumstances
    of the Appellant's absence from the United Kingdom did  not  break  the
    continuous lawful residence.

13. In respect of ground 2, Mr Saini submitted that the real question  here
    was about whether or not the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a  previous
    decision had been lodged in time or not.  The Respondent had said  that
    it was not, whereas all of the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge indicated that it had been.  The judge had failed  to  deal  with
    this issue at  all.   If  the  appeal  had  been  lodged  in  time  the
    Appellant's leave was extended by virtue of section 3C of the 1971  Act
    until  23  February  2017.   Thereafter  the  Appellant  made  a  fresh
    application to the Respondent within the fourteen days'  grace  period.
    This application was subsequently varied on two occasions and this  was
    permissible.  In light of paragraph 276B(v) of  the  Rules,  the  grace
    period had the effect of disregarding that short period of  overstaying
    and therefore the Appellant was able to show that he  had  accrued  the
    necessary ten years' lawful residence.

14. Mr Saini's fall-back position was that even if the paragraph 276B point
    could not assist the Appellant, the judge  had  erred  in  his  overall
    approach to Article 8 in its wider context.

15.  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  procedural
    unfairness by the judge in terms of him taking the point about the 2012
    absence.  In addition, the Appellant had failed to show that he  had  a
    realistic expectation of being able to return  to  the  United  Kingdom
    when he left in March 2012.

16. In respect of ground  2,  Mr  Lindsay  acknowledged  the  existence  of
    evidence relating to the lodging of the  appeal  in  2015.   He  had  a
    concern as to  whether  section  3C  leave  could  have  benefited  the
    Appellant up until the point that he became "appeals  right  exhausted"
    in February 2017, or whether his leave to remain had ceased at the time
    of the Respondent's refusal of the application that had been  appealed.



17. At the end of the hearing I gave Mr Lindsay permission to take  further
    instructions on this last point and to provide any written  submissions
    he wished to no later than  24th  December  2018  at  5  p.m.  No  such
    submissions were forthcoming.

Post-hearing directions

18. Following the hearing  before  me  and  having  considered  the  recent
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the  application  of  Ahmed)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (para  276B  -  ten  years
    lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010  (IAC),  published  on  11  January
    2019, I deemed it appropriate  to  issue  directions  to  the  parties,
    inviting further written submissions on the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant could be said to have accrued the requisite ten years' lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom, notwithstanding any errors made by the
    judge. The directions are annexed to this decision.

19. Both parties duly complied with my directions and I am grateful  to  Mr
    Lindsay and Mr Singer (who had drafted the original grounds of  appeal)
    for their assistance.

20. In summary, Mr Lindsay asserts  that  because  the  Appellant  had  not
    accrued the requisite ten years' lawful  residence  prior  to  becoming
    appeal rights exhausted in  February  2017,  and  because  he  was  not
    subsequently granted leave, he cannot satisfy paragraph 276(B)(i)(a).

21. Mr Singer candidly, and in my view entirely correctly,  conceeded  that
    in light of Ahmed the Appellant cannot show ten years' lawful residence
    in this country.

22. However, it is still  asserted  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in
    respect of both of the grounds of appeal as originally put forward  and
    that the grounds should be amended to include a  wider  attack  on  the
    judge's approach to Article 8. In essence, the judge failed  to  assess
    the Appellant's private life in the correct context of him  having  had
    continuous lawful residence between 2007 and early  2017,  with  regard
    also to other factors.

Decision on Error of Law

Errors identified

23. I conclude that there is an error of law in relation to  ground  1  and
    the Appellant's departure from the United Kingdom in 2012.

24. First, it is quite clear from the reasons for refusal letter and indeed
    the judge's own summary of  that  at  [4]  of  his  decision  that  the
    Respondent expressly accepted that there had been no break by virtue of
    the short absence from this country in 2012.  There is nothing  in  the
    papers before me to indicate that the judge  informed  the  Appellant's
    representative at the hearing that he was going to take this  point  in
    any event.  I am satisfied that there was procedural unfairness in this
    regard.

25. Second, and in any event, even if the matter had  been  raised  by  the
    judge at the hearing, there are no reasons  provided  in  [16]  of  the
    decision to indicate on what basis the judge was  concluding  that  the
    lawful residence had been broken by the absence.  There is no reference
    to paragraph 276A or the Respondent's  guidance.   In  my  view  it  is
    simply impossible to tell from the face of the decision on  what  basis
    the judge was concluding as he did.

26. Third, on the face of  the  evidence  the  Appellant  left  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2012 with valid leave.  Once in Bangladesh he  applied
    for and was granted leave to enter in a different  category,  something
    which is contemplated by the Respondent's own guidance.   Whilst  there
    would of course be no guarantee to an individual who applied for  fresh
    leave to enter whilst outside of the United  Kingdom  that  they  would
    obtain this, the fact that the Respondent's guidance indicates  that  a
    change in the category of  leave  is  permissible,  combined  with  the
    Appellant's  good  immigration  history,  would  have  shown  a  strong
    arguable case that the Appellant did have a reasonable  expectation  of
    being able to return to the United Kingdom.

27. I turn to ground 2 and the issue of whether the Appellant could rely on
    periods after 21 January 2015.  The judge has  not  engaged  with  this
    issue at all.  This is despite the fact that there was clearly  a  good
    deal of evidence before him, particularly relating to  the  lodging  of
    the appeal in 2015.  In that regard I have been referred  to  pages  40
    and 41 of the Appellant's bundle and a witness  statement  provided  by
    the Appellant's solicitors (which I am satisfied was before the  judge)
    dated the day before the hearing.  There is an error here as the  judge
    has failed to deal with an aspect of the Appellant's case.

Materiality

28. The question then arises as to whether the errors identified above were
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

29. I am satisfied that the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 21 January 2015 was in fact lodged in time, contrary to the
    Respondent's assertion.

30. Page 40 of the Appellant's bundle is a fax transmission receipt.  It is
    dated 31 January 2015, records the correct  Tribunal  fax  number,  and
    also confirms the successful transmission of  30  pages.   At  page  41
    there is a cover letter for the notice  of  appeal,  dated  30  January
    2015.  In addition to this evidence, there is the unchallenged  witness
    statement from the Appellant's solicitor relating to the same issue and
    confirming that the notice of appeal was  lodged  within  the  relevant
    period.

31. Whilst there certainly does appear to  have  been  some  confusion  and
    delay on the Tribunal's side in respect of processing the appeal, it is
    more likely than not that the appeal itself was made in time.

32. As a result of this, the Appellant would have enjoyed the protection of
    section 3C leave until  he  became  'appeals  right  exhausted'  on  23
    February 2017.  With reference  to  section  104  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that is when his appeal became finally
    determined.

33. I do not accept Mr Lindsay's suggestion that once  the  Upper  Tribunal
    refused permission to appeal the Appellant's leave was to be treated as
    ending on 21 January 2015.  Provided that an appeal is lodged  in  time
    (as I have found it to have been), section 3C leave operates until  the
    appeal is finally determined one way or another.  The legal position on
    this is clear: the whole point of section 3C leave is  to  protect  the
    status of individuals whilst  in-time  applications  or  appeals  await
    decisions.

34. I accept that once his appeal rights were exhausted, the Appellant then
    made a fresh application to the Respondent within the  14  day  'grace'
    period allowed for by paragraph 276B(v) of the Rules.  Once he did that
    he was fully entitled to vary that fresh application, as he did on  two
    occasions, the first on 20 June 2017 and the  second  on  14  September
    2017.

35. Notwithstanding the matters in the Appellant's favour set out above, he
    could not have satisfied paragraph 276B(i)(a) in any event, as has  now
    been recognised by Mr Singer in his written response to my post-hearing
    directions. The concession is correct for the following reasons.

36. I respectfully agree with the relevant conclusions reached by Sweeney J
    at paragraph 75 of Ahmed. The sub-paragraphs of paragraph 276B are  all
    separate from one another. The  Appellant  had  to  show  that  he  had
    accrued the ten years' lawful residence before being able  to  rely  on
    any disregard of limited overstaying under sub-paragraph (v).

37. The Appellant had clearly not accrued the necessary ten  years'  lawful
    residence as at the exhaustion of his appeal rights and  the  cessation
    of his section 3C leave on 23 February 2017: he was some eight  months'
    short. Nor had he subsequently been granted further leave to remain  as
    a result of the new application made on 7 March 2017.

38. Therefore, the Appellant simply could not have met all the requirements
    of paragraph 276B(i)(a). In turn, the judge's errors were not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal insofar as the Rules were relevant to  the
    overall Article 8 claim.

39. Finally, I turn to the wider Article 8 point, this now being the  focus
    of the Appellant's case following the concession made  in  the  written
    response.

40. The judge's consideration is not perhaps as full as it might have  been
    and I note that section 117B is not  mentioned  at  all.  However,  and
    notwithstanding the best efforts of Mr Singer in his written  response,
    in my view what the judge has  said  is  sufficient  to  have  properly
    disposed of this aspect of the case.

41. The first point to make is the wider Article 8 conclusions are  not  in
    fact challenged in the grounds of appeal at all. Mr Singer  has  sought
    to amend the grounds of appeal, but I conclude that it is inappropriate
    to permit this at such a late stage. An attack on the wider  Article  8
    assessment could, and should, have been put forward at  the  permission
    stage.

42. In any event, the judge dealt adequately  with  the  substance  of  the
    claim. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is properly addressed at [18] and,  when
    this is combined with the inability of the Appellant to have  satisfied
    paragraph 276B as well, the public interest in removal was strong, with
    reference to section 117B(1) and (5) and Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11,  at
    paragraphs 47-48.

43. There was no "near miss" argument available to the  Appellant,  but  in
    any event he was eight months short of the required ten years, and  the
    length of residence in the United Kingdom was  not  in  and  of  itself
    going to act as a compelling circumstance.

44. It is apparent from the face of [20] and [21] that the judge  took  the
    Appellant's significant lawful residence in this country into  account,
    together with familial and social ties here. Nothing material was  left
    out of account on the  "plus"  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  Equally,
    factors counting against the  Appellant  (i.e.  matters  going  to  his
    ability to reintegrate into Bangladeshi society for example)  were,  in
    effect, listed in the "negative" side.

45. It is clear that there were no other compelling or exceptional  factors
    in play  here  despite  the  contrary  suggestion  by  Mr  Singer  (see
    paragraphs 9-10 of the written response).

46. The failure to have specifically gone through the section 117B  factors
    is immaterial in this case. Even taking Rhuppiah [2018]  UKSC  58  into
    account, there was nothing here which could even arguably have  led  to
    any conclusion other than a material reduction in  weight  attributable
    to the private life because of the  precarious  nature  of  the  lawful
    residence. No other factors were capable of  enhancing  the  Article  8
    claim.

47. The Appellant's challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must fail.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

That decision shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 31 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX: POST-HEARING DIRECTIONS


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05301/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                           Mohammad Sadequr Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                              DIRECTIONS NOTICE

   1. Following a hearing on 19 December 2018, I reserved my decision on
      whether the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law.

   2. Having considered the evidence and arguments further, and in light of
      the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of
      Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (para 276B - ten
      years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010 (IAC), an issue arises in
      this appeal which the parties should have the opportunity to address
      by way of written submissions.

   3. I am satisfied that the Appellant had leave (including section 3C
      leave) until 23 February 2017. This was short of the required 10
      years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom. Although the
      Appellant put in a further application for leave within the 'grace'
      period set out in paragraph 276A(v), he was not subsequently granted
      leave to remain. In light of this and the Ahmed decision, can it be
      said that he nonetheless accrued the necessary period of lawful
      residence?

                                 DIRECTIONS

                    1. Both parties are invited to make any further written
                       submissions on this question;
                    2. Any submissions must be served on the other party and
                       filed with the Upper Tribunal by 5pm on 29 January
                       2019.




Signed   [pic]    Date: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor








