
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05714/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 15th March 2018            |
|typed, corrected, signed and sent to          |                              |
|Promulgation on 13th February 2018.           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  LAMIN [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Habtemariam, Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  some  time  in  2003.   He
    arrived on a visit visa and when it expired he remained in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally.  In May  2011  he  was  encountered  by  immigration
    authorities and arrested.  He claimed  asylum  but  then  withdrew  his
    application a month later.  Further submissions were  rejected  and  on
    19th October 2015, the appellant made application to the respondent for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds of his private and
    family life.  The family life in question was with Ms [J], who is  also
    originally from Gambia and the parties' son [A], who was born  on  29th
    October 2010.  The application was refused by the  respondent  on  17th
    February 2016 and the appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell at Newport  on
    28th September 2017.

2.   In the letter from the respondent to the appellant  advising  him  that
    his application for leave to remain was being refused (it is dated 17th
    February, 2016), it is  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  he  has  a
    relationship with  his  partner  and  that  he  meets  the  suitability
    requirements of S-LTR of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i).  When considering
    EX1 of the immigration rules, the refusal  letter  says,  "you  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with your partner however they  are
    Gambian with leave to remain in the United Kingdom".

3.   The  judge  appears  to  have  acknowledged  that  the  refusal  letter
    accepted that the appellant and his  partner  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship but refers in paragraph 4 of the  determination
    to the fact that his partner is not settled in the United Kingdom.  The
    judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from  Ms  [J]  and  it
    appears  that  he  was  asked  by  the  Presenting  Officer   to   note
    discrepancies between their evidence, suggesting that they were in fact
    no longer in a subsisting relationship.  The judge  then  concluded  at
    paragraph 32 that he was not satisfied that the appellant had shown  on
    the balance of probabilities that this is  a  genuine  relationship  or
    that they live together.

4.   The respondent having initially accepted that the  parties  were  in  a
    genuine relationship it was not for the judge then to make  an  adverse
    finding  without  having  first  given  notice   to   the   appellant's
    representatives  and  given  them  an  opportunity  to  apply  for   an
    adjournment in order that they may adduce further evidence to deal with
    the point that had earlier been accepted by  the  respondent.   See  RM
    (Kwok on Tong HC 395, as amended ("immigration rules") 395  Para.  320)
    [2006] UKIAT 39.

5.   As a result, I am satisfied that the  judge  has  erred  in  law.   The
    determination cannot stand.  I set it aside.

6.   Given the inevitable delays that occur when  part-time  judges  adjourn
    matters I have concluded that the matter must be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal if lengthy delays are to be avoided.  The  matter  should
    be heard afresh by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell.
     None of the First-tier Judge's findings are preserved.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
