





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/05214/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |          Decision and Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 26 February 2019              |          On: 13 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                          Mrs Arobi Abbasi Shwargo
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ostadsaffar, counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 24  November  1994.
      She appeals with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 14 November 2018, dismissing her appeal
      against the respondent's refusal  of  her  application  for  leave  to
      remain as the spouse of  a  settled  partner,  Saikiran  Pudhota.  Her
      husband is a British citizen

   2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the respondent considered the
      appellant's application under the five  year  partner  route.  It  was
      accepted that she met the suitability requirements of S-LTR.  However,
      the respondent noted that she had not provided evidence of passing the
      English language speaking and listening test at Level A1 of the Common
      European Framework.

   3. When considering the application under the ten year partner route, the
      respondent contended that there were no insurmountable obstacles to be
      faced by the appellant or her partner in continuing their family  life
      together outside the UK or Bangladesh.

   4. The Judge found with regard to the five year route, that the appellant
      would not have been in a position to meet the requirements as she  had
      not passed the relevant English language test and further, having been
      the subject of a curtailment of leave, had been unlawfully here  since
      26 April 2016 [20].

   5. He noted at [21] that the respondent, for reasons best known  to  her,
      had not taken issue with the fact that at the time the application was
      considered, the appellant was not here lawfully.

   6. The appellant did not deny that she did not have the requisite English
      language qualification but argued that this was because the respondent
      had her passport, without which she was unable  to  take  the  English
      language test. The Judge stated that whilst that is a factor, he would
      have to take that  into  account  in  assessing  proportionality  when
      assessing her claim outside the Immigration Rules. However,  he  found
      as a matter of fact that at the time she made her application she  did
      not have the relevant English language qualification. As a result  the
      respondent was correct in refusing her application  under  that  route
      [22].

   7. He found that the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to her relocating to Bangladesh  because  her
      family did not accept her marriage. That  was  a  last  minute  excuse
      [26].

   8. With regard to her claim that her husband does not speak the language,
      he saw no reason why her husband could learn the language [25]. In the
      two statements deposed by her husband there was no  reference  to  the
      assertion regarding his inability to  speak  the  language,  nor  with
      regard to her family not accepting the marriage.

   9. With regard to her claim outside the Rules,  the  circumstances  would
      have to be exceptional, resulting in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
      for her or a member of her family.

  10. He recognised that both would wish to live together  in  the  UK.  Her
      husband is settled and has a job here.  The  evidence  did  '......not
      suggest that for them both to either live together in  Bangladesh,  or
      for the appellant alone to return to apply for an entry  clearance  to
      come, would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences'  [29].  The
      appellant's exclusion was accordingly justifiable [30].

  11. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers
      found it to be arguable that the Judge erred  in  his  proportionality
      assessment generally, and in particular by not sufficiently  factoring
      in the claimed circumstance that the  respondent's  retention  of  the
      appellant's passport may have rendered it impossible for her to take a
      further English language test. Further, he may not  have  factored  in
      that the appellant apparently having  obtained  a  Bachelor's  degree,
      could satisfy the relevant English language requirement.

  12. Ms Ostadsaffar, who did not represent the appellant before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, referred to the grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.

  13. She noted that the appellant stated in her witness statement that  she
      has completed her Bachelor of Arts with Honours  in  Business  Studies
      from Cardiff Metropolitan University and claimed to have qualified  in
      respect of the English language requirement.

  14. She referred to the decision of Agyarko R (on the  application  of)  v
      SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. Lord Reed, with whom the other  Justices  agreed,
      stated at [48] that the Rules and  Instructions  are  compatible  with
      Article 8. That is not, of course, to say that decisions applying  the
      Rules  and  Instructions  in  individual  cases  will  necessarily  be
      compatible with Article 8: that is a question which, if a decision  is
      challenged, must be determined independently by the court or  tribunal
      in the light of the particular circumstances of each case.

  15. Lord Reed went on to state at [50] that  domestically,  officials  who
      are determining whether there are exceptional circumstances as defined
      in the Instructions and whether leave to remain  should  therefore  be
      granted outside  the  Rules,  are  directed  by  the  Instructions  to
      consider  all  relevant  factors,  including  whether  the   applicant
      "[formed] their relationship with their partner at a  time  when  they
      had  no  immigration  status,  or  this  was  precarious".  They   are
      instructed:

        "Family life which involves the applicant putting down roots in the
        UK in the full knowledge  that  their  stay  here  is  unlawful  or
        precarious should be given less weight, when balanced  against  the
        factors weighing in favour of removal, than family life formed by a
        person lawfully present in the UK."

  16. Lord Reed found that Instruction to be consistent with the case law of
      the European Court. As the Instruction makes  clear,  "precariousness"
      is not a preliminary hurdle to be  overcome.  Rather,  the  fact  that
      family life has been established by an applicant in the full knowledge
      that his stay in the UK was unlawful or precarious affects the  weight
      to be attached to it in the balancing exercise.

  17. Lord Reed went on to state at [51] that:

           Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled to
           remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
           this consideration depends on what the  outcome  of  immigration
           control might otherwise be. For example, if an  applicant  would
           otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal,  then
           the weight of the public interest in his  or  her  removal  will
           generally be very  considerable.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  an
           applicant -  even  if  residing  in  the  UK  unlawfully  -  was
           otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at least  if  an
           application were made from outside the UK,  there  might  be  no
           public interest in his or her removal. The point is  illustrated
           by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department.

  18. Ms Ostadsaffer submitted that the First-tier Judge failed to  consider
      the fact that the  appellant  had  produced  evidence  satisfying  the
      English language requirement by obtaining a  Bachelors  degree.  There
      was no assessment of that at all.

  19. The appellant contended that she met all the  requirements  under  the
      five year route except for the English language  requirement.  At  the
      time of the application, she stated that she requested the Home Office
      to return her passport as she was unable to take the English  language
      test without the passport. The passport had  been  placed  before  the
      Home Office during the initial period of the application itself.

  20. There was no response from the Home Office; after that a reminder  was
      again sent on 1 February 2017 reminding the Home Office of  that  need
      but there was no response.

  21. In accordance with Home Office guidelines, the Home Office is required
      to return the passport for the  purpose  of  undertaking  the  English
      language test. The passport was given to the Home Office at  the  date
      of the curtailment of the visa during  the  interview  on  8  December
      2016. She had commenced a degree in 2014 to 2015.

  22. At [22] the Judge found that whilst he was aware  that  the  appellant
      contended that the reason she  did  not  have  the  requisite  English
      language qualification was because the  secretary  of  state  had  her
      passport was  a  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing
      proportionality, as a matter  of  fact,  at  the  time  she  made  her
      application she did not have the English language qualification.

  23. Ms Ostadsaffer submitted that in the circumstances, the Judge did  not
      properly consider the reasonableness of requiring entry  clearance  in
      line with authorities such as Chikwamba, Hyatt  (Pakistan)  and  Chen.
      Accordingly the Article 8 proportionality assessment was not  properly
      reasoned.

  24. In reply, Ms Isherwood submitted that there has been no material error
      of law. The guidance relied on is in respect of  indefinite  leave  to
      remain cases.

  25. At the date of her application, she would have had full knowledge that
      she had to show that the Rules were met. However, she did not have the
      passport. That had been sent in when her leave was curtailed.

      Assessment

  26. The appellant contended that she met all the other criteria under  the
      five year route except  for  the  English  language  requirement.  The
      refusal itself was based upon her not  meeting  the  English  language
      test requirement in speaking and listening.

  27. However, she was unable to take  the  English  language  test  as  her
      passport had been taken and without it she  was  unable  to  take  the
      test.

  28. The student transcript placed before the First-tier Tribunal from  the
      Cardiff Metropolitan University, indicates that the appellant obtained
      a Bachelor of Arts with Honours in Business Studies and that the award
      year was "15/16". She received the BA with Honours in Business Studies
      on 24 May 2017.

  29. There are letters  in  the  appellant's  bundle  from  her  solicitors
      requesting the passport. On 1 February 2017 her solicitors referred to
      an earlier letter dated 16 December 2016 requesting  the  passport  of
      the appellant  in  order  for  her  to  attend  the  English  language
      examination. They undertook to return the original passport after  the
      English language test.

  30. In the reply to the solicitors' letter dated  1  September  2017,  the
      Home Office stated that her application was refused on 9 March 2017 at
      which time their documents were retained under s.17 of the Asylum  and
      Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants  Etc.)  Act  2004.  They   were
      therefore unable to return her documents as requested.

  31. It was evident from the appellant's  Cardiff  Metropolitan  University
      student transcript, that the language of instruction was English.  The
      language of assessment for her programme of study in BA Hons  Business
      Studies was English.

  32. There is reference to the various modules that she was  enrolled  for,
      including the level. It is recorded that she produced  a  dissertation
      at London School of Commerce. She received a credit for  that,  and  a
      passing grade.

  33. At her appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant produced a
      witness statement which she made in English and  which  she  confirmed
      was true and correct. She gave her evidence in English. She was cross-
      examined in English.

  34. The Judge noted from his knowledge of hearing cases from appellants of
      Bangladeshi origin, that English is quite widely spoken. He  concluded
      at [27] that  the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to her  relocating  to  Bangladesh  with  her
      husband.

  35. With regard to her claim outside the Rules,  he  considered  that  the
      evidence did not suggest that for both of them  to  live  together  in
      Bangladesh or for the appellant alone to return to apply for an  entry
      clearance to come would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
      [29].

  36. However, what he did not consider was  whether  in  the  circumstances
      there might be no public interest in her removal if she  were  certain
      to  be  granted  leave  to  enter.  The  only  basis  upon  which  her
      application was refused was because she did not undertake  and  fulfil
      the English language test requirement under  the  Rule.  However,  the
      respondent had not been prepared to release the passport to her at the
      time.

  37. It was nonetheless evident  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  speak
      English at a high level, having obtained a degree where the course had
      been taught in English over a  period  of  two  years  and  where  her
      various assignments and examinations had all been taken in English.

  38. In the event the Judge did  not  undertake  a  proper  proportionality
      assessment. Where the only issue related  to  her  fulfilment  of  the
      English language requirement, he was bound to consider whether she was
      certain to be granted leave to enter.

  39. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that she had  in  fact
      obtained a Bachelors degree from Cardiff Metropolitan University  with
      honours in Business Studies which may have satisfied the requirement.

  40. In any event, on the evidence presented it was certain that she  would
      be granted leave to enter where the only outstanding  requirement  was
      the English language requirement.

  41. As at the date of the decision as well as at the date of hearing,  the
      Judge found that  the  couple  were  involved  in  a  relationship  of
      marriage. Both of them would wish to live together.  Her  husband  was
      settled in a job here.

  42. There were no other factors militating against her being granted leave
      to enter from abroad. The Judge  was  obliged  to  consider  therefore
      whether, in these circumstances, there was any public interest in  her
      removal.

  43. As she was bound to succeed in an application made from Bangladesh for
      leave to enter, there was no public interest in her removal.

  44. I find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accordingly
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. I  accordingly  set
      the decision aside and re-make it.

  45. For the reasons already given, I find that  if  required  to  make  an
      application from Bangladesh for entry clearance to join her husband in
      the UK, the appellant would be certain to be granted leave to enter as
      the only issue  which  prevented  a  successful  application  was  her
      failure to produce evidence of passing the necessary English  language
      speaking and listening  test  at  Level  A1  of  the  Common  European
      Framework. She had in fact obtained a Bachelors  degree  from  Cardiff
      Metropolitan University with honours in Business Studies.

  46. It  has  not  been  contended  that  there  were  any  current  issues
      militating against a grant of entry clearance.

  47. In the circumstances I find that there is no public  interest  in  her
      removal.

  48.  The  contemplated  decision   is   accordingly   a   disproportionate
      interference with her right to respect for her family life  under  the
      Human Rights Convention and is accordingly unlawful under s.6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and it is set aside.


      Having re-made the decision, I allow the appellant's appeal.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 8 March 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer






