
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05992/2019
                                                               HU/05996/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers at Field    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 16 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                      1) Shoeb Mohamed Iqbal Dukanwala
                            2) Shahina Dukanwala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband and wife, both citizens of  India,  born  in
    1983 and 1986 respectively.  The first appellant (the husband)  entered
    the UK on 23 November 2010 as a student. The  second  appellant  joined
    him as a dependant in February of  2011.   The  appellants'  leave  was
    variously extended until April 2016.

 2. On 26 November 2015 the first  appellant's  leave  was  curtailed.   He
    subsequently submitted a Human  Rights  Claim  which  was  refused  and
    certified but the SSHD subsequently reconsidered this decision pursuant
    to an Order of the Court of Appeal.  The  application  was  once  again
    refused on 12 March 2019 - a decision which also relates to the  second
    appellant. The appellants' appealed this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Of significance to the instant appeal is the  terms  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's order, signed on 09 November 2018, which disposed of  judicial
    review proceedings challenging the decision of 26 November  2015  which
    reads:
         "HAVING REGARD to  the  requirements  of  Section  VI  of  Practice
         Direction 52A to Part 52 of the Civil Procedure Rules;
         AND UPON the parties confirming that none of the parties  to  these
         proceedings is a child or a protected party;
         AND UPON the parties hereto confirming  that  this  application  to
         appeal is not from a decision of the Court of Protection;
         AND UPON the Respondent agreeing to withdraw the Secretary of State
         for the Home  Department's  decision  dated  26  November  2015  to
         curtail leave to remain;
         AND UPON the Respondent agreeing to withdraw the Secretary of State
         for the Home Department's decision dated 24 February 2016 to refuse
         leave to remain;
         AND  UPON  the  Appellant  undertaking  to  submitting   any   full
         particulars relating to his application for  leave  to  remain  and
         that removal would breach his human rights for  consideration  with
         28 days of the date of the sealed Order;
         AND UPON the Respondent agreeing to make a fresh decision within  3
         months of the date the Respondent receives any further evidence for
         consideration, or if no submissions are received, within  4  months
         from  the  date  this  Order  is   sealed,   absent   any   special
         circumstances, which, if refused, will attract an in-country  right
         of appeal to the First Tier Tribunal, subject to  the  exercise  of
         certification  powers  under  section  94   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;
         AND UPON the Respondent agreeing to not remove the  Appellant  from
         the country until such decision is made;
         AND UPON the Respondent agreeing that if the Appellant succeeds  in
         any appeal, on the basis that he did not commit a TOEIC fraud then,
         in the absence of some new factor justifying a  difference  course,
         the Respondent will:
          i) Take into account all the circumstances of the  case,  and  in
             particular in deciding his case will act reasonably to  ensure
             that,  so  far  as  is  practicable,  the  Appellant  is   not
             disadvantaged by an earlier wrong finding of deception.
         ii) Treat the Claimant as being an in time applicant since the  26
             November 2015 (and any earlier period as may  be  established)
             as if he had 3C leave, subject to there being no other periods
             where the Appellant was an overstayers.
        iii) Grant the Appellant a reasonable opportunity, being  not  less
             than 60 days, to submit an application for further leave.
         iv) Waive any fee or  charge  (including  health  surcharge)  that
             might be payable for making such an application.
         AND UPON the parties requesting that this application to appeal  be
         withdrawn;
         BY CONSENT, IT IS ORDERED THAT:
         1.   The application for permission to appeal be withdrawn.
         2.   There be no order as to costs."

 4. The appeals against the Secretary of State's decision of 12 March  2019
    came before First Tier Tribunal Judge Myers on 24 June  2019  and  were
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on  27  June  2019.   The  material
    paragraphs that decision read as follows:
         "[15]    The First Appellant submits in his grounds of appeal  that
         under the terms of the consent order  the  Respondent  should  have
         withdrawn the previous decision regarding his alleged deception has
         not understood the terms of the consent order.  He states that  the
         consent order means that the parties would "revert to the situation
         as it stood on 25/11/2015, no  finding  of  deception  having  been
         made."  Furthermore, there should have been a review of his alleged
         TOEIC deception,  with  consideration  of  his  evidence  of  train
         tickets and Facebook posts but instead the Respondent  has  made  a
         decision on the human rights application.  He further submits  that
         the decision is in breach of the Appellants' Article 8 rights.
         [16] First, in relation to the consent order I find that Appellants
         have misunderstood its terms.  The order records that  the  parties
         agreed as follows; the Respondent agreed to withdraw  the  decision
         of 26/11/2015 to curtail  leave  to  remain  and  the  decision  of
         24/02/2016 to refuse leave to remain, the  Appellant  undertook  to
         submit within 28 days full particulars relating to his  application
         for leave to remain and that removal would breach his human rights,
         and on him doing so the Respondent agreed to make a fresh  decision
         which if refused would attract an in country right of  appeal.   It
         further records that the Respondent agreed that  if  the  Appellant
         succeeds in any appeal on the basis that he did not commit a  TOEIC
         fraud then the Respondent would ensure that the Appellant  had  not
         been disadvantaged by  the  earlier  wrong  finding  of  deception,
         treated him as being an in time applicant and give him a reasonable
         opportunity to submit an application for further leave.
         [17] It is the Respondent's case that the First Appellant does  not
         meet the suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules  because
         he is alleged to have used deception in a language test in February
         2012.  This and many other allegations came about after  suspicions
         were raised about  ETS  test  results  following  intelligence  and
         investigations undertaken by a BBC Panorama programme  in  February
         2014  which  discovered  instances  of  proxy  sitters   and   exam
         invigilators dictating answers and multiple choice question  papers
         being given out having already been completed.
         ...
         [20] The documents before me do not include any evidence  from  the
         Respondent in relation to the alleged forged language certificates.
          Furthermore, it is apparent  from  the  application  for  judicial
         review that no evidence had been disclosed  to  the  Appellant.   I
         cannot therefore find that the Respondent has satisfied the  burden
         of proof to show that on the  face  of  it  there  is  evidence  of
         deception.  It follows that the Appellant has succeeded in  showing
         that he did not commit a TOEIC fraud and therefore  does  not  fall
         foul of the suitability requirements in the Immigration Rules.
         ...
         [26] ... the Appellants do not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules.
         [27] I must now consider the evidence to see if there  is  anything
         which had not been already adequately considered in the context  of
         the Immigration Rules ... which could lead to a successful  article
         8 claim.
         ...
         [34]  For  all  of  the  above  reasons,  I  therefore  find   that
         interference by the Respondent for  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control is proportionate in this case.  I do  not  find
         that  the  Appellants'  appeal  succeeds  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 5. In her Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  to  appeal  against
    the FtT's decision, the Secretary of State said as follows:
         "(1) The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department.  Documents relating to this appeal should
             be sent to the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  at
             the above address.
          (2) The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal.  It is accepted that  the  FTT  did  not
             follow the instructions set out in  the  Consent  Order  after
             having found that no deception was committed by the appellant.
             It is accepted that the appeal should  have  been  allowed  on
             this basis to then allow the SSHD to  give  the  appellant  60
             days to make a fresh application on the basis that he  is  put
             back in the position he was in on 26 November 2015 and has had
             s.3C leave since then and therefore  was  not  an  overstayer.
             The Upper Tribunal is invited to proceed on this basis."

 6. In my view, the Secretary of State was entirely correct to accept  that
    this is an appeal which ought to have been allowed on Article 8 grounds
    by the FtT, given its  findings  that  the  Appellant  did  not  commit
    deception and the terms of the Court of Appeal's Order.  The  terms  of
    this Order are such that it  is  clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted (and she continues to accept) that the public interest demands
    that the appellants be allowed to remain in the UK in order to  make  a
    further application to formalise and regularise  their  stay,  as  they
    would have been able to do had the deception allegation not  been  made
    against them.  This is a feature of the Appellants' case which the  FtT
    failed to grasp.

 7. In such circumstances, I adopt the approach suggested by the  Secretary
    of State and set aside the decision of FtT. I remake  the  decision  on
    the available evidence, concluding that the appeal should be allowed on
    Article 8 grounds for the reasons disclosed by the Secretary  of  State
    in her Rule 24 response.



Decision

The decision of the First Tier Tribunal is set aside.

Upon remaking the decision of appeal and for the reasons  given  above,  the
appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.


Signed                              Date         17 January 2020

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

