
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05527/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 22 January 2018                  |On: 24 January 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                 XIAOYAN LIU
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      In person
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing of an appeal against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walker in which  she  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, a  citizen  of  China,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant further leave to remain.

 2.  At  a  hearing  on  30  November  2017  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and set aside that decision to be  remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal. The Appellant was advised  to  attend  the  resumed
    hearing and directions given to the  Appellant  to  serve  any  further
    evidence upon which he wished to rely seven  days  in  advance  of  the
    resumed hearing. No further evidence has been submitted. The  Appellant
    attended the resumed hearing in person and Mr Richards represented  the
    Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a 34 year old citizen of China. He came to the  United
    Kingdom lawfully as a student arriving on  7  September  2005  and  his
    leave to remain was renewed on various occasions up to 30  August  2011
    when he left. He re-entered the UK on 21 April 2012  as  a  post  study
    migrant remaining until 5 April 2014. The Appellant re-entered for  the
    last time on 16 September 2014 as an academic visitor and  was  granted
    leave to remain until 16 September 2015.

 4. On 14 September 2015 the Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence. The application was  made  under
    the terms of the Immigration Rules which provided for an entitlement to
    indefinite leave after 10 years continuous lawful residence  (paragraph
    276B(i)(a)). The application was refused because  the  Appellant  could
    not show continuous residence as his absence between 30 August 2011 and
    21  April  2012  exceeded  6  months  (see  paragraph  276A(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules).

 5. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision.  By  virtue  of  s.82
    Nationality Immigration and asylum Act  2002  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal against the Immigration Rules decision. The only right of appeal
    was against the refusal of a human rights  claim  and  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain on the grounds of  long  residence  was
    considered as a 'deemed' human rights claim.

 6. The appeal came for hearing before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker.
    Although this was not an Immigration Rules appeal the Judge  considered
    whether the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  as
    this was relevant to the proportionality of the human rights  decision.
    The  Judge  carefully  detailed  the  relevant  law  and  reached   the
    conclusion (at paragraph 27 of her decision) that the  Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Judge  went  on  to  consider  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's  private  life  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
    Convention. The appeal  was  allowed  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision. The Secretary of State appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission to appeal was granted.

 8. At the  hearing  on  30  November  2017  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law.  The
    detailed reasons for this finding are set out in the  decision  but  in
    summary it was found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to carry
    out a proper proportionality assessment with reference to the facts  as
    set out in section 117B Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    with reference  to  the  relevant  caselaw  and  by  making  unreasoned
    findings relating to the Appellant's inability to form a  private  life
    in China.





The resumed hearing

 9. As the Appellant was  unrepresented  I  explained  the  nature  of  the
    resumed hearing. The Appellant  emphasised  that  his  application  was
    based on long residence and not  on  private  life  and  he  could  not
    understand why it was not dealt with on that basis. He  said  that  the
    appeal did not consider his long residence. He has been in  the  United
    Kingdom for 13 years continuously and he has not been  back  to  China.
    Asked about the absences in 2011 and 2014 he accepted however  that  he
    returned to China but only for short periods.

10. I asked the Appellant why he could not go back to China  and  make  his
    life there. He said that he has been at university here  too  much  and
    that he is emotionally attached to this country. It would be  difficult
    to change. He is 35 years old and his way of thinking has  been  formed
    here. China has changed dramatically since he left.  It  would  not  be
    easy to integrate. He has Chinese friends and they have managed to stay
    here. Their life is getting better whilst he has exhausted his savings.
    He has been to the CAB and  the  Jobcentre,  but  he  cannot  get  work
    because he does not have leave to remain.  He  has  finished  with  his
    employment in China. The two-year contract of  collaboration  with  the
    University of the West of England has finished. He is the  unlucky  one
    in the company of his friends who have been allowed to stay even though
    he has a higher qualification.

11. Answering questions from Mr Richards the Appellant  said  that  he  had
    invested financially by spending 10 years studying rather than working.
    Mr Richards asked why he should not follow the  normal  expectation  of
    coming here to get qualifications and returning to use them in his home
    country. The Appellant said that he has a good  relationship  with  his
    laboratory here and he is integrated. Some of  his  friends  have  been
    here for a long time. He said that he could get a job in China, but  he
    could have done so 10 years ago after his Master's  degree.  He  agreed
    that he would prefer to live here.

12. I asked the Appellant if he had anything  to  add.  He  said  that  the
    younger generation have taken over in  China.  He  disagrees  with  the
    period that he has spent in this country and he should  be  allowed  to
    stay on the basis of long residence. He cannot get  a  job  because  he
    does not have leave to remain.

13. I said that it was inevitable that his appeal would be dismissed, and I
    reserved my written decision.

Decision

14. The background and history of this appeal is summarised above and given
    in more detail in the decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal.

15. It was very clear at the hearing before me that the Appellant based his
    application and his appeal on long residence. It was equally clear that
    he did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  relating  to
    long  residence  because  the  period  of  10  years  upon  which   his
    application was based was broken by an absence of more than six  months
    between 30 August 2011 and 21 April 2012. Paragraph 19 of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal records
         "He accepted that between 30.08.2011 and 21.04.2012 he had been  in
         China with no valid visa for the UK."

    If this has been an Immigration Rules appeal that would have  been  the
    end of the appeal, the appeal would have been dismissed.

16. The Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does not provide for an
    appeal against a decision under the Immigration Rules. However  certain
    applications under the Immigration Rules are treated as 'deemed'  human
    rights claims and a right of appeal is provided against the refusal  of
    such a claim. A long residence application is one such application, and
    this is the reason why the Appellant was able to proceed with an appeal
    against the Respondent's decision.

17. The First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the appeal on human  rights
    grounds has been set aside  for  the  reasons  given  in  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain's decision. In remaking the decision, I find
    the following.

18. The Appellant does not claim to  have  a  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom. His parents live in China. The fact that  he  has  spent  many
    years living in the United Kingdom apart from his parents does not mean
    that he has abandoned his family life with his parents. It is the  only
    potential family life that he has so there  is  at  least  a  vestigial
    family life remaining.

19. The Appellant has established a private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    through his presence and his studies here. The  qualitative  nature  of
    that private life is however very difficult to ascertain. There  is  no
    supportive evidence from friends or  acquaintances.  Letters  from  the
    University of Kent merely record his qualifications,  nothing  more.  A
    letter from the University of the West  of  England  confirms  only  an
    invitation to stay as a visiting researcher for a period  of  one  year
    from 20 September 2014 at the Appellant's  own  expense.  There  is  no
    witness statement from  the  Appellant  detailing  the  nature  of  his
    private life in the United Kingdom. There is no evidence put forward of
    his living arrangements here or even his  current  or  recent  studying
    arrangements. The evidence of  the  Appellant's  private  life  is,  in
    short, extremely limited. It cannot be said  on the evidence before  me
    that his private life is anything more than 'time served'.

20. So, having found that the Appellant does have a private  life  in  this
    country it is not a private life to  which  I  can  attach  significant
    weight. The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for most  of  the
    past 13 years. His private life here is evidenced by his studies at the
    Universities of Kent and West of England. He would prefer  to  stay  in
    the UK and, if he had known that he was going to have  to  go  back  to
    China to live he would have  got  a  job  there  after  completing  his
    Master's Degree in 2007. The Appellant believed that by  completing  10
    years lawful residence he, like many of his friends, would  be  granted
    permission to remain. However, the continuous nature of  his  residence
    was broken by his absences between 2011 and 2012. The Notice of  Appeal
    makes it clear that the Appellant does not  believe  that  this  should
    have been held against him because the length of his absence was due to
    mistakes made by the Entry Clearance  Officer.  Unfortunately  for  the
    Appellant this is irrelevant to the appeal now before me  which  is  on
    human rights grounds only.

21. I have taken into account s.117  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. In doing so I take account  in  particular  of  s.117B
    (5), the Appellant's status in the UK has always been on the  basis  of
    limited leave so it has been 'precarious' and in  these  circumstances,
    it can be afforded little weight. I have also taken account of Patel  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 which, in effect, provides that education of itself
    is not sufficient to merit sustainable grounds of appeal under  Article
    8. In this case education in this country is all that the Appellant has
    having provided nothing of substance regarding any other aspect of  his
    private life. I would add that in considering  the  proportionality  of
    the decision the Appellant has put forward nothing of any substance  to
    suggest that he will have  any  difficulty  in  finding  employment  or
    reintegrating in China. He was able to spend more than 6 months there a
    few years ago and puts forward no evidence of any difficulty. I have no
    reason to believe that he does not speak the language fluently. I  have
    no reason to believe that the qualifications obtained in  this  country
    will not be of benefit to him in finding employment in China.

22. My conclusion is that the Appellant has established a private  life  in
    this country at a time when his immigration status was precarious, that
    private life is limited to  his  education  in  this  country  over  an
    extended period and there are  no  substantial  obstacles  to  him  re-
    establishing  his  private  life  in  China.  He  does  not  meet   the
    requirements of the immigration Rules and the Respondent's decision  is
    proportionate to  the  interference  in  his  private  life  caused  by
    requiring him to return.

Summary

23. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of  law.  I  remake  that  decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.


    Signed:                                  Date: 23 January 2018
    [pic]
    J F W Phillips
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
