
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05641/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 17th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               Md Foyjul AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Barton, instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Md Foyjul Ahmed, was born on 1 January  1983  and  is  a
    male citizen of Bangladesh.  He entered the United Kingdom  in  January
    2007 as a working holidaymaker.  More than four years  after  his  visa
    had expired he applied for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  person
    settled in this country.  His application was  refused  in  April  2013
    with no right of appeal.  In February 2016 he was served with a  notice
    IS96 as an overstayer.  On  3  March  2016,  he  made  a  human  rights
    application to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his  family
    life with his spouse  (Ms  Yasmin)  who  is  a  British  citizen.   His
    application was refused by a decision dated 18 April 2017.  He appealed
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Wyman)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 31 May 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Wyman's decision is problematic.  The analysis of Article 8  ECHR
    (the ground upon which the appeal was  brought  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) is lacking in structure and at times confusing.  In  granting
    permission, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  found  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge's decision did not properly address  Article  8
    ECHR and he may have applied "too high a threshold" for Article 8.

 3. It was also pleaded that the judge considered EX1 of Appendix  FM  when
    the appellant's representative had already conceded that the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of that provision.

 4. The appellant's immigration history is by,  any  standards,  appalling.
    Having arrived  as  a  working  holidaymaker,  the  appellant  has  not
    returned to Bangladesh but has chosen to make his life  in  the  United
    Kingdom without any reference to laws concerning residence.  The public
    interest concerned with the removal of the appellant is a  strong  one.
    I acknowledge that the judge has become somewhat  confused  as  regards
    the ratio of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and it is not entirely  clear  when
    the judge's consideration of EX1 finishes and his analysis of Article 8
    begins.  However, as regards the challenge concerning EX1, I find  that
    this is without merit.  There may have been no need for  the  judge  to
    consider EX1 following the concession by the appellant's representative
    but his analysis of this issue is, at worst, superfluous.  The  judge's
    analysis does not contradict in any way  the  concession  made  and  it
    would seem that the judge continued with the assessment of EX1  because
    he felt that he needed to be satisfied that  the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of the provision and that a finding was  required
    on that point before the judge could consider Article 8.  In any event,
    the judge's consideration of EX1 does not constitute an  error  of  law
    such that the decision falls to be set aside.

 5. Likewise, despite the  judge's  confused  analysis,  I  find  that  the
    outcome of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was in  little  doubt.
    This is a case where two individuals have chosen to get married in  the
    United Kingdom at a time when the appellant's  immigration  status  was
    highly precarious.  I note that the appellant did not tell his wife  of
    his immigration status  (or  rather  lack  of  it)  until  after  their
    marriage.  Ms Yasmin suffers from epilepsy and has also been undergoing
    fertility treatment.  I do not  find  that  the  judge's  albeit  brief
    analysis of these facts is flawed.  As Judge  Robertson  observed  when
    refusing  permission  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was  for  the
    appellant to adduce evidence to  show  that  these  medical  conditions
    could not be treated in Bangladesh.  He has not done so.  Further,  the
    appellant has adduced no evidence at all to show that Ms  Yasmin  would
    encounter any degree of hardship should she accompany him  to  live  in
    Bangladesh.  The judge has made a clear finding that family life may be
    continued in Bangladesh.  On the facts of this case,  I  consider  that
    any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    adduced, would reach the same conclusion.  That was  Mr  Tan's  primary
    submission  and  I  agree   with   it.    I   find,   therefore,   that
    notwithstanding problems in the First-tier Tribunal judge's analysis, I
    should refrain from setting aside his decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

