
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: HU/05672/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport  |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 27 April 2018                  |      On 3 May 2018               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                 ASMA RASHID
                        (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr S A Canter, Counsel instructed by B S Singh & Co
For the Respondent:     Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rolt in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave  to
    remain as the partner and parent of British Nationals on  human  rights
    (Article 8) grounds.


 2. The application under appeal was  refused  on  8  February  2016.   The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Rolt on 5 July 2017 and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant on 14 December 2017 in the following terms

       The grounds submit the judge  fell  into  error  at  the  outset  by
       beginning his article 8 assessment with the  outdated  authority  of
       Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) which should not be followed, and fell
       into error a  second  time  with  regard  to  the  proper  balancing
       exercise on proportionality.


       The findings of the Judge  on  proportionality  have  arguably  been
       infected by the wrong test as  can  be  seen  at  paragraph  55  and
       accordingly the grounds may be argued.




 3. At the hearing before me Mr Canter applied  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal saying that the interpreter at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    was of poor quality. The Appellant's eldest daughter  sat  through  the
    evidence of the Appellant  and  noted  that  the  interpreter  did  not
    properly translate the  questions  put  to  her  or  her  answers.  The
    Appellant's daughter raised her hand to attract the  attention  of  the
    Judge, but he did not take  notice.  She  raised  the  issue  with  her
    parents after the hearing, but no further action was taken.  Mr  Canter
    said that he heard this the first time today. I refused the application
    to amend. This was being raised for the first time almost a year  after
    the hearing with no supporting statement. Mr Canter  accepted  that  it
    would be impossible to go back and ascertain which questions and  which
    answers were incorrectly translated. The Judge could not be  criticised
    for failing to take note  of  a  raised  hand  from  the  back  of  the
    courtroom.




Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  2
    January 1972. Her husband is a British citizen and her three  children,
    aged 13, 15 and 16 at the date of application are British citizens. The
    Appellant and her family were living in Pakistan  until  15  June  2015
    when they entered the UK together and the Appellant was  granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor. She had travelled to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on a number of previous occasions. On this occasion the  family
    decided that they wished to settle in the  United  Kingdom  and  on  27
    November 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain.


 5. The Respondent refused the application because the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the eligibility requirements under the  partner  or  parent  route
    because she was in the UK as a visitor and further  did  not  meet  the
    English language requirements of the immigration rules. It was accepted
    that she had a genuine spousal and parental relationship as claimed but
    the Respondent decided that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    consistent with the right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life
    warranting the grant of leave to remain. In particular it was suggested
    that her in-country application was a deliberate attempt to  circumvent
    the immigration rules.



 6. At the hearing on 5 July 2017 the Judge dismissed  the  appeal  finding
    that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules and that there was nothing exceptional in  the  circumstances  of
    the  appeal  and  no  compelling  circumstances   that   rendered   the
    Appellant's  removal  disproportionate  to  the  need   for   effective
    immigration control.




Submissions


 7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Canter referred to the grounds of  appeal
    and said that there were two points in particular.  Firstly  the  Judge
    wrongly refers to the authority of Gulshan at paragraph  44  suggesting
    that there is a preliminary barrier to overcome before an assessment of
    Article 8 could be made. At paragraph 56  he  compounds  the  error  by
    saying that there are no compelling circumstances to allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds. Although the Judge appears to have  considered
    Article 8 nevertheless he clearly did so through the prism of  Gulshan.
    It was a token gesture. The Judge believed that there  was  an  initial
    test to be met. Secondly whereas the Judge refers  to  section  117A(2)
    and section 117B he does not consider section 117B(6). The children are
    qualifying children and it is not reasonable  for  them  to  leave  the
    United  Kingdom.  Mr  Canter  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance, the starting point  of  which  is  that  it  will  always  be
    unreasonable to expect British citizen children  to  relocate.  Whereas
    paragraph 53 of the decision purports to be a best interests assessment
    there is no focus on reasonableness.


 8. For the Respondent Mr Hibbs agreed that the reference  to  Gulshan  was
    erroneous but said that the mere mention does not  amount  to  material
    error. The reference to exceptional  circumstances  at  the  bottom  of
    paragraph 55 is the correct  test.  Reasonableness  is  dealt  with  in
    paragraphs 53 and 54, although the word 'reasonableness' is not used it
    is clear that this is a consideration of reasonableness. The failure to
    mention the word may be poor  drafting  but  it  is  not  legal  error.
    Section 117B(6) is not determinative. Any error is not material.


 9. Responding Mr  Canter  said  that  paragraph  53  of  the  decision  is
    generalised. There is no specific consideration of  reasonableness  and
    he repeated that Home Office guidance refers to  a  starting  point  of
    always being unreasonable. He also referred to the decision in  SF  and
    others arguing that Home Office guidance should be taken into  account.
    It should be in the Judge's mind. Mr Canter pointed out, and  Mr  Hibbs
    accepted, that whereas the Judge mentions section 117B(4)  and  section
    117B(5) at paragraphs 18 and 19 of his decision  he  fails  to  mention
    section 117B(6) which, argued Mr Canter, is the most pertinent.


10. I reserved my decision.




Decision


11. The argument put forward on behalf of the Appellant is a simple one. It
    is suggested that the Judge referred to "old" law (Gulshan) and  failed
    to refer to current law (s.117B(6)) and guidance and that the  combined
    effect was that he misdirected himself as to the correct  test.  In  my
    judgement this argument has merit.


12. The decision in Gulshan has effectively been undermined by a number  of
    subsequent decisions and Mr Hibbs did not seek to argue otherwise.  The
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  and
    the Judge's decision in this respect is not challenged. At paragraph 44
    and 45 of the decision the Judge quotes Gulshan and its reference to  R
    (on the application of) Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (admin)  and  goes
    on to note the Presenting  Officer's  submission  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances that warranted consideration of Article 8.


13. Although  the  Judge  does  not  comment  on  the  correctness  of  the
    submission and goes on to consider Article 8 his findings at paragraphs
    55 and 56 give the impression that he  is  looking  for  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances. In the circumstances of this appeal that was
    the wrong test. This is where s.117B(6) is important. At paragraphs  17
    to 19 of his decision  the  Judge  correctly  self  directs  to  s.117B
    specifically highlighting ss.117B(4) and 117B(5). He fails  to  mention
    s.117B(6), if he had done so he would have noted that it states:



    "in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the  public
    interest does not require the person's removal where - (a)  the  person
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child, and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the United Kingdom".


    It is common ground that the  Appellant  has  three  children  who  are
    British citizens  and  are  therefore  qualifying  children.  The  test
    therefore is whether it is reasonable for those children to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.


14. In his submissions Mr Canter raised the Home Office  guidance  in  this
    respect and the authority of SF and others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120(IAC). It was  held  in  this  case  that  the
    Tribunal should take the Secretary of State's guidance into account  if
    it points clearly to a particular outcome. The guidance in question  in
    both  SF  and  others  and  the  case  before  me  is  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM,  section  1.0
    (B) of August  2015.  This  guidance  provides  that  except  in  cases
    involving criminality a decision should not be taken in relation  to  a
    parent the effect of which would be to force a British child  to  leave
    the EU.


15. There can be no doubt that taken together s.117B(6) and the Home Office
    guidance required the Judge to consider whether it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United Kingdom and that  the  starting
    point of such consideration should, in the normal course of events,  be
    that a British child should not be forced to leave. Mr  Hibbs  suggests
    that paragraph  53  of  the  decision,  a  consideration  of  the  best
    interests  of  the  children  was  to  all  intents  and   purposes   a
    consideration of reasonableness. I cannot agree. The failure to mention
    either s.117B(6) or the  word  'reasonable'  taken  together  with  the
    reference to Gulshan and the concluding remarks  about  compelling  and
    exceptional circumstances show that a different, and  wrong,  test  was
    being applied.


16. My conclusion can only be that the Judge erred  in  law  and  that  his
    error was material to his decision to dismiss this appeal.  The  appeal
    is therefore allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set
    aside. I have considered whether, in the circumstances, I  am  able  to
    remake the decision on the basis of the evidence before me. I find that
    I cannot for two reasons. Firstly the Judge makes a number  of  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of the Appellant. Although  it  is  the
    reasonableness of the children's departure from the United Kingdom that
    is in question it is possible that the  Appellant's  evidence  in  this
    respect may be pertinent. Secondly the question  of  reasonableness  is
    one that neither party was called  upon  to  address  at  the  previous
    hearing and to which, in fairness, both must be able to contribute.


  Summary

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal.  I  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal and direct that the matter be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal so that evidence can be called from  the  Appellant,  her
    three British citizen children and, if so advised, her husband.



Signed:                                 Date: 30 April 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
