
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/05915/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 May 2017                            | On 19 June 2017                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mehemet Balli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, instructed by SG Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                      (Delivered orally on 26 May 2017)

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ("SSHD").  The SSHD appeals against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell, promulgated  on  1  November  2016,
    allowing an appeal  by  Mr  Balli  (who  I  will  call  "the  claimant"
    hereafter) under the Immigration Rules against a decision of  the  SSHD
    dated 8 September 2015. By that decision the SSHD refused to grant  the
    claimant indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a  person  settled
    in the United Kingdom.

 2. I observe at the outset, although it was not  a  ground  taken  by  the
    SSHD, that the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules. The only relevant ground of  appeal
    permitted by the amendment to the 2002 Act is to the  effect  that  the
    SSHD's decision is unlawful as being breach of Section 6 of  the  Human
    Rights Act.  In other words, in the context of this  case,  the  SSHD's
    decision leads to a breach of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 3. Although the FtT did not go on and  deal  specifically  with  the  only
    permitted ground of appeal it  is  a  rarity  for  the  removal  of  an
    applicant who meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.
    As I have said, the SSHD did  not  take  the  point  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, which may be indicative of the SSHD's acceptance that such an
    error was not, of itself, material in this case.

Decision and Discussion

 4. To put this case in context, it falls within the category of cases that
    are commonly known as "ETS cases".  It is asserted by the SSHD in  this
    case, as it is in many other cases, that the claimant did not undertake
    the English language test  relating  to  English  language  certificate
    which was used in support of an application for leave to remain.  It is
    alleged that a proxy took the test on behalf the claimant.

 5. There has been a  substantial  amount  of  case  law  relating  to  the
    decision-making  process,  and  the  evidence  upon  which  the  SSHD's
    decisions are made, in ETS case. I need do no more than refer to recent
    decisions in Saha [2017] UKUT 0017, MA [2016] UKUT 00450 and Mohibullah
    [2016] UKUT 561, in this regard.

 6. The simple fact that ETS concluded that the claimant's test was invalid
    is not of itself sufficient for the SSHD to defeat a claimant's appeal.
    There is an initial evidential burden on the SSHD. If this has been met
    in any given case, then the burden shifts to an  applicant  to  provide
    evidence upon which a conclusion can be founded that he did not  commit
    the deception alleged.

 7. Turning then to the instant case. The claimant is alleged to have  used
    deception  when  producing  a  TOIEC  certificate  from  ETS   in   his
    application for leave to remain as a spouse made in March 2013.  It  is
    said that ETS had undertaken a check of the claimant's  test  and  that
    there was significant evidence to conclude  that  his  certificate  was
    fraudulently  obtained.  The  claimant's  ETS  test  result  has   been
    cancelled. This led to a later application made by the  claimant  being
    refused on 8 September 2015  in  reliance,  inter  alia,  on  paragraph
    322(2) of the Rules.

 8. At the appeal hearing the SSHD provided evidence in support of her case
    - as listed in paragraph 5 of the FtT's decision.  The  FtT  concluded,
    uncontroversially, that the SSHD had produced prima facie  evidence  of
    deception (paragraph 27).

 9. By way of explanation, the claimant and his wife gave evidence  to  the
    FtT relating to the events that it is said occurred in  2013  when  the
    claimant purports to have taken the language test at the Queensway test
    centre. Insofar as there were any inconsistencies between the witnesses
    the FtT concluded those to be irrelevant.

10. The rationale deployed by the FtT for allowing the claimant's appeal is
    summarised in the following terms in paragraph 38 of its decision:

         "It is clear that 30% of the tests at Queensway were  not  invalid.
         Ms Leyshon (the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer)  submitted  that
         there could be several reasons why the appellant did not  take  the
         test and I find that the appellant did attend at Queensway  College
         and he did take the two English tests.  I find this because he  and
         his wife gave consistent evidence that he went  there,  he  had  no
         reason to use a 'proxy test taker' and he had just short  of  three
         weeks before sat the  more  complex  Life  in  the  UK  test."  (my
         emphasis)

11. It is plain from that paragraph, and indeed reading the decision  as  a
    whole, that there were three features of the claimant's case  that  led
    the FtT to conclude as it did.   First,  the  consistency  between  the
    claimant and his wife as to the events that took place on the date that
    the claimant asserts he took the tests. This was undoubtedly  something
    the FtT was entitled to place weight on.

12. There is a considerable degree of overlap between the second and  third
    reasons relied upon by the FtT i.e. that the appellant had no reason to
    use a proxy test taker, and that just three weeks  prior  to  allegedly
    taking the TOEIC test the  claimant  had  sat  (and  passed)  the  more
    complex Life in the UK test.

13. At the heart of the third reason given by the FtT is an assumption that
    it is necessary for the claimant to have attained a  certain  level  of
    English language abilities in order to pass the Life in  the  UK  test.
    There was, though, no evidence before the FtT going to this issue  and,
    in particular, there was no evidence linking the ability  to  pass  the
    Life in the UK test with the ability to speak  and  write  the  English
    language. This is unsurprising because it is accepted that there is  no
    speaking element to the Life in the UK test. As to the written element,
    this involved no more than ticking  one  of  a  number  of  pre-written
    possible answers (a multiple-choice test). It is trite that  the  TOEIC
    test has  a  number  of  specified  elements,  including  speaking  and
    writing.

14. The rationale underpinning the second and third reasons provided by the
    FtT in paragraph 38 of its decision is not founded on evidence that was
    before the FtT, and thus the FtT erred  in  deploying  such  rationale.
    Alternatively, if the FtT proceeded on a correct understanding  of  the
    nature of the Life in the UK test  it  ought  to  have  explained  why,
    despite such test not having any speaking  element  and  an  elementary
    written element, it nevertheless relied on the results thereof  in  the
    manner set out in paragraph 38.

15. Mr Khan, who said all that can be said  on  behalf  of  this  claimant,
    submitted that one must look at the FtT's decision  in  the  round  and
    that it is obvious from  the  decision  that  the  FtT  looked  at  the
    evidence holistically.  I accept entirely that the FtT  looked  at  the
    evidence holistically. The difficulty for the claimant is that as  part
    of that holistic consideration the FtT took into account an  immaterial
    matter. Looking at the circumstances holistically is not  a  substitute
    for either the requirement to take account only of material matters  or
    for the provision of proper reasoning for the conclusions reached.

16. Mr Khan further submitted that  the  FtT  treated  the  fact  that  the
    claimant had sat for, and passed, the Life in the UK  test  just  three
    weeks before the TOEIC test as a peripheral  matter,  rather  than  one
    which went to the heart  of  its  decision.   This  though,  cannot  be
    maintained in light of the terms of paragraph 30 of the FtT's decision,
    in which the following is said:

         "He has produced the Pass Notification letter (and that relates  to
         the Life in the UK test).  I find that  I  can  place  considerable
         weight on this piece of evidence as he took it  and  passed  it  so
         close to the time of the ETS tests and it  has  not  been  disputed
         that it is much more complex.  This is an indication to me that the
         appellant had a good level of English at that time." (my emphasis)

17. In my conclusion, and for the reasons given above, it is clear that the
    FtT erred in law and that such error was material to its decision. As a
    consequence, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

18. I now turn to what I should do next.  Both parties sought  to  persuade
    me that the correct approach should be to  remit  this  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh. I see no reason  why  that
    should not be the appropriate order.  I therefore remit the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 O'Connor
Date 26 May 2017



