
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05702/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On October 2, 2018                           |On 19 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD KAMRAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Rivington
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order is made.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a partner of a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  on  June  7,
    2011 and his leave to remain was subsequently extended  until  June  7,
    2016.

 3. The appellant then lodged an application for indefinite leave to remain
    as the partner of a Tier 1 (General) Migrant on May 27, 2016  but  this
    was refused by the respondent on July 11, 2017.

 4. The appellant lodged an application for indefinite leave to remain as a
    dependant of a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  on  July  27,  2017  which  he
    subsequently varied to an application under paragraph 276B  HC  395  of
    October 4, 2017. This was refused by the  respondent  on  February  15,
    2018.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 27, 2018.

 6. His appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Siddiqi
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on May 10,  2018  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on May 17, 2018 she dismissed his appeal  under  article  8
    ECHR.

 7. The appellant appealed this decision on May  30,  2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on  August  8,  2018  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Adio who found it arguable the  Judge  procedurally  erred  by
    failing to allow the appellant's witness the opportunity to explain the
    case on the appellant's behalf and  failed  to  resolve  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant had lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for
    ten years and whether the issue of compelling circumstances could  have
    been resolved in the appellant's favour by the Judge exercising her own
    discretion.

 8. No Rule 24 response was filed.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Ahmed submitted that there had been a number of errors both  at  the
    hearing and in the Judge's decision which had created confusion and led
    the appellant to wonder why he had lost his appeal. It was  clear  from
    the Judge's decision that she had doubts about aspects of the  decision
    letter and Mr Ahmed submitted that the Judge should  have  adjourn  the
    matter to enable a Presenting  Officer  to  attend  and  address  those
    concerns.

10. Mr Ahmed further argued the appellant's wife had  been  prevented  from
    assisting her husband in his representations and this was  procedurally
    unfair. He concluded his submissions by submitting the  key  issue  was
    whether the appellant's absence from the  United  Kingdom  was  due  to
    unavoidable circumstances because if it was this would carry weight  in
    any article 8 assessment.

11. Mr Tan opposed the application and submitted that  there  was  a  large
    appellant bundle that set out the appellant's claim and this was not  a
    case where the case proceeded without any evidence. The Judge was aware
    of why the appellant had been absent from the United  Kingdom  for  235
    days  and  the  Judge  was  well  within  her  rights  to  uphold   the
    respondent's decision. He also pointed out  that  inadequate  reasoning
    was not something that had been raised in the grounds of appeal.

    FINDINGS

12. This was a case where the appellant had  lawfully  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on October 13, 2007 as a student. He had  been  given  extended
    leave to remain in this country but on October 14,  2010  he  left  the
    United Kingdom and returned to Sri Lanka and on  December  2,  2010  he
    made an application for entry clearance  as  a  partner  of  a  Tier  1
    General Migrant. He was not issued a visa until May 20,  2011  and  the
    delay meant that he was absent from the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    the  permitted  180  days-the  permitted  period  of  absence   in   an
    application for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 276B HC 395.

13. I pointed out to Mr Ahmed that at the date of application the appellant
    had not accrued ten years residence in the United  Kingdom  because  of
    when he had submitted the application. He had submitted his application
    at least  nine  days  short  of  the  qualifying  10-year  period.  The
    application under paragraph 276B HC 395 could not have succeeded.

14. The grounds of appeal raised an issue concerning the  Judge  preventing
    the appellant's witness from  giving  evidence.  I  have  reviewed  the
    Judge's hand-written  notes  and  find  nothing  in  those  notes  that
    supports such an argument. There is clear reference in the notes to the
    wife giving oral evidence. I find no merit on this ground of appeal.

15. Mr Ahmed argued the Judge should have adjourned the case  but  for  the
    reasons set out above I am satisfied that adjourning the  matter  would
    have achieved nothing because the respondent's  letter  made  it  clear
    that the appellant could not demonstrate ten years continuous residence
    regardless of any absence from the United Kingdom.

16. Mr Ahmed has submitted (a) The Judge erred by not making a finding that
    the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom  had  been  unavoidable
    and (b) The  Judge  had  not  carried  out  a  full  balancing  act  on
    proportionality.

17. The first issue would not have assisted the Judge in  deciding  whether
    the appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to  remain  because  the
    appellant had not completed ten years continuous  residence.  Mr  Ahmed
    wanted an indication from this Tribunal that the 55-day period over and
    above the permitted 180 days should  not  have  broken  the  continuous
    residence.

18. Paragraph 276B(i)(a) HC 395 makes it clear that the appellant must have
    completed 10 years continuous and lawful residence.  As  the  appellant
    applied too early the respondent did not have to consider whether there
    were "compelling or compassionate circumstances".

19. Mr Ahmed invited me to make a finding on this period of  delay  and  to
    conclude that  there  were  compelling  or  compassionate  reasons  for
    excusing the excess absence. I do not feel it necessary to make such  a
    finding because an application under paragraph  276B  HC  395  was  not
    being considered by either the Judge or the respondent because  at  the
    date of application the appellant had not accrued ten years residence.

20. If the appellant wishes to submit a fresh  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under paragraph 276B HC 395 then the respondent will be
    required to consider the explanation further.

21. The final issue is whether the Judge gave due consideration to all  the
    factors pertinent to an article 8 claim. The  Judge  noted  the  points
    that were put forward by the appellant and his wife  at  paragraphs  26
    and 27 of her decision. The Judge took into account:

      a) The appellant spent 25 years living in Sri Lanka before he came  to
         the United Kingdom.

      b) Both the appellant and his wife are Sri Lankan  nationals  and  are
         well educated and had demonstrated an ability to obtain employment.



      c) They both speak the national language  and  there  was  nothing  to
         prevent them returning to their country of nationality

22. The Judge took all factors into account and  concluded  there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to their integration. The Judge's finding at
    paragraph 27 was one that was open to her.

23. The Judge went on to consider the application under article  8  and  at
    paragraph 28 of her decision the Judge assessed section  117B  factors.
    At paragraph 30 the Judge,  whilst  accepting  private  life  had  been
    developed,  found  that  as  the  appellant  had  not   satisfied   the
    Immigration Rules there were no  compelling  circumstances  that  would
    make removal disproportionate. The findings on article 8 were  open  to
    the Judge.

24. The  appellant  does  of  course  have  the  option  of  submitting  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain and whilst it  is  a  matter
    for the respondent as to how he treats  the  235-day  absence  I  would
    expect the respondent  to  take  into  account  all  the  circumstances
    including any delay that was occasioned by his office when  considering
    such an application.

DECISION

25. There is no error in law and the original decision shall stand.


Signed                              Date     09/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



