
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05979/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2018                               |On 5 September 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 MS NITA [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Omorere, Bestway Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  24  January  1970.   She
    appealed the respondent's decision dated 6 January  2016  refusing  her
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom based on her private life and the
    fact that she has a daughter in the  United  Kingdom,  [MTD],  who  she
    states has a British passport.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Randall  on  3  July  and  26  September  2017  and
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 19 October 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Boyes on 3 May  2018.   The
    permission states that the grounds are that  the  Judge  made  numerous
    errors in the assessment of the appellant's family members' nationality
    but goes on to state that outwith that argument, permission is  granted
    because of the claim that the Judge was reading from  his  phone.   The
    permission goes on to  state  that  whether  the  Judge  was  receiving
    information  from  someone  or  was  conducting  his  own  research  is
    something for the Upper Tribunal to consider.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  Judge  was
    looking up legislation on his phone.  This ultimately had no impact  on
    the case and the parties had the opportunity to deal appropriately with
    this issue.  The response states that the Judge's consideration of  the
    other issues was sound and there is no  error  in  the  decision.   The
    response goes on to state that the British passport of  the  child  has
    been revoked.

The Hearing

 4. The appellant's representative  submitted  that  the  appellant  has  a
    daughter who is a British national.  I pointed out that in the Rule  24
    response it is stated  that  the  child's  British  passport  has  been
    revoked.  The representative stated that he does  not  believe  it  has
    been revoked.  His reason for this is that  the  appellant  would  have
    known if it had been revoked and has heard nothing about this.

 5. I put to the representative that there is no evidence that the  child's
    father is British and he submitted that the child's  father's  passport
    was produced and his documents were accepted.  I pointed out  that  the
    supposed biological father of the child,  [CD]  has  not  produced  DNA
    evidence although he was directed to  do  so  and  apparently  has  now
    returned to Nigeria.  I pointed out that there was suspicion of a fraud
    relating to the appellant's daughter's passport.

 6. The representative said he had been reading about  British  nationality
    law at the First-Tier hearing, and that is why he was  looking  at  his
    phone and he produced  the  British  Nationality  "Proof  of  Paternity
    Regulations" 2006.  He submitted that Mr [D] is named  as  the  child's
    father on the birth certificate so the child is British.  He  submitted
    that the 1981 British Nationality Act has been amended by  the  British
    Nationality Proof of Paternity  Regulations  2006  and  based  on  this
    amendment the appeal must be allowed as Mr [D] is named  on  the  birth
    certificate as the father of the appellant's child.

 7. The Presenting Officer made his submissions, submitting that there  has
    been no objection to any of the findings of fact made by the First-Tier
    Judge.  He submitted that the appellant has failed  to  establish  that
    her daughter is British and the First-Tier Judge  did  not  accept  the
    evidence provided.

 8. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant was not divorced when she had the child.  She was married  to
    a Nigerian national,  [MO].   The  father  of  the  child  for  British
    Nationality purposes is the appellant's husband  at  the  time  of  the
    child's birth.  For nationality purposes therefore, Mr [D] is  not  her
    father, so the child is not British.  The  Judge  deals  with  this  at
    paragraph 58 of the decision.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
    establish that her daughter is British and I was asked to consider  all
    the findings of fact made  by  the  Judge,  none  of  which  have  been
    opposed.

10. At paragraph 48 the Judge found there to  be  issues  relating  to  the
    child's birth certificate and this has not been disputed and there  has
    been no real challenge to paragraphs 50,  51  or  52  of  the  decision
    relating to the DNA tests which were  not  produced  in  spite  of  the
    appeal hearing being adjourned for these results to be  obtained.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge was entitled  to  draw  the
    conclusions that he did and the Judge refers to significant credibility
    issues in the decision.

11. The Judge at paragraphs 57 and 58 deals with the appellant's  customary
    marriage to [MO], her supposed customary divorce in 2010 and  the  fact
    that there is no documentary evidence of this.  The  Judge  notes  that
    there is a lack of evidence about customary marriages  in  Nigeria  and
    customary divorces. The Judge finds the appellant to lack  credibility,
    and does not  accept  her  evidence  about  this  and  finds  that  the
    customary marriage, on the balance of  probabilities  did  not  end  in
    2010.

12. The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  in  March  2016  the  British
    passport of the child was revoked and this was made clear in  a  letter
    to the appellant dated 21 March 2016.  This  letter  was  sent  to  the
    appellant's correct address.  He submitted that the respondent was  not
    told that the appellant was  still  disputing  the  revocation  of  her
    child's passport but based on the letter from the Passport  Office  and
    the British  Nationality  Proof  of  Paternity  Regulations  2006,  the
    appellant has not established that the child is British.

13. The appellant's representative submitted that the Judge  did  not  take
    into account the amendment dated 2006 to the  British  Nationality  Act
    but the Presenting Officer submitted that there has been  no  statutory
    challenge put forward for the appellant  to  argue  that  the  Passport
    Office has got it wrong.  This would require a judicial review  in  the
    High Court.  He submitted that the child's passport has been taken  and
    is being withheld by the Passport Office at the date of  this  hearing.
    He submitted that the appellant knew where the  passport  was  and  the
    burden of proof is on the  appellant  to  show  that  her  daughter  is
    British and that having a passport does not prove her nationality.   He
    submitted that in any case the British passport has  now  been  revoked
    and although the 2006 amendment to the British Nationality  Act  refers
    to DNA test reports there are no  DNA  test  reports.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted  that  there  has  been  no  real  challenge  to  the
    credibility findings in the First-Tier Judge's decision.

14. With regard to the grant of permission the Presenting Officer submitted
    that the fact that the appellant's representative was  looking  at  his
    phone during the hearing was not a good  reason  for  permission  being
    granted as he did this before the parties and he made clear what he was
    looking up.

15. I was directed to paragraph 57 of the decision which deals with Section
    50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1981 and the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the Judge was entitled to make the decision he did based
    on what was before him.  It is clear that the child's  father  was  not
    the appellant's husband at the child's date of birth and the  appellant
    was married to someone else at that date.

16. The appellant's representative submitted that only the pertinent  issue
    requiring to be dealt with is that the Judge considered  the  1981  Act
    without the amendment  thereto.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    evidence is that her dowry to her husband [MO] was  returned  and  that
    was the end of the customary marriage in  2010.   I  pointed  out  that
    there is no evidence, apart from the appellant's verbal evidence, about
    this and that when the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  she  said
    she  was  married  to  [MO]  on  her  visit  visa   application.    The
    representative  submitted  that  the  appellant's  oral   evidence   is
    sufficient and he  submitted  that  the  Presenting  Officer  has  made
    reference to the findings of fact by the First-Tier Judge and they  are
    irrelevant.  What has to be considered is the law.  I pointed out  that
    the findings of fact were not  challenged  by  the  appellant  and  the
    representative  submitted  that  the  2006  amendment  to  the  British
    Nationality Act is sufficient.  DNA evidence is not required.  This  is
    clearly an alternative and the respondent has not properly  interpreted
    the law.

17. He submitted that the letter from the Passport Office to the  appellant
    dated 21 March 2016 has no postcode thereon and  the  appellant  states
    that she did not receive it.  He submitted that the British Nationality
    Act considered by the Judge has been overtaken by  the  2006  amendment
    which he did not take into account and it is clear that the appellant's
    child is British.

18. I asked the representative if what he is saying is that paragraph 3  of
    the Passport Office's letter is incorrect and he said that  is  correct
    and he asked me to allow the appeal.

Decision and Reasons

19. I am not concerned with the permission  referring  to  the  appellant's
    representative looking at his mobile phone in court at  the  First-Tier
    Hearing, as this was done with the knowledge  of  the  parties  at  the
    hearing and has been adequately explained.

20. The letter from the Passport Office dated 21 March 2016 was sent to the
    appellant and there are credibility issues  raised  in  the  First-Tier
    Judge's decision.  The letter states that the claim about  the  British
    citizenship of the child was determined on the basis  that  [CD]  is  a
    British citizen and was named on the child's birth certificate  as  her
    father within 12 months of her  birth.   This  is  dealt  with  in  the
    British Nationality Proof of Paternity Regulations  2006.   There  were
    however issues raised about the birth  certificate,  which  were  dealt
    with by the Judge in his decision.  At paragraph 48 the Judge refers to
    the mistakes in the birth  certificate.   Mr  [D]  had  to  attend  the
    Registry Office in 2012  to  give  his  personal  information  for  the
    child's second birth certificate as the father's name had been  omitted
    in the first birth certificate.  Mr [D] supposedly attended to give his
    details and gave the wrong country of his birth and gave  his  mother's
    maiden name rather than his own surname.  The Judge was  therefore  not
    satisfied with the process, when Mr [D]'s name was added to  the  birth
    certificate.  It was this birth certificate that established  that  the
    child had a British father.  The 2006 amendment to the Act states  that
    (a) the person must be named as the father of  the  child  on  a  birth
    certificate issued within one year of the date of the child's birth, or
    (b) the person must satisfy the Secretary  of  State  that  he  is  the
    father  of  the  child.   As  there  were  issues  with  the   father's
    particulars on the birth certificate he had to satisfy the Secretary of
    State that he is the father of  the  child.   He  was  to  produce  DNA
    evidence but did not do so.  The Judge finds that the DNA evidence  may
    have been obtained but not produced.  The Secretary  of  State  clearly
    was not satisfied that Mr [D] is the father of the child but there were
    other issues.  The appellant's representative stated that he  does  not
    believe the third paragraph of the  letter  from  the  Passport  Office
    dated 21 March 2016:-

         "It has since come to light from information provided by UKVI  that
         you are married to [MO].  Section 50(9A) of the British Nationality
         Act 1981 states that the father of a child is the mother's  husband
         at the time of  the  birth  irrespective  of  any  other  evidence.
         Therefore for the purposes of British Nationality law [MO] is [M]'s
         father.  This means that [M] did not automatically acquire  British
         citizenship from her birth as claimed as neither parent was settled
         in the UK at the time of the birth."

21. The letter goes on to state that the passport of [M] has  been  revoked
    as she has no  entitlement  to  that  document  and  the  passport  was
    returned to HM Passport Office by UKVI.  The letter goes  on  to  state
    that British citizenship is a matter  of  law  and  not  one  which  HM
    Passport Office has any discretion  about  and  the  law  is  that  the
    appellant's husband, at the date of the birth  of  the  child,  is  the
    child's father according to law.

22. The Judge in his decision refers to credibility issues.   None  of  his
    findings of fact were disputed.  He was not satisfied  with  the  birth
    certificate and he states that the appellant  has  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof relating to the appellant's  child's  nationality.   He
    also points out that the child is very young, that the appellant is  an
    overstayer and has always been here in a precarious situation.

23. The Judge has given clear findings of fact and based on what was before
    him he has dismissed the appeal.  I find that he was entitled to  reach
    this decision.

Notice of Decision

24. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge's decision promulgated on 18 October 2017
    contains no material error of law  and  must  stand.   The  appellant's
    appeal is therefore dismissed.

25. Anonymity has not been directed.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray  Date 30 August 2018

