




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05790/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House              |                      Decision and Reasons|
|                                   |Promulgated                               |
|On: 12 December 2017               |                      On:  02 January 2018|

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                         Mr Miguel Mario Del Rosario
                        (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       entry clearance officer: Manila
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, counsel, instructed by Bespoke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on 6 May 2000. He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Asjad, promulgated on 20 February 2017,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for  an
      entry clearance to join his mother  and  stepfather  in  the  UK.  The
      appellant did not have  legal  representation  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  His mother attended and gave evidence.  The Judge explained
      to her the procedure and the issues under appeal [3].

   2. She  found  that  his  mother,  Mrs  Policarpio,  did  not  have  sole
      responsibility for  the  appellant  but  shared  responsibility  [14].
      Accordingly his mother did not meet the requirements under paragraph E-
      ECC 1.6(b) of Appendix FM.

   3. On 7 September 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain granted the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it is  arguable  that
      in her assessment of the evidence as a  whole,  Judge  Asjad  had  not
      correctly applied the  guidance  as  set  out  in  cases  such  as  TD
      (paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility"  (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT
      00049, especially with regard to the day to day care of the appellant.

   4. Mr Khan, who did not draft the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal,
      relied on the grounds of appeal prepared by counsel.

   5. He submitted that the findings of the Judge at  [12-13]  regarding  an
      emergency incident where the appellant was rushed to hospital  by  his
      elder brother, did not indicate a  lack  of  sole  responsibility  for
      significant decisions in his life. It was a decision which  could  not
      wait for consultation.

   6. The grounds contended that the finding amounted to a  'perversity'.  A
      spur of the moment reaction is not indicative of the usual pattern  of
      decision making. The Judge was wrong to infer from that incident  that
      his mother did not have sole responsibility for him.

   7. He referred to TD, supra, at [10]. There the  Tribunal  noted  that  a
      parent who has settled in the UK may retain sole responsibility for  a
      child and the day to day care and responsibility  for  that  child  is
      necessarily undertaken by a relative abroad. That may  include  seeing
      that the child attends school, is fed and clothed and receives medical
      attention when  needed.  The  Tribunal  in  the  earlier  decision  of
      Emmanuel v SSHD [1972] Imm A R 69, identified the  mother's  financial
      support as the retention of a close interest in and affection for  the
      child as important to its decision.

   8. Further, Mr Khan submitted that although  correctly  setting  out  the
      guidance in TD, Judge Asjad drew an adverse finding from the fact that
      the appellant skipped school, finding that if the mother was not aware
      of that, or  if  she  was,  she  could  not  have  had  the  level  of
      involvement in his schooling put forward  in  the  letter  of  of  the
      appellant's head teacher dated September 2015.

   9. There was nothing inherently at odds between the head teacher's letter
      confirming the extent of the appellant's mother's involvement  in  his
      education and the fact that he truants.  The  responsibility  for  his
      attending  school  and  the  like   is   an   example   of   delegated
      responsibility on a day to day basis.

  10. Similarly, the finding at [14] that the appellant's brothers who  have
      been  told  of  concerns  about  the  undesirable  company  which  the
      appellant keeps, led the Judge into further error. She found that fact
      to be significant. This again simply confirmed that  the  day  to  day
      care must necessarily be undertaken by someone closer to the appellant
      than his UK based mother. The Judge noted that his brother Raphael was
      responsible for the budgeting of the household and the money was  sent
      to him. The precise breakdown in the brothers'  daily  expenditure  on
      the appellant is likewise something which can  be  delegated  to  them
      without detracting from their mother's overall responsibility for him.

  11. In reply, Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response. The Judge directed
      herself appropriately. She was entitled to  rely  upon  the  sponsor's
      inability to provide any information about the outcome of the  medical
      investigations as well as the fact that she was unaware of  her  son's
      truanting.

  12. Had she been in contact with the school as she  claimed,  these  facts
      would have been readily known to her. Even assuming  that  it  was  an
      error to find the lack of sole responsibility based  on  an  emergency
      situation, it did not detract from the other considerations which  the
      Judge had considered.

      Assessment

  13. In TD, supra, the Tribunal noted that sole responsibility is a factual
      matter to be decided on all the evidence. As applied to  this  appeal,
      the issue concerned the sponsor and others who have  the  day  to  day
      care of the appellant abroad. The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
      continuing  control  and  direction  over  the   child's   upbringing,
      including making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
      However, where both parents are involved in a child's  upbringing,  it
      would be exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".



  14. Judge Asjad has properly directed herself at [10]. She has set out the
      evidence given by the sponsor, Ms Policarpi. She noted that  when  she
      came as a student to the UK in 2010, she left behind her three sons in
      the care of their  father.  The  marriage  broke  down  in  2012.  She
      continued supporting  the  three  children  [11].  Although  she  only
      produced evidence of money transfers going back  to  2013,  the  Judge
      accepted that she had been financially supporting the  children  since
      at least 2012 when the marriage ended. She had not been able to  bring
      her children with her to the UK when she came to study in 2010.

  15. She had regard to the contents of a short  letter  dated  4  September
      2015, provided by the school principal, who stated that Ms  Policarpio
      financially  supports  the  appellant  and  pays  for  his  fees   and
      miscellaneous expenses. The  principal  also  asserted  that  she  has
      regular contact with the school and  shares  her  views  and  provides
      assistance to help him fulfil his potential.  The  principal  asserted
      that she is aware that the appellant '....speaks to his  mother  on  a
      daily basis and is very appreciative and  thankful  to  her  with  the
      support and guidance she gives him'.

  16. When Ms Policarpio was cross-examined about this however, Judge  Asjad
      stated at [12], that the reality of the situation was quite different.
      She referred to paragraph 9 of Ms Policarpio's witness statement where
      she stated that fortunately the appellant has  not  had  major  health
      problems. However, she ensures that if he  has  any  issues,  relevant
      arrangements are made for him to visit a doctor.

  17. The letter from Gabriel led Judge Asjad to question how much input the
      appellant's mother actually had with the school. She referred  to  the
      emergency incident  in  July  2016  which  Gabriel  mentioned  in  his
      statement, namely,  that  the  appellant  'turned  blue'  after  being
      confronted about  skipping  school.  As  a  result  Gabriel  took  the
      appellant to hospital.  He also stated that his mother was  hysterical
      when told about this.

  18. In cross-examination, Mrs Policarpio stated  that  she  was  not  told
      about the appellant's admission to hospital until  afterwards  as  her
      sons  did  not  want  to  worry  her.  That,  the  Judge  found,   was
      inconsistent with her  being  the  appellant's  sole  decision  maker.
      Although the actual decision to take him to hospital was made  on  the
      spot, the Judge found that it was also clear from  her  evidence  that
      she was either unaware that the appellant was skipping school or  that
      if she was, she could not have had the level of input with the  school
      that was put forward in the September 2015 letter from the Principal -
      [12-13].

  19. Having set out the evidence and cross  examination  on  these  issues,
      Judge Asjad then considered at [14] whether or  not  the  sponsor  was
      responsible for the appellant. She found  that  she  clearly  provides
      financial support. However, it was her son, Raphael, who  stated  that
      he was responsible for the budgeting of the household  and  the  money
      sent to him. It was his brothers who had been told that the  appellant
      was suspected of being involved with undesirable company. It  is  they
      who stated that they can no longer look after him.

  20. She found that the 'situation' is that the appellant had  been  looked
      after by his adult brothers since at least 2012.  Whilst  the  sponsor
      might be responsible for his upkeep, and some decision making such  as
      the choice of schooling, nevertheless, that responsibility was  shared
      [14].

  21. In coming to that conclusion, the Judge had regard to Mrs Policarpio's
      witness statement as well as her evidence at the hearing. She has  set
      out the sponsor's evidence from [4]. In paragraph  7  of  her  witness
      statement Mrs Policarpio contended that she has been and continues  to
      be, the primary decision maker for his  day  to  day  activities.  She
      contends that she has been responsible for all aspects  of  his  life,
      with respect to education.

  22. She also stated that she ensures  that  if  he  has  issues,  relevant
      arrangements are made for him to visit a doctor. However, no  evidence
      substantiating those assertions was produced.

  23. She stated that she transfers money into his account which is used for
      daily food and separate school fees. At paragraph 16 she  stated  that
      since  his  father  left,  his  brothers  Raphael  and   Gabriel   are
      responsible for his care. Raphael has however now begun his  own  life
      with a girlfriend with whom he is expecting a child  and  cannot  care
      for the appellant any longer.

  24. Since then, Gabriel has  assumed  responsibility  for  the  appellant.
      However, he also intends to move  on  with  his  life  and  cannot  be
      expected to care for his younger brother  while  she  is  willing  and
      capable. He is often left at home alone which  is  not  something  she
      feels comfortable with.

  25. The Judge noted her evidence  that  she  keeps  in  contact  with  the
      appellant and that she has in recent years been to the Philippines  to
      visit her children and attended his graduation in 2012.  She  attended
      her son's school opening event in June 2015. She  travelled  twice  in
      2016 during her son's school holidays.

  26. There was no statement from the appellant.  In  his  application,  the
      Judge noted that the brother who was looking after  him  is  about  to
      start work and will be busy [6]. This was again referred to at [7].

  27. The  Judge  noted  that  although  his  mother  has  been  financially
      supporting the appellant since at least 2012, financial responsibility
      is not the determinative factor.

  28. There was no evidence produced of any contact  with  the  school,  let
      alone "regular contact" as stated by the principal. Nor was there  any
      evidence that Mrs Policarpio 'shared her views and provided assistance
      to help the  appellant  fulfil  his  potential'  as  asserted  by  the
      Principal.

  29. No documentary or other evidence was produced  or  relied  on  by  Mrs
      Policarpio as to such regular contact and  communication  between  her
      and the school. There was no evidence  of  any  discussions  with  the
      school or any of his teachers. There was no evidence that she had ever
      received reports relating to his progress at the school. Nor was there
      evidence of any  input  that  she  had  provided  in  respect  of  any
      important decisions relating  to  his  schooling.  The  only  document
      produced was a school leaving certificate from  pages  124  indicating
      that he has 'enrolled his back subjects and passed them  last  summer,
      April 2014'.

  30. The finding in these circumstances that  whilst  the  sponsor  may  be
      responsible for the upkeep and  some  decision  making,  such  as  the
      choice of his schooling, the responsibility in this case is shared and
      not sole, is sustainable on the evidence available.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.


      Signed                             Date 22 December 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


