
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05723/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2017                     |On 5 January 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Sri Lanka  aged
    51.  In a decision sent in 11 November 2016 Judge Hussain of the First-
    tier Tribunal allowed on human rights grounds his  appeal  against  the
    decision made by the appellant (hereafter the  Secretary  of  State  or
    SSHD) refusing to grant him leave to remain.  The claimant came to  the
    UK in 2001 as a theology student.  He ceased to have leave to remain in
    November 2011.  In September 2011 he married SI, a citizen of Malaysia,
    who had also come to the UK.  She has a PhD  and  teaches  English  and
    Maths.  She has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The SSHD  refused  the  claimant's  application  because  she  was  not
    satisfied  that  there  would  be  any  insurmountable   obstacles   in
    accordance with EX.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules preventing
    him from continuing his relationship with his  wife  in  Sri  Lanka  or
    Malaysia.  Nor did the SSHD consider there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the couple's integration into either  country.   The  SSHD
    also took into account that he had numerous applications refused.

3.   The  judge  had  the  benefit  of  a  large  volume  of  documentation,
    including witness statements from the claimant, his wife  and  numerous
    supporters.  He heard from a number of witnesses.   He  concluded  that
    the couple were both devoted Christians who are "highly prized in their
    community" and "very much embedded into church life in  this  country".
    They are both pastors.  He considered that their inability to  continue
    their work in the UK would have an adverse impact on their  lives.   He
    also took into account their claimed  difficulty  in  practising  their
    faith in Sri Lanka or Malaysia, although he said he did not  give  that
    "much weight".  He then considered the medical evidence relating to the
    couple's lengthy efforts to have a child, entailing extensive fertility
    treatment.  Whilst finding that fertility treatment  may  be  available
    both in Sri Lanka and Malaysia, the judge concluded that:

         "The difficulty of establishing a new  regime  of  treatment  in  a
         foreign country under a different system cannot be  underestimated.
         Given that time may be of the essence for the appellant's  wife  in
         this case, I find that any delay in  the  resumption  of  treatment
         could well be fateful for this couple".


    The judge concluded that paragraph EX.1 was satisfied.


4.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal are essentially  twofold.   First,  it  is
    submitted that the judge failed to  engage  with  EX.2  and  failed  to
    appreciate that  the  insurmountable  obstacles  test  imposes  a  high
    threshold.  They point out that in Agyarko  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  the
    Court of Appeal had upheld a finding by UTJ Craig that  the  fact  that
    the applicant in that case was undergoing fertility treatment in the UK
    was not an insurmountable obstacle.   Second,  it  was  submitted  that
    given the judge's findings that the couple's claim that they would  not
    be able to practise their faith in Sri Lanka or Malaysia did  not  bear
    "much weight" and that infertility treatment would be available in both
    countries, his finding that there would be insurmountable obstacles was
    unsustainable.

5.   I am grateful to Mr Nath  and  Mr  Richardson  for  their  submissions.
    Both managed to pilot  their  submissions  through  a  crowded  sea  of
    documentation with skill and clarity.

6.   I am not persuaded that the SSHD's grounds are made out.  It  would  be
    fair to describe the judge's decision as a generous one, but  I  cannot
    interfere with his decision unless satisfied that  it  is  vitiated  by
    legal error.  The fatal difficulty with the SSHD's grounds is that they
    do not grapple with the fact  that  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
    couple would face insurmountable obstacles was not based  on  a  single
    factor but on a cumulative consideration,  relevant  factors  including
    the great strength of the couple's community  ties  in  the  UK,  their
    charitable work, the couple's difficulties in conceiving  a  child  and
    (although not attaching "much weight" to them) the problems they  would
    face practising their faith in Sri Lanka or  Malaysia.   It  is  simply
    incorrect of the grounds to assert that the  judge  "failed  to  engage
    with EX.2". The judge did not consider that the difficulties they  were
    experiencing in undergoing fertility treatment were sufficient on their
    own to amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  It is true that the judge
    (to use the wording of the grounds) "gives little to the assertion that
    the appellant and his wife would not be able to practise their faith in
    Sri Lanka or Malaysia" but, once again, that only shows that that  this
    factor in itself was not considered  to  constitute  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  As regards the infertility treatment issue, it is clear that
    for the judge it was not the difficulty of establishing a new regime of
    treatment  in  a  foreign  country  that  was  decisive  (although   he
    considered it a difficulty that "cannot  be  underestimated");  it  was
    rather that  the  couple's  failure  to  conceive  over  a  long  time,
    especially in light of the wife's age, meant that "time may be  of  the
    essence" and "any delay in the resumption of treatment  could  well  be
    fateful  for  this  couple".   The  judge's  findings  as  regards  the
    fertility treatment were clearly made against  the  background  of  the
    evidence, medical and otherwise, indicating that the wife's failure  to
    conceive had taken its  toll  physically  and  mentally  on  her.   She
    suffered from clinical depression.  The treatment had proved  traumatic
    to her.  None of this evidence was or has been challenged by  the  SSHD
    or Mr Nash.  I do not find the SSHD's  invocation  of  a  passage  from
    Agyarko in the Court of Appeal relating to the  applicant's  particular
    circumstances in that case to be helpful.  The decision in  Agyarko  in
    both the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court emphasise that Article 8
    cases are highly fact-sensitive.

7.   Accordingly, whilst accepting that the judge's decision was a  generous
    one, it was within the range of reasonable responses on an  issue  that
    required broad evaluative judgment.

8.   For the above reasons, I find that the SSHD's grounds are not made  out
    and that accordingly the decision of the judge must stand.

9.   I would point out that  had  I  found  a  material  error  of  law  and
    continued to re-make the decision for myself, I would have  given  more
    weight than the judge did to the likely problems the couple would  face
    in practising their faith in Sri Lanka and Malaysia.  The COI  evidence
    before the judge at least, contained materials indicating that  persons
    who actively proselytise a Christian evangelical  faith  in  either  of
    these countries face significant difficulties.  In considering he could
    not attach "much weight" to these the judge may have had in  mind  that
    this COI fell short of establishing a real risk of persecution or  ill-
    treatment.  But the issue in this case was  whether  such  difficulties
    would give rise to insurmountable obstacles which, even though still  a
    stringent test, is clearly a lesser level of severity than  persecution
    or  ill-treatment.   The  very  detailed  evidence  before  the   judge
    established beyond doubt that the  couple  were  committed  evangelical
    Christians for whom the active promotion of their  faith  is  a  matter
    fundamental to their identity.

10.  There is another matter that in my view would have weighed  heavily  in
    the claimant's favour.  It is not disputed that  save  for  suitability
    criteria relating to the claimant's failure to leave the  UK  when  his
    leave ran out,  he  meets  all  the  substantive  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules relating to spouses.  His wife has a  well-paid  job.
    She has ILR.  It is not  disputed  that  they  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  They are of good  character  and  have  shown
    dedication and service to their local community and charitable  causes.
    In my judgment, even though the couple do not have children, their case
    brings into play the principles set  out  by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40; see also  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11.   In  my
    judgment, were the claimant to return  to  Sri  Lanka,  he  would  have
    strong prospects of being found to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules for overseas spouses.  Taken in conjunction with other factors in
    play in this case, this would strongly point to a  conclusion  that  it
    would be disproportionate to require him to leave the UK

11.  For the above reasons, I dismiss  the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  and
    uphold the decision of the FtT Judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 4 January 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
