
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05560/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th November 2019                |On 6th December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                              kukakwashe mahaka
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha, Solicitors with Carl Martin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms I Vigiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry promulgated on 24 July 2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights
    application dated 10 October 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 15  August  1973,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor  in  2002.   She  was
    subsequently granted leave to remain as a student until 30 April  2007.
    The Appellant has not had leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  since
    that date, with a human rights application being refused  in  September
    2009, an application  being  rejected  in  June  2012  and  her  latest
    application on human  rights  grounds  dated  28  February  2018  being
    refused on 10 October 2018.

 3. The Respondent refused the latest application the basis  that  although
    it was accepted that the Appellant was in a genuine relationship with a
    British citizen, she could not meet  the  immigration  requirements  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and it was not accepted  that  she
    met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  because  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued outside of  the
    United Kingdom.  In particular, there was healthcare available for both
    the Appellant and her partner's conditions.  The Appellant did not have
    any dependent children and could not meet the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent did not consider  that
    there were any exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to
    remain and the Appellant's medical conditions did not  reach  the  high
    threshold in Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights for a
    grant of leave to remain on that basis.

 4. Judge Young-Harry dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  24
    July 2019 on human rights grounds.  In summary, the First-tier Tribunal
    found that the Appellant could not meet the requirements for a grant of
    leave  to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  of   the   Immigration   Rules,
    specifically she could not meet the immigration requirements  and  also
    could not meet paragraph EX.1  because  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside of the United Kingdom.  The
    First-tier Tribunal went on to  consider  the  proportionality  of  the
    Appellant's removal for the purposes  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights  and  concluded  that  it  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with her right to respect for private and
    family life.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    partner would support an entry clearance application and that she could
    return  temporarily  to  do  so,  with  a  temporary  separation  being
    proportionate, or  perhaps  no  interference  at  all  if  her  partner
    accompanies her.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in concluding that the  Appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  specifically  that
    there was  a  failure  to  consider  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.
    Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    considering that a successful entry clearance  application  would  mean
    that removal would be proportionate, whereas in  fact  that  diminishes
    the public interest in removal.

 6. At the oral hearing, on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Ngwuacha relied  on
    the written grounds of  appeal.   In  relation  to  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM, it was submitted that there was a failure  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to refer to the definition set out in paragraph EX.2  and
    a failure to consider the Appellant's partner's  position  separate  to
    the Appellant's circumstances.

 7. It  was  further  submitted  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  of
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  namely  the  medical
    conditions of the Appellant and her partner and the written evidence of
    her partner that it would be inconceivable for him  to  relocate  given
    his family in the United Kingdom.  There was however  no  challenge  to
    the findings that medical treatment would be available in Zimbabwe  and
    in any event, there was no evidence in support of  the  claim  that  it
    would not  be  available  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  only
    evidence on this confirmed that medication was available.  Overall,  it
    was suggested that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  consider  all
    of the factors in combination, a requirement confirmed by the Court  of
    Appeal in the case of Lal v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.

 8. On the second ground of appeal, it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the approach of the First-tier Tribunal is  contrary  to
    the decision in Agyarko v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 wherein it was confirmed, further to  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  40,
    that a likely successful application for entry clearance  would  reduce
    the public interest in removal.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, it was submitted that there was  no  error
    of law on the first ground of appeal given that the First-tier Tribunal
    expressly considered the medical issues of both the Appellant  and  her
    partner and came to a conclusion that was open to it on the evidence in
    paragraph 21 that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
    being considered abroad.  Taking the evidence at  its  highest  and  in
    combination, the matters raised by the Appellant and her partner  could
    not possibly meet the stringent test  set  out  in  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM as these are all factors which could be overcome and  which
    would not in any event entail any serious hardship.

10. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  made  adequate   findings   on   the   issue   of
    proportionality.  First there was no clear  finding  that  all  of  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules would be met for a grant of entry
    clearance, the First-tier Tribunal only going so far in paragraph 24 of
    the decision and stating that it 'seems the financial requirements  are
    met'.  Secondly, in  paragraph  26  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal find that this is not a rare or exceptional  case  as  on  the
    facts of Chikwamba, there are no children involved and as such it would
    be reasonable for an  application  for  entry  clearance  to  be  made.
    Thirdly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  also  have  considered  the
    factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, with little weight to be attached to family life given  that  the
    relationship commenced at a time when the Applicant had no lawful leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  Overall on the facts, it was open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to find  that  there  was  no  disproportionate
    interference with the right to respect for private and family  life  in
    this case.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find no error of law on the first ground of appeal, which  is  wholly
    misconceived on any reading of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
     It is not  necessary  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  quoted
    paragraph EX.1 or EX.2 in its decision in circumstances where there  is
    clear and express reference  to  the  correct  test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing on return  to  Zimbabwe,  correctly
    applied to the facts available to the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation
    both to the Appellant's own circumstances and that of her partner.  The
    primary reason relied upon by both for remaining in the United  Kingdom
    was their  medical  conditions,  however  it  was  found  that  medical
    treatment was  available  in  Zimbabwe  for  both.   In  addition,  the
    Appellant has family in and nearby  Zimbabwe  who  can  assist  her  on
    return and  no  other  insurmountable  obstacles  or  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration had been identified or relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant.

 2. In any event, on any view, the very limited evidence before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  could  not  rationally  or  legitimately  satisfy   the
    stringent test in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  even  if  all  factors
    relied upon were taken cumulatively and in combination.  The height  of
    the Appellant's  case  was  based  on  medical  conditions,  for  which
    treatment was found to be available in  Zimbabwe  and  the  Appellant's
    partner's brief statement of ties to the United Kingdom which contained
    almost  no  detail  and  did  not  specifically  identify  any  adverse
    consequences or serious hardship in relocating with  the  Appellant  to
    Zimbabwe.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  bound  to  conclude  on  the
    evidence that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  and  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    for a grant of leave to remain.

 3. I find no material error of law on  the  second  ground  of  appeal  in
    relation to the balancing  exercise  undertaken  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights for the  following
    reasons.

 4. The Appellant specifically  relies  on  paragraph  51  of  the  Supreme
    Court's decision in Agyarko to the effect that if an applicant, even if
    residing in the UK unlawfully, was  otherwise  certain  to  be  granted
    leave to enter, at least if an application was made  from  outside  the
    UK, then there might be no public interest in his or  her  removal  and
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal effectively applies  the  opposite
    by increasing the public  interest  because  of  the  Appellant's  poor
    immigration history.

 5. However, on the facts of this case and the very limited evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the possibility that there may  be  no  public
    interest in the Appellant's removal even though she is here  unlawfully
    could not on any  legitimate  basis  assist  the  Appellant.   This  is
    because there is no clear finding by the First-tier  Tribunal  that  an
    application for entry clearance was certain  to  be  granted.   At  its
    highest the Appellant's relationship is accepted and the Tribunal  only
    go so far as saying that it seems that the financial requirements  were
    met.  However, there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  of
    the financial circumstances of the Appellant or her Appellant's partner
    and no acceptance by the Respondent  that  the  financial  requirements
    were met.  This cannot of amount to an application found to be  certain
    of being granted.

 6. In any event, although as noted in R (on the  application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC),
    that it would be comparatively rarely, certainly family cases involving
    children, that an Article 8 case should be dismissed on  the  basis  it
    would be proportionate and more appropriate for an individual to  apply
    for leave from abroad, in all cases it will be for  the  individual  to
    place before the Secretary of State (or in this  case,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal)  evidence  that  such  temporary  separation  will  interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights.

 7. Further, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in  Kaur  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 (at paragraphs 43 to
    45), the facts in Chikwamba were striking and the  application  of  the
    principle does not trump all public interest  matters,  including,  for
    example a poor immigration history.  Even in cases where  an  applicant
    was certain to be granted leave to enter,  there  might  be  no  public
    interest in removing the  applicant.   What  is  required  is  a  fact-
    specific assessment in each case, the principle will only  apply  in  a
    very clear case and even then, will not necessarily result in  a  grant
    of leave to remain.  On the facts and evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which did not include any evidence at all of the impact of  a
    temporary separation if the Appellant were to return  to  Zimbabwe  and
    make an entry clearance application (and to the contrary found that  it
    was possible that the Appellant's partner could return with her),  this
    is not a case in which Chikwamba could in any event have  assisted  the
    Appellant.

 8. In these circumstances, the fact that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    consider reducing the public interest in the maintenance of immigration
    control, was of no material impact  on  the  decision  given  that  the
    Appellant could not benefit from the  principle  in  Chikwamba  in  any
    event.  Further, even if the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control had been reduced in this way, that would have to be
    balanced against the requirement that little weight should be given  to
    the  Appellant's  relationship  formed  with   a   qualifying   partner
    established at a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully in accordance  with  section  117B(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; which the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to do in the present appeal.  Therefore, in any event, the reduction of
    interest on both sides  of  scales  in  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise was likely to have no material difference  to  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant's removal was proportionate, with the  same  outcome
    of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]         Date         29th November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
