
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05371/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 October 2018                    |On 14 November 2018                   |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  syed [a]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandergani, Counsel instructed by Haq Hamilton
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a decision of the respondent on 27  March  2017
    refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The claimant is subject to deportation because he is a foreign national
    (a citizen of Pakistan) who on 1 September 2015 was sent to prison  for
    a total of 30 months for his part in a money laundering business.   The
    claimant's son was a more active participant and was sent to prison for
    seven years.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is in some ways  very  thorough  and
    certainly shows considerable regard to  the  mass  of  evidence  placed
    before the Tribunal but does not always show the precise legal analysis
    that would have been desirable.

 4. Certain things are clear.  The claimant has spent most of  his  working
    life as a merchant seaman which he did with some success having  gained
    respected qualifications in the United Kingdom.  He was  born  in  1944
    and so is now 74 years old.  He has not lived in Pakistan since he  was
    17 years old. The  claimant  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    permission since January 2008 and was given indefinite leave to  remain
    on 6 September 2012.  The claimant lives with his wife, also a  citizen
    of Pakistan.  They married in January 1974.

 5. The judge clearly did have regard to Section 117C of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but it would have been more helpful  if
    he had said a little more about the  operation  of  that  section.   It
    establishes  without  equivocation  that  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest but where the foreign criminal  has
    been sentenced to less than 4 years imprisonment  although  deportation
    remains in the public interest the  public  interest  does  not  always
    require deportation. Section 117C(4) creates two  statutory  exceptions
    to the  normal  requirement  of  deportation.   The  first,  identified
    conveniently as "Exception 1", applies when certain conditions  present
    including the claimant having been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life.  Clearly  it  is  not  relevant  to  this
    appeal. However Exception 2 may apply and  I  am  satisfied  the  judge
    found that it did.  Section 117C(5) states that:

         "Exception 2  applies  where  [the  claimant]  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  ...,  and  the
         effect of [the claimant's] deportation on the partner ... would  be
         unduly harsh."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  and  found  all  the  witnesses
    including the claimant and his wife to  be  credible.   This  important
    finding has not been challenged and there is no reason to think  it  in
    any way unsound.  The judge was satisfied that  in  the  event  of  the
    claimant being deported  his  wife  would  go  with  him  to  Pakistan.
    Importantly he found at paragraph 136:

         "Shamin intends to travel to Pakistan with the [claimant], if he is
         deported.  She intends to do so because she  knows  she  could  not
         cope in the UK without  him.   The  full-time  [care]  he  provides
         cannot be provided by Maria.  Moreover,  she  is  not  prepared  to
         spend the rest of her life separated from him."

 7. It is immaterial that the claimant's wife could choose to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  She has chosen to go to Pakistan.  The effect  of  the
    claimant's removal would be the claimant's wife going to  Pakistan  and
    that is the basis on which issues of "harshness" need to be  assessed."
    Nevertheless the judge also concluded that it would be unduly harsh for
    the claimant's wife to remain in the United Kingdom without  him.  This
    conclusion is based both on the natural desire of a married  couple  to
    live together and on the high degree  of  dependency  she  has  on  the
    claimant has her main carer.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with this at paragraphs 161 and 162 where
    the judge said:

         "161.    The [claimant] is 73 years old.  He has problems with  his
         physical health.  He suffered a stroke while he  was  in  hospital.
         He now  suffers  from  Major  Depressive  Disorder.   He  sometimes
         suffers from severe memory impairment.  I have  already  quoted  Dr
         Thomas's conclusions as to what effect his deportation  would  have
         on his mental state.

         162. Shamim's circumstances are these.  She is very  ill.   She  is
         physically much older than her years would suggest.  Dr Harris  and
         Ms Ashley confirmed the [claimant] is her full-time carer.  She has
         decided that she will return to Pakistan  with  the  [claimant]  to
         live with him there, should he be deported.  They have been married
         for 43 years.  Most of  that  time  they  have  been  living  apart
         because the [claimant] was always at sea.  They came to the  United
         Kingdom to settle here, to be together and to be with their family.
          As I say, the [claimant's] conduct has destroyed that dream."

 9. The judge continued to look how the couple would  manage  in  Pakistan.
    He pointed out they would need money to live on and they had little and
    Shamin would not receive the benefits to which she is entitled  in  the
    United Kingdom in  Pakistan.   The  judge  found  that  they  would  be
    isolated.  The judge clearly accepted evidence that the  former  family
    home was in ruins. They would have no family support and the  situation
    made worse by the claimant's wife's ill-health.  She was  described  as
    "a heavy user of the NHS, as she is entitled to be."

10. It is explained that Shamin has a very  serious  heart  condition  that
    could quite literally  result  in  sudden  death.   She  needs  a  knee
    operation because her knee is very painful but surgery is  particularly
    difficult because of other complications.

11. The judge concluded that it is really difficult to see how  they  would
    manage on the modest income that was known to be available to them.

12. Additionally the judge accepted that Shamin has a  subjective  fear  of
    returning to Pakistan. She is a Shia rather than Sunni Muslim  and  has
    experienced discrimination and  harassment  as  a  result.  This  is  a
    significant point in a case involving an  elderly  couple  establishing
    themselves in Pakistan with very modest means and no family support.

13. The judge said at paragraph 139 "It is far from clear  how  they  would
    manage to get a roof over their heads".

14. Moreover at 168 the judge said: "I record that I am left in doubt as to
    whether the [claimant] and Shamin would be able to survive in Pakistan,
    in the circumstances I find that they would be likely to encounter".

15. Unless that finding is perverse or otherwise ignorable it  is  hard  to
    see why it does not support adequately a finding that  the  effects  of
    deportation on the claimant's wife would be unduly harsh.

16. In short the judge decided that it was wrong  to  deport  the  claimant
    because it would impact with undue harshness on his wife.  I find  that
    an entirely lawful decision.

17. Difficulties have come because the judge considered a  vast  amount  of
    material before him and this has created room for criticism although  I
    am not persuaded that he fell into material error.

18. I have considered the Secretary of State's grounds.  The judge did have
    regard to the "very harsh consequences" that the deportation would have
    upon the claimant's wife and also his adult children and found that his
    relationship with his grandchildren was "unusually  strong"  and  found
    that that disrupting it would impact  adversely  on  them.   These  are
    points which may well have been given undue  weight  in  the  balancing
    exercise but they are peripheral matters and can be  removed  from  the
    balance which remains tipped firmly in favour of  allowing  the  appeal
    because the effect of removal on the claimant's wife is  unduly  harsh.
    These findings are not determinative.

19. Similarly although the judge has found, rationally, that there is a low
    risk of reoffending it would be wrong  if  the  judge  had  given  much
    weight to that finding.  The relevance of there being  a  low  risk  of
    reoffending is that it might make it acceptable to allow an appeal that
    could be allowed for other reasons.  It is not itself a reason to allow
    an appeal but I see no justification for the  implied  suggestion  that
    that is what the judge has done.  The reason for allowing  this  appeal
    is the impact of deportation on the claimant's  wife.   The  judge  was
    very aware of his responsibilities and it cannot be said that  he  gave
    too much regard to the risk of reoffending.

20. Mr Duffy, realistically, did not take me through  all  of  the  grounds
    although he continued to rely upon them. His main argument was that the
    harsh consequences of removal are not  unduly  harsh  but  the  natural
    consequences of deportation.  I  have  reflected  on  that.  It  is  an
    important point well made.  However there are factors  here  that  make
    matters much worse than would ordinarily be the case.   The  claimant's
    wife is poorly.  She needs a lot of medical care.  This is  an  element
    far beyond the  obvious  and  significant  difficulties  of  trying  to
    establish herself in a country where she has no contacts when  she  has
    reached  the  age  of  60  and  her  husband  is   considerably   more.
    Additionally the claimant and his wife have little money, no  home  and
    no contact to support them. They do not have the advantages  of  youth.
    This is not a matter of simply feeling sorry for  the  claimant's  wife
    but of recognising that the effect of removal would be quite out of the
    ordinary and also unduly harsh.

21. Perhaps I am apt to remind myself here that the claimant was  sentenced
    to 30 months' imprisonment.  This case does not attract the  very  high
    hurdle that has  to  be  negotiated  by  a  person  seeking  to  resist
    deportation after being sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

22. Sitting back and looking at this as a whole I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge has given lawful reasons for his decision.  The judge has muddied
    the waters a little by giving weight,  possibly  too  much  weight,  to
    other elements of the claim but they  are  not  even  cumulatively  the
    reason that the decision was made.

23. I am satisfied that the judge's findings that  the  effect  on  removal
    itself would be unduly harsh are  a  proper  reason  for  allowing  the
    appeal.  The other matters in which the judge may have erred were  only
    an attempt to support an otherwise sound  decision.   Ironically,  they
    may have had the opposite effect but they are not material errors.   It
    follows therefore that I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Decision

24. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 November 2018                |

