
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
hu/05112/2016

                                                   hu/05115/2016

                                                   hu/05116/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd April 2018                         |On 1st May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                    mr Jhak Bahadur pun (first appellant)
                  miss Netra Kumari pun (second appellant)
                   miss Dhan Kumari pun (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss A Jaja, Counsel, Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal.  They all make application as the
    dependent children of  Durgabahadur  Pun,  a  former  Ghurkha  soldier.
    Their applications were refused on various dates between 2015 and 2016.
     The Appellants lodged Grounds of Appeal and the  appeals  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  27th
    June 2017.  Judge Fox noted that in the Notices  of  Refusal  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had concluded that the Appellants  are  healthy
    adults, that they are not financially or emotionally dependent upon the
    Sponsor for the purpose  of  the  revised  policy  as  they  have  been
    separated for more than two  years  and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    concluded that no  other  exceptional  circumstances  existed.   Having
    heard the appeal, the Appellants' appeals were allowed on human  rights
    grounds.

 2. On 23rd August 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  On  7th  February  2018  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant-Hutchison  granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison considered that it was arguable that the judge had  erred  in
    law (a) by failing to give adequate reasons why  apart  from  financial
    and emotional dependency there was sufficient to demonstrate  emotional
    dependency to the Kugathas standard when all three appellants  live  in
    the same location and no consideration has been given that  as  healthy
    adults, they cannot support each other and why  their  emotional  bonds
    with their Sponsor constitutes anything beyond the norm.  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison also noted that it was contended by the  Secretary  of  State
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider Section  117B
    adequately, and that whilst accepting that the historic injustice ought
    to trump the Respondent's  interest  in  maintaining  firm  immigration
    policy, Annex  K  had  been  introduced  specifically  to  address  the
    "historic injustice" and yet the  Appellants  do  still  not  meet  the
    requirements having lived apart from  their  Sponsor  at  the  time  of
    application for over six years, more than the  two  years  required  by
    Annex D and that although the  Sponsor  asserted  that  he  would  have
    settled  in  the  UK  upon  his  retirement,  had  he  been  given  the
    opportunity to do so, it may be that the argument was no more than pure
    speculation as to what someone would  have  done  in  hindsight,  which
    arguably could not be given any weight in  an  overall  proportionality
    assessment.

 3. The Appellants replied to the Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal by
    Rule 24 response.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before  me
    to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the sake of  continuity
    throughout the appeal process, the Entry Clearance Officer is  referred
    to herein as the Respondent, albeit that I note that that  this  is  an
    appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The Appellants are  represented
    by their instructed Counsel Ms Jaja.  Ms Jaja  is  familiar  with  this
    matter, having appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is  the
    author of the Rule 24 response.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Wilding.

Submission/Discussion

 4. Mr Wilding takes me to, and relies upon, his  Grounds  of  Appeal  save
    that he amends this by indicating that the Secretary of State no longer
    seeks to rely on the ground pursuant to Section 117B of the  2002  Act.
    His main submission is that the judge has  failed  to  properly  reason
    that Article 8(1) has been engaged.   He  takes  me  in  particular  to
    paragraphs 30 to 35 of the judge's decision, these being the first part
    relating to the judge's findings.  He submits that being generous  (his
    words) it could be possibly construed therein that the judge  has  gone
    on to consider the concept of proportionality.  He notes that reference
    is made to the factual history therein, but  he  wonders  whether  that
    shows whether family life exists and submits that there are only normal
    emotional ties and that the judge has not engaged in the Kugathas  test
    and therefore the findings at paragraph 36 thereafter reflect an  error
    of law as to whether Article  8  has  been  engaged.   He  accepts  the
    response that is set out in the Rule 24 and notes that  the  judge  has
    referred to the authorities  and  that  Kugathas  has  been  raised  at
    paragraph 28.  He submits  that  this  is  even  more  damning  of  the
    decision and whilst noting that  at  paragraph  35  the  threshold  for
    Article 8 is low, that does not assist the Appellant and that there  is
    nothing on the findings of the evidence at paragraph 36 onwards to  say
    that the findings therein were immaterial and that there  has  been  no
    engagement with the evidence.  The Secretary  of  State's  position  is
    that the decision is lacking in construction as there are  no  findings
    and that the  decision  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

 5. In response Ms  Jaja  refers  to  the  Rule  24  response  and  to  the
    authorities.  She submits that the judge has  taken  into  account  the
    relevant case law and that the approach  was  perfectly  correct.   She
    reminds me that the judge has noted at paragraph 24 that the second and
    third Appellants are not in education  and  are  financially  dependent
    upon the Sponsor.  She points out this has not been challenged  and  in
    fact  it  is  repeated  at  paragraph  3  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Consequently, she submits the only real issue in this matter is one  of
    proportionality.

 6. She contends that when putting all of this "into the mix"  (her  words)
    that if there is no dispute as to family life then there  would  be  no
    need to rehearse what is conceded.  She takes me to  paragraph  31  and
    the fact that the judge has accepted the evidence and  noted  that  the
    Sponsor has provided credible evidence of his immigration  history  and
    the reasons for its timing.  She refers me to the most recent decision,
    namely the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Rai  v  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320  and  to  the  reference  to  the
    analysis therein of Kugathas v the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  She submits that at paragraph 31 of the
    decision the judge  has  followed  these  guiding  principles  and  has
    concluded  at  paragraph  42  that  the  Appellants  have  not   formed
    independent lives.

 7.  Mr  Wilding  responds  by  commenting   that   Kugathas   is   not   a
    proportionality exercise and that the issue that needs to be  addressed
    relates to the five-stage test set out in Razgar.   He  indicates  that
    should the Tribunal accept that proportionality has been reached,  then
    the appeal will be allowed and hence the challenge that  Article  8  is
    not engaged.  He submits this is the point the Entry Clearance  Officer
    was making in his refusal  e.g.  he  does  not  accept  that  there  is
    emotional dependency.  He submits that  the  historical  wrong  is  not
    relevant  to  the  engagement  of  paragraph  8(1)  but   it   is   for
    proportionality and refers me to  paragraph  14  of  Patel  and  others
    [2010] EWCA Civ 17.

 8. Ms Jaja submits that despite such submissions the Secretary of State is
    still stuck with the concession made before the judge  and  points  out
    that the Grounds of Appeal refers to family life and not a family unit,
    which she submits is something completely different.  She submits  that
    fairness and due process mean that she is entitled to take advantage of
    the concession and that the concession was made of financial dependency
    and therefore that is sufficient to engage Article 8.  Thereinafter she
    goes into an analysis of the authorities, all of which I have given due
    consideration to.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me is whether or  not
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has materially erred in law.   I  am  not
    rehearing this matter (at least not at this stage) nor being  asked  to
    draw my own conclusions.  The starting point is the  judge's  findings,
    which begin at paragraph 30.  This is a  judge  who  has  done  a  very
    thorough analysis of the case and the manner in which the  decision  is
    set out is well-constructed.  Firstly, the judge  has  dealt  with  the
    basis upon which the Secretary of State refused the appeal and has then
    gone on in considerable detail at paragraphs 6 to 11  to  set  out  the
    authorities with regard to the burden and standard of  proof.   He  has
    then dealt with the issues of the evidence and the submissions and then
    made findings from paragraph 30 onwards.  The judge had made  clear  in
    his determination that he was guided in reaching his  decision  by  the
    authorities including those cases recited in the authorities,  starting
    with Gurung and going through to Rai.  As  Ms  Jaja  reminds  me  those
    cases make it clear that where the adult children  of  ex-Ghurkhas  are
    concerned, there are factors which the court is  entitled  to  take  in
    account in determining whether  refusal  of  entry  clearance  breaches
    Article 8.  She has submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    provided sufficient reasoning in relation to emotional  dependency  but
    that even if he did not, any failure to do so would not be material.

12. I remind myself that the Secretary of State has made a concession  with
    regard to financial dependency.  I agree with Ms Jaja's submission that
    Rai refers to a "long delayed right" and by way of the findings of  the
    judge at paragraph 32, the judge has accepted the view expressed in Rai
    at paragraph 18 that the judgment in Kugathas has been interpreted  too
    restrictively in the past  and  ought  to  be  read  in  the  light  of
    subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg case and that  some
    of the court's  decisions  indicate  that  family  life  between  adult
    children  and  parents  will  readily  be  found  without  evidence  of
    exceptional dependence.

13. Thereafter the judge has, I am  satisfied,  gone  on  to  look  at  the
    appropriate stages within Razgar  and  at  paragraph  38  has  reminded
    himself that an entitlement  to  entry  clearance  is  not  within  the
    Tribunal's gift and that Article 8 must not be  employed  to  grant  an
    entitlement to residence where none is  intended.   Thereafter  he  has
    gone on to consider the position  regarding  exceptional  circumstances
    and the policies and has made findings that he was  perfectly  entitled
    to.

14. I am consequently satisfied that this is a  solid  decision  where  the
    judge has quite properly addressed the  issue  of  both  emotional  and
    financial dependency to the Kugathas standard and has properly  applied
    the law.  It has only been necessary to recite the above herein to show
    that the judge has taken such steps.  To that extent,  the  submissions
    of the Secretary of State amount to nothing more than disagreement.

15. This is a judge who has carried out the appropriate  exercise  properly
    and thoroughly and made findings which he was  entitled  to.   In  such
    circumstances, for all the  above  reasons,  the  appeal  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 30 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
