
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05438/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 17 December 2018                   |On 04 January 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        ERIKSON REGIS ALVES ALEXANDRE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Brazil, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") against a decision to refuse  leave  to  remain  as  a  (civil)
    partner. The FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. At the hearing before me on 17 December 2018 it was agreed between  the
    parties that the FtT erred in law for the reasons given in the grant of
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT"). It was  also  agreed
    between the parties that the errors of law are such as to  require  the
    decision of the FtT to be set aside and for the appeal to  be  remitted
    to the FtT for a hearing de novo.

 3. In the circumstances, and considering the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the
    grounds of appeal in relation to its decision, the grant of permission,
    and all other relevant documentation, I set aside the decision  of  the
    FtT for error of law and remit the appeal to the FtT for a  hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones
    with no findings of fact preserved.

 4. In remitting the appeal I have had  regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals.

 5. Although permission was granted on limited grounds, had  the  appellant
    renewed the application for permission in terms  of  the  grounds  upon
    which permission was refused, it may very well be that permission would
    have been granted on those grounds as well. I mention this to emphasise
    that the scope of the fresh hearing before the FtT is not  limited;  it
    is a complete re-hearing.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.

 7. A Portuguese interpreter will be required at the further hearing.



signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 17/12/18


