
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/05243/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2018                        |On 11th May 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                         nikesh kaushikbhai panchal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini of Counsel, instructed by Vision
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gibbs promulgated on 13 June 2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision dated 28 January 2016 to  refuse  his  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of India,  born  on  17  March  1990.   The
    Appellant had previously entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student
    in 2009 with leave to remain until 1  July  2013  but  that  leave  was
    curtailed to end on 22 September 2012.  The Appellant  was  encountered
    and arrested for overstaying on 23 November 2012,  following  which  he
    sought to judicially review the decision to  curtail  his  leave.   The
    Respondent accepted that there was a mistake in the curtailment and the
    date or curtailment was changed to 15 June  2013.   The  Appellant  was
    then granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 general student to  30
    October 2015, but on 28 February 2015 he  was  encountered  working  in
    breach of his conditions, arrested and cautioned as a person liable  to
    be  detained  pending  removal.   On  10  March  2015   the   Appellant
    voluntarily departed from the United Kingdom and then applied for entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  Anu  Gurung,  the
    sponsor.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 28  January  2016  for  three
    reasons.  First, the application was refused under paragraph 320(11) of
    the Immigration Rules because the Appellant had  previously  worked  in
    breach of the conditions of his grant of leave to remain as  a  student
    and had  used  deception  when  arrested  in  relation  to  that.   The
    Respondent  considered  that  there   were   sufficiently   aggravating
    circumstances to justify a refusal under this provision.  Secondly, the
    application was refused under paragraphs E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10 of Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules because the Respondent did not accept  that
    the Appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  nor  that
    they intended to live together permanently in United Kingdom.  Thirdly,
    there was insufficient evidence to establish that the sponsor  met  the
    financial requirements in  paragraph  E-ECP.3.1  of  Appendix  FM.   In
    particular, self-employed income had not been verified  with  HMRC  and
    without it the income requirement was not satisfied.

 4. Following receipt of the notice of appeal, an Entry  Clearance  Manager
    reviewed and maintained the decision on 3 May 2016.  The  same  reasons
    for refusal were given and in addition it was noted that in relation to
    the financial  requirements,  the  sponsor's  self-employment  had  not
    existed for a full financial year such that the evidential requirements
    of Appendix FM-SE could not be  satisfied.   Further,  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance did not amount to a disproportionate interference  with
    the right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. Judge Gibbs dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  13  June
    2017.  Although she found that the refusal under paragraph 320 (11)  of
    the Immigration Rules was not sustainable, she did not  find  that  the
    Appellant had established that he  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and was unable to find  that  the  financial  requirements
    were satisfied by the documents submitted with the original application
    in accordance with Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal
    was dismissed on human rights grounds on the basis that  there  was  no
    family life to engage Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.



The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law in failing to consider all of the material  submitted  with  the
    Appellant's application for entry clearance and the sponsor's  evidence
    at the hearing.  In particular, that the Respondent had  not,  contrary
    to Rule  24(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provided a full copy of the
    Appellant's application to the Tribunal and Judge Gibbs failed to  take
    into account that evidence had been submitted to the  Respondent,  even
    if not before her, and failed to take into account the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence of contact.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Appleyard on 28 December 2017
    on all grounds.

 8. At the oral hearing, on behalf of the Appellant it was  submitted  that
    the error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  that  Judge
    Gibbs was under the impression that documents  had  not  been  provided
    with the entry clearance application when in fact they had.  This was a
    misapprehension of fact which  was  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  In particular, the Appellant  had  submitted  photographs  and
    records of viber and whatsapp messages, which it was accepted were  not
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  had  been  requested  from  the
    Respondent and should have been provided by him in accordance with  the
    procedure rules.  At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, some,
    but not all of the  photographs  submitted  with  the  entry  clearance
    application had been returned to the Appellant and  were  available  to
    him, as were the record  of  messages  and  communication  and  it  was
    accepted that there was some culpability on the part of  the  Appellant
    not to produce these documents in support of his appeal.

 9. In relation to the financial requirements, it was accepted  that  there
    was no specific appeal against the findings adverse to the Appellant on
    this point but the evidence that was available was sufficient  to  show
    that the financial requirements had been  met  including  documentation
    with invoices and bank statements for  self-employed  income.   In  any
    event, if the decision is set aside and remade this would form part  of
    the overall assessment under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

10. On behalf  of  the  respondent,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the grounds of appeal could not  amount  to  a  material
    error of law.  The only point that could really be  taken  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal is that they should not have proceeded to hear  the
    appeal in the absence of documents from the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    However, the documents that were submitted with  the  application  were
    not necessarily determinative and there was still a lack of evidence of
    the relationship.  Further, the Appellant could have produced most,  if
    not all, of  that  evidence  and  addressed  the  concerns  as  to  the
    genuineness of the relationship.  It cannot be a material error of  law
    for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established her case in the circumstances.

11. In relation to  the  financial  requirements,  it  was  submitted  that
    Appendix FM-SE, paragraph 7 required  evidence  for  a  full  financial
    year, which had not, on the facts  at  the  date  of  application,  yet
    occurred, such that  self-employed  income  could  not  be  taken  into
    account to meet the overall requirements in this case in any event.

Findings and reasons

 1. In consideration of  the  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  above,  it  is
    necessary to  set  out  more  fully  the  reasons  of  Judge  Gibbs  in
    dismissing the appeal on the  basis  that  there  was  no  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and that the  financial  requirements  had  not
    been met.  The relevant parts of the decision as  to  the  relationship
    are as follows:

    "24.  For the reasons that I have set out above  I  do  not  place  any
    weight on the ECO's assertion that the appellant did  not  mention  his
    relationship with Ms Gurung when he was detained.

    25.  However, what I do find significant is the lack of evidence before
    me regarding the totality of  the  relationship,  particularly  as  the
    couple are aware that this forms the central part of  the  reasons  for
    refusal.  The couple claim to have been in a  relationship  since  2013
    and yet no evidence has been provided (as noted by the ECO) of this.  I
    find that in this digital day and age the fact that the  appellant  has
    not provided photographs of the couple together  in  the  UK,  messages
    and/or  emails  exchanged  during  their  relationship,  or  called  or
    provided witness statements from friends and/or colleagues  (Ms  Gurung
    still works at Subway) corroborating   their  relationship  casts  very
    significant  doubt  in  my  mind  on  the  genuine  nature   of   their
    relationship.

    26.  I also find that there is lack of evidence regarding the  couple's
    apparent cohabitation in 2015.  Although the ECO  refers  to  the  fact
    that the appellant was living at the  same  address  as  Ms  Gurung  no
    evidence  of  this  has  been  provided  before  me,  I  find  it  very
    significant  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  Ms  Gurung  refer   to
    cohabitation their witness statements, and that Ms Gurung did not refer
    to this in her oral evidence.

    27.  I place weight on the fact that since the appellant left the UK on
    10 March 2015 Ms Gurung has only seen him once,  for  two  weeks,  when
    they were married.  Despite being aware that the credibility  of  their
    relationship  is  an  issue  I  do  not  have  before  me  any  wedding
    photographs, or evidence of ongoing contact.  I am also not  persuaded,
    in the absence of more specific reasons and evidence,  that  Ms  Gurung
    has been unable to visit her husband  since  August  2015,  because  of
    work.

    28.  Taking all of these factors into account I am not  persuaded  that
    on the balance of probabilities the couple are in a genuine  subsisting
    relationship or intend to live with one another.

    29.  I uphold the refusal under Paragraph E-ECP.2.6 & 2.10 of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules."

 2. The reasons set out by Judge Gibbs focus on the lack of evidence before
    her of the claimed relationship between the Appellant and  the  sponsor
    and the only reference to material not being  in  front  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is in relation to the lack of evidence dating back as
    early as 2013 which is when it was said the relationship started.   The
    latter is not said to be inaccurate, the Appellant relies only on there
    having been wedding photographs and evidence of ongoing contact  before
    the Respondent.  It is not in dispute that such documents had not  been
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal by  either  party.   The  Appellant
    does not suggest that any of the further types of evidence referred  to
    by Judge Gibbs as lacking before her were in fact  provided  either  to
    the Respondent or to the First-tier Tribunal.  Even at its highest  and
    had the photographs and records of communication been before the First-
    tier Tribunal, there would still be a lack  of  evidence  as  to  their
    relationship and claimed cohabitation,  lack  witness  statements  from
    friends and lack of reasonable explanation for no  visits  since  their
    marriage.  The  sponsor's  oral  evidence  does  not  detract  from  or
    outweigh those reasons given.

 3. As can be seen from the reasons set out above,  there  is  in  fact  no
    misapprehension of the facts and no reliance on  a  lack  of  documents
    submitted to the Respondent as suggested  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    What in fact the Appellant is seeking to do is construct  an  error  of
    law by the Judge for failing to take into account documents which  were
    not before her, but which could have been.  This is not a case such  as
    in MH (Respondent's bundle: documents  not  provided)  Pakistan  [2010]
    UKUT 168 (IAC) where a document which the Respondent  relied  upon  had
    not been provided to the Tribunal, but one where documents available to
    both parties had not been provided  by  either.   In  relation  to  the
    Respondent, this is a breach of the procedure rules and in relation  to
    the Appellant, it is a failure to establish his case before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. It is important to note that although the  Appellant  states  that  the
    Respondent was requested to provide a copy of the  documents  submitted
    with the application to the First-tier Tribunal, most, if not  all,  of
    those documents had already been returned to the Appellant by the  time
    of the hearing and were  therefore  available  for  him  to  submit  in
    support of his appeal.  No explanation has been given at all as to  why
    this was not done, nor why it could not have  been  done  and  in  fact
    Counsel went so far as to accept  some  level  of  culpability  on  the
    Appellant's behalf for failing to advance a positive  case  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. It is also important to note that at no stage did  the  Appellant  seek
    any directions from the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  Respondent  to
    provide the documents submitted with his entry  clearance  application,
    nor was there any request for an adjournment of his appeal  hearing  to
    allow the Respondent or him to submit such documents.  Counsel for  the
    Appellant suggested that this had not been done  prior  to  the  appeal
    hearing in the optimistic hope that the Respondent  would  attend  with
    the documents on the day, however that provides no  explanation  as  to
    why an adjournment was not sought on the day when it was clear that  no
    further documents had been submitted  and  no  representative  for  the
    Respondent was in attendance.

 6. In the circumstances outlined above, there can be no error  of  law  by
    the First-tier Tribunal for failing to consider documents which had not
    been submitted to it, nor any error of law in proceeding in the absence
    of a bundle of documents from the Respondent where there was no request
    to adjourn the hearing and no reason why the Appellant could  not  have
    provided most, if not all,  of  those  documents  in  any  event.   The
    reasons given in paragraphs 24 to 29 of the decision accurately reflect
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and disclose  no  error  of
    law and no procedural failing.  The appeal is therefore  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is confirmed.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     2nd May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

