

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05090/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                         |On 21st March 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       SIMBIAT FERANMI ADENIKE OKUNUGA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, UKVS
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls promulgated on 20 March 2017 in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a female national of Nigeria who, aged  17  years,
        applied for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as  the
        child of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  this  country.  The
        application was refused on 29 July 2015 against which the appellant
        appealed on human rights grounds.
     3. The appellant's father, who appeared before  the  Judge,  confirmed
        the application for entry clearance was submitted on  14  May  2015
        two days before the appellant's eighteenth birthday.
     4. Having considered the evidence the Judge sets out findings of  fact
        and conclusions from [17] of the decision under challenge in  which
        it was noted the only available  ground  of  appeal  was  that  the
        decision  amounted  to  an   unjustified,   disproportionate   and,
        therefore, unlawful interference with the article 8 rights  of  the
        appellant or other people direct directly involved in the appeal.
     5. The basis of the application to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
        that  the  appellants  father  in  the  United  Kingdom  had   sole
        responsibility  for  her  upbringing  which   therefore   met   the
        requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration  Rules.  The
        Judge  noted  the  evidence  given  with  regard  to  the   child's
        arrangements in Nigeria leading to  a  finding  at  [20]  that  the
        appellant's mother retained both an  interest  in  the  appellant's
        situation and a significant measure of control over her  movements.
        Whilst accepting the appellant's father made all  the  arrangements
        for the appellant's accommodation and schooling and paid the  bills
        the Judge  found  that  the  amount  of  control  retained  by  the
        appellant's mother was sufficient to show that the father  did  not
        have sole responsibility for the appellant's  upbringing  but  that
        the responsibility was shared with her mother.
     6. The Judge accepted that the evidence showed the appellant's  father
        had played a substantial and continued role in his daughter's  life
        including making key decisions such as the place and manner of  her
        education and accepted the submission that the  appellant's  mother
        lives a distinctly separate live with her own partner and family in
        Nigeria. At [24 - 25] the Judge found:

             "24.     There is no aggravating  factor  in  the  immigration
                  history of this Appellant or of her father which indicates
                  that any additional weight should be given to  the  public
                  interest. I have found that the evidence  shows  that  the
                  Appellants father has at all times supported his  daughter
                  by both his financial contributions,  his  decision-making
                  and his physical presence to or  three  times  a  year.  I
                  accept the evidence that the Appellant  remains  dependent
                  on him  and  that  he  will  continue  his  financial  and
                  emotional support for the foreseeable future. Whether  the
                  relationship between them is a family life  or  a  private
                  life is, in this appeal, a matter of no  significance.  In
                  reality, the decision of the VCO has not forced changes in
                  that relationship, nor has it  meant  that  it  could  not
                  continue and develop in the same way that it has  done  in
                  recent years. The sponsor's evidence was quite clear  that
                  he would continue the support  her  as  previously  given,
                  although he was concerned about the Appellant's  emotional
                  state. As I have indicated, there is no up-to-date medical
                  report to show that the problems indicated in  the  letter
                  accompanying  the  Visa  application  have  continued   or
                  deteriorated in any way.


             25.  Applying the five Razgar tests, I find that the  decision
                  of the VCO does  not  amount  to  a  sufficiently  serious
                  interference with the family and  private  life  that  the
                  Appellant has with her father, her stepmother and her  two
                  half-sisters in the UK. That life can continue as  it  has
                  done in recent  years.  The  continuing  difficulties  and
                  concerns  do  not,  I  find,  amount  to  a   sufficiently
                  substantial interference  with  that  family  and  private
                  life, recognising the low level of  interference  that  is
                  required. However, if that conclusion is wrong  and  there
                  is a sufficient degree of interference,  the  decision  of
                  the Respondent is  a  lawful  one  exercising  the  powers
                  granted by Parliament and is  in  pursuit  of  the  public
                  interest of the  control  of  immigration.  The  remaining
                  question is whether that interference is proportionate and
                  justified. As I have indicated, I find that the degree  of
                  interference is limited and that the weight which  can  be
                  given to that interference is not sufficient  to  outweigh
                  the public interest which has been identified.


             26.  I take note that the Appellant does not meet the terms of
                  the Immigration Rules. I find that the factors on her side
                  of the balance are not sufficient to outweigh  the  public
                  interest and that the decision of the ECO to refuse  entry
                  clearance was lawful and not in breach of article 8 of the
                  ECHR."

     7. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        in failing to adequately or at all to  apply  the  guidance  in  TD
        (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
        00049. It is also argued the Judge ought to have considered whether
        paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules was met, i.e.  whether  compelling
        circumstances existed and that the Judge ought to  have  considered
        the best interests and welfare of the child  when  the  application
        was made in light of the reasons given.
     8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis that "it is  just  arguable  that  the  Judge
        misdirected himself as to the definition of sole responsibility".




Discussion



     9. In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]
        UKAIT 00049 the Tribunal  said  that  "Sole  responsibility"  is  a
        factual matter to be decided upon  all  the  evidence.   Where  one
        parent is not involved in the child's  upbringing  because  he  (or
        she) had abandoned or abdicated responsibility, the issue may arise
        between the remaining parent and others who have day-to-day care of
        the child abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has  continuing
        control and direction over the child's upbringing, including making
        all the important decisions in the child's  life.   However,  where
        both parents are involved in  a  child's  upbringing,  it  will  be
        exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".
    10. In NA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2007] EWCA Civ 128 the Court of Appeal said that, where a  natural
        parent continued to live in the same country as the child, it was a
        necessary part of the reasoning on sole responsibility to  consider
        the position of that parent to determine whether  that  parent  had
        partial responsibility (which would of course preclude  the  parent
        in the UK from having sole responsibility).  The  Court  of  Appeal
        said that the Immigration Judge was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
        requirements of the Rules were met  where  the  parent  effectively
        shared responsibility with his sons here.  However,  the  Court  of
        Appeal also said that the parent  could  have  sole  responsibility
        notwithstanding that the financial consequences of this were shared
        with his sons. The  parent  may,  as  head  of  the  household,  be
        regarded as controlling the disposition of those contributions.
    11. In Buydov v ECO Moscow [2012] EWCA  Civ  1739,  as  part  of  their
        written divorce agreement, the parents had agreed that  the  mother
        would have sole responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing.  The
        judge found that in practice the claimant's  father  retained  some
        responsibility. It was held that the judge had misdirected  himself
        when he found that it was necessary to show  that  the  father  had
        abdicated responsibility for the child before the mother could have
        sole responsibility. The finding that the father had not  abdicated
        responsibility was clearly relevant but that was not  the  same  as
        treating the finding as conclusive. The  residence  order  for  the
        child was clearly evidence but it would be wrong  to  treat  it  is
        necessarily sufficient evidence to prove sole  responsibility.  The
        Upper Tribunal's conclusion that it  could  not  derive  assistance
        from the IDI could not be characterised as an  error  of  law.  The
        Upper Tribunal was entitled to find that the mother  did  not  have
        sole responsibility.
    12.  In DN v SSHD [2017] CSOH 144 the Court of  Session  was  asked  to
        rule that point ix) of the analysis in TD was not good law  bearing
        in mind Articles 9 and 10 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the
        Child as the starting point from those articles was that it was  in
        the best interests of a child to be with a parent or parents and so
        where there was only one parent the starting point should  be  that
        the condition was prima facie satisfied.  The Court  rejected  that
        submission and held that the UNCRC was not  fully  incorporated  in
        domestic law and the Convention did not impose  any  obligation  on
        the receiving state party to grant an application.  The guidance in
        TD was that the decision should be made on the  basis  of  all  the
        evidence  and  the  assessment  of  whether  a  parent   had   sole
        responsibility would include a consideration as to  the  nature  of
        the relationship between parent and child in a given case  and  the
        decision maker would be able to assess whether particular decisions
        were or were not important ones in the context of the evidence as a
        whole.
    13.  What  the  case  law  shows  is  that  the   question   of   'sole
        responsibility' is one  of  fact.  The  Judge  analysed  the  facts
        including the degree of involvement in the appellant's life by both
        her father and mother. Whilst finding the appellant's father played
        a significant part in  his  daughter's  life  in  terms  of  making
        arrangements from the United  Kingdom  the  Judge  also  found  the
        appellant's mother had an involvement too.  The  Judge  assess  the
        nature of that involvement and concluded that it was  of  a  degree
        that  prevented  the  appellant's  father  establishing   that   he
        exercises sole responsibility for the appellant.
    14. It has not been shown this conclusion is  perverse,  irrational  or
        outside the range  of  findings  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    15. In relation to the  assertion  the  Judge  should  have  considered
        297(i)(f),  this  provision  permits  entry  where  one  parent  or
        relative is present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  or  being
        admitted on the same occasion to settlement and there  are  serious
        and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion
        of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made
        for the child's care, in addition to other mandated requirements.
    16. Although the Judge made no specific finding on this point it is not
        made out the Judge was asked to do so.  In  any  event,  the  Judge
        considered the appellants circumstances by reference to  Article  8
        ECHR and concluded that factors in the appellant's favour were  not
        sufficient to warrant a grant of leave to remain.  It  can  clearly
        therefore be inferred that notwithstanding the appellants situation
        the finding of the Judge is that  she  is  unable  to  satisfy  any
        requirement of paragraph 297  of  the  Rules  or  to  establish  an
        entitlement for leave to enter outside the Rules.
    17. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out. Whilst it is accepted  the  appellant's  father
        may want his daughter to live with him in the  United  Kingdom,  on
        the facts of this application made very late in the window in which
        it could be made which expired on the appellant's 18th birthday, it
        has not been shown the decision of the Judge to dismiss the  appeal
        was not one reasonably available to him on the evidence.


Decision

    18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th March 2018












