
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05439/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 9 September 2020                  |On 14 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                           Tham Bahadur Bura Magar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri instructed by Sam Solicitors (written
submissions)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 28 June  1987.   On
    11 February 2019, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")  refused  the
    appellant's application for entry clearance to join  the  sponsor  (his
    father) in the UK as the dependent adult  child  of  a  former  Ghurkha
    soldier.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 26 September 2019, Judge  K  Swinnerton  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The judge was not  satisfied  that  there  "family  life"  was
    established between the appellant and sponsor for the purposes  of  Art
    8.1 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  (the
    "UT") and, on 21 February 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Resident Judge
    Appleyard) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 4. The appeal was initially listed for hearing in the UT on 23 April 2020.
     However,  as  a  result  of  the  Covid-19  crisis  that  hearing  was
    adjourned.  On 18 May 2020 and again on 8 June 2020 the UT (UTJ Norton-
    Taylor) issued directions expressing  the  provisional  view  that  the
    error of law issue could be determined without a  hearing  and  invited
    representations from both parties as to the substance of the  error  of
    law issues  and  also  in  respect  of  whether  the  appeal  could  be
    determined without a hearing.  In response, the appellant made  written
    submissions on the substance of the appeal but raised no  objection  to
    the  appeal  being  determined  without  a  hearing.    Likewise,   the
    respondent made written submissions on  the  substance  of  the  appeal
    adopting the earlier rule 24 response  and,  by  a  later  email  dated
    August 2020, raised no objection to the appeal being determined without
    a hearing.

 5. In the light of the submissions, and in the absence of  any  objections
    from either party, I consider it just and fair to determine  the  error
    of law issues without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

Background

 6. The appellant is the son of a former Ghurkha soldier.  His father  (the
    sponsor) together with his mother came to the UK in 2015 when they were
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  In 2016, the appellant applied  to
    join his parents in the UK but that application was refused by the  ECO
    and his subsequent appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a
    decision sent on 14 September 2017.

 7. On 30 October 2018, the appellant made a further application for  entry
    clearance which was again refused by the ECO on 19  February  2019  and
    which is the subject of this appeal.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The substance of the appellant's case is that he continues to  live  in
    the family home  in  Pyuthan  in  Nepal  and  that  he  is  financially
    dependent upon the sponsor who sends him money  as  financial  support.
    He does not work or have anu other source of income.   The  appellant's
    case is that he is  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  upon  the
    sponsor such that family life exists between them and that, taking into
    account the 'historic injustice' in the  treatment  of  former  Ghurkha
    soldiers and their families, it  is  disproportionate  to  prevent  the
    appellant joining his father (and mother) in the UK.

 9. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor and she had before her a
    number of documents, including a witness statement from the appellant's
    mother (who did  not  give  oral  evidence)  and  also  money  transfer
    documents and receipts for money transferred  by  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant in Nepal.  In addition, there were  statements  of  telephone
    calls which,  it  was  said,  showed  continuing  contact  between  the
    appellant's family in the UK and himself in Nepal.

10. In her determination, the judge rejected the appellant's claim that  he
    was financially dependent upon the sponsor.  At para 25, she said this:



         "With respect to the Appellant being financially dependent upon the
         Sponsor, the evidence given at the hearing by the Sponsor  is  that
         he continues to provide financial assistance to the  Appellant  and
         that this is confirmed by the money transfer receipts provided  and
         by the Sponsor leaving monies for the  Appellant  when  he  visited
         Nepal.  I note that the military pension of  the  Sponsor  is  paid
         into the Sponsor's Standard Chartered Bank account in Nepal  but  I
         was not provided with evidence that the Appellant has authority  to
         operate the account of his father in Nepal, that these  monies  are
         used by the Appellant or that  he  is  dependent  upon  them.   The
         Standard Chartered Bank statements provided for the period  from  8
         August 2018 to July 2019 do not show any withdrawals at all.  I  do
         accept, though, that the Appellant has received  some  monies  from
         the Sponsor by way of money transfers (as the Ria documents  detail
         payments made in  June  2017  (2),  July  2017,  January  2018  and
         September 2018) but, based upon the evidence  provided,  I  am  not
         satisfied that  the  Appellant  is  dependent  upon  the  financial
         assistance provided to him by the Sponsor."

11. The judge then went on to consider the appellant's claim to live in the
    family home in Pyuthan at para 26:

         "I was also directed to the part of  the  decision  of  Immigration
         Judge White [in the earlier appeal] that  addressed  the  issue  of
         where the Appellant resided.  It is stated in the decision that the
         Sponsor first said that his son had  lived  all  his  life  in  the
         family home in Pyuthan and then later agreed that  the  address  in
         Kathmandu given in the application was his son's address  where  he
         had lived for two months in order to complete the  application  and
         that the address belonged to a shopkeeper to whom he had paid rent.
          At the hearing before me, the Sponsor gave evidence that he  asked
         his son to continue living in the family home in  Pyuthan  when  he
         and his wife left Nepal in July 2015 and he stated that he did  not
         know why the Appellant had put the  address  in  Kathmandu  on  the
         earlier application.  The Respondent pointed to the address  stated
         for the appellant in the money transfer payments being in Kathmandu
         which, it was contended, is further  evidence  that  the  Appellant
         does not live in the rural family  home  but,  in  fact,  lives  in
         Kathmandu where other  family  members  also  live.   I  have  been
         mindful of the fact that the Sponsor is  age  74  and  may  not  be
         accustomed to answering questions in legal proceedings or  able  to
         recall precise details but, having said that and having taken  that
         into account, I  was  troubled  by  the  lack  of  clarity  of  the
         Sponsor's evidence in this respect and I was not persuaded that the
         Appellant had resided in the  family  home  in  Pyuthan  since  his
         parents left Nepal in July 2015."

12. Then, in the context  of  the  requirements  in  the  Rules  for  entry
    clearance as a dependent adult of a former Ghurkha soldier,  the  judge
    said this at para 27:

         "The Appellant was aged 31 at the time of the application  and  had
         lived apart from his parents for more than two years at the date of
         the  application.   I  have  found  that  the  Appellant   is   not
         financially dependent upon the Sponsor.  I find, therefore that the
         Appellant has not met the entry clearance conditions."

13. At para 28, the judge went on to consider the  appellant's  claim  that
    there was family life established between him and the sponsor:

         "In relation to family life, I  accept  as  credible  the  evidence
         before me that the Appellant remains unmarried and  I  accept  also
         that the Appellant  has  not  formed  his  own  family  unit.   The
         evidence of the Sponsor at the hearing was that the  Appellant  now
         lives alone in the family home but I have  stated  that  I  am  not
         persuaded of that.  The Appellant has three other siblings who  all
         live in Nepal with their  families  such  that  four  of  the  five
         children of the Sponsor live in Nepal.  The evidence of the Sponsor
         at the hearing was that none of his other three children living  in
         Nepal are able to provide any support to the Appellant but  I  find
         it difficult to accept why, in  an  apparently  close  family,  the
         three other siblings of the Appellant  will  not  maintain  regular
         contact with him and thereby  be  able  to  provide  some  form  of
         emotional support to him.  No credible reason was given as  to  why
         the Appellant would not maintain contact  and  have  good  familial
         relationships with his other siblings and many nephews  and  nieces
         in Nepal.  I accept the evidence of  the  Sponsor  that  he  speaks
         regularly with the Appellant although I was not  persuaded  by  the
         claim that he speaks with the Appellant five times each  day.   The
         Sponsor has stated that, in Ghurkha culture, the unmarried child is
         the responsibility of the parents such that the Appellant, the only
         unmarried child of the Sponsor, remains his  and  his  wife's  full
         responsibility.  The Appellant, though, has now been  living  apart
         from his parents for more than four years and I  am  not  satisfied
         that there exists emotional dependency between the Sponsor and  the
         Appellant over and above the  normal  emotional  ties.   I  am  not
         therefore satisfied that family  life  exists  or  that  Art  8  is
         engaged."

14. As a result, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

15. In the grounds of appeal, supplemented by the written submissions  made
    in response to the UT's directions, the  appellant  relies  upon  three
    grounds.

16. First, the appellant contends that the judge failed to have  regard  to
    relevant  evidence-in  reaching  her  finding  at  para   26   of   her
    determination that the appellant had not established that he  lived  in
    the family home in Pyuthan.  In particular, the judge  failed  to  take
    into account a number of IME records of receipts of  income  that  gave
    the appellant's permanent address as being in Pyuthan.

17. Secondly, the finding that the appellant had  not  established  "family
    life" with the sponsor the judge failed to apply the  correct  approach
    taken in Ghurkha historic injustice cases as set out in  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA  Civ  320.   In  particular,
    reliance is placed upon  the  fact  that  the  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant did not come to the UK with  his  parents  initially  because
    they could not afford the application fee.  The  judge  wrongly  relied
    upon the fact that four years have elapsed since the appellant's mother
    and father came to the UK and she failed to have  regard  to  the  long
    delay being occasioned by the denial of the legal right  to  enter  the
    UK.  In relation to Rai, the grounds place reliance upon the  Court  of
    Appeal's point (at [17]) that  in  determining  whether  "family  life"
    exists in cases of this nature family  life  may  fall  short  of  what
    constitutes dependency but there may still be family life between adult
    children and parents who are settled in the UK.

18. Thirdly, it is contended that the judge was wrong, in assessing whether
    "family life" existed with the sponsor in the UK, to take into  account
    that the appellant had other family members in Nepal to whom  he  could
    turn to for emotional support and dependency.

The Respondent's Submissions

19. In  her  rule  24  notice,  adopted  as  the  respondent's  submissions
    following  the  UT's  directions,  it  is  submitted  that  the   judge
    considered all the relevant circumstances in  determining  that  family
    life did not exist given the limited direct  contact  and  the  judge's
    findings  that  the  appellant  was  not  financially  or   emotionally
    dependent upon the sponsor even though he had not formed his own family
    unit in Nepal.  The respondent contends that the findings of the  judge
    were properly open to her on the basis of the evidence  and  against  a
    backdrop of the previous appeal having been dismissed.

Discussion

20. The essential finding of the judge upon which her decision  turned  was
    that the appellant had not established for  the  purposes  of  Art  8.1
    "family life" with the Sponsor (or his mother) in the UK.

21. Both parties referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in Rai which
    was itself a case concerning an adult Ghurkha  child  who  was  seeking
    entry to the UK to join his family.  In that case, the Court of  Appeal
    set out the proper approach to the issue of "family life" under Art 8.1
    of the ECHR, in particular in the context of a case involving an  adult
    child seeking entry to join a parent who was a former Ghurkha  soldier.
    Lindblom LJ (with whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed)  set  out  the
    approach at [17] - [20] as follows:

         "17. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life  implies".  Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

          1. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in  Kugathas   had   been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                  reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
                  A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether
                  or not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If
                  he is still single and living  with  his  parents,  he  is
                  likely to enjoy family life with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom  (in  paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                  suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old,
                  who resides with his mother and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                  family of his own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  "family
                  life"."

          1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances  "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including  its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

          1. To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                  referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
                  approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.
                  In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of  immigration
                  control, there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to
                  the existence or absence of family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
                  European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly  in
                  Kugathas   did   not   include    any    requirement    of
                  exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. The love  and
                  affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
                  will not of itself justify a finding  of  a  family  life.
                  There has to be something more. A young adult living  with
                  his parents or siblings will normally have a  family  life
                  to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family
                  life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a
                  family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.  On
                  the other hand, a young adult living independently of  his
                  parents may well not have a family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.""

22. At [43] Lindblom LJ reiterated that:

         "Whether the Appellant did enjoy family life at the  relevant  time
         was, of course, a question of fact ... And this court  will  always
         accord appropriate respect to the evaluative judgment of an  expert
         Tribunal on the facts it finds ..."

23. In this appeal, the judge made two adverse findings which, although she
    dealt with them in the context of the entry clearance requirements  for
    an adult dependent of a former Ghurkha soldier, undoubtedly  influenced
    her conclusion that there was no "family life" established between  the
    appellant and his father for the purposes of Art 8  (paras  25  and  26
    read with para 28).  Those findings were: first, the appellant was  not
    financially dependent upon the sponsor; and secondly, he did  not  live
    at the family home in Pyuthan (see paras 25 and  26  respectively).   I
    bear  in  mind  Lindblom  LJ's  cautionary  note  in   Rai   at   [43].
    Nevertheless, in my  judgment,  both  of  those  factual  findings  are
    legally flawed.

24. First, as regards the finding that the  appellant  is  not  financially
    dependent upon the sponsor, the judge offered no  adequate  reasons  in
    para 25 given that she accepted that the appellant had received  monies
    from the sponsor by way  of  money  transfers  between  June  2017  and
    September 2018 and the evidence was that the appellant  was  unemployed
    and apparently had no other source of income.

25. Secondly, in relation to whether the  appellant  lived  in  the  family
    home, the judge failed to take into account the evidence supporting the
    appellant's claim that he lived there which was  contained  within  the
    IME records of receipts.  They are  contained  within  the  appellant's
    bundle at pages 86 and 88-89.  They immediately follow the Ria  records
    to which the judge did make  reference  and  refer  to  an  address  in
    Kathmandu.  It was incumbent upon the judge to have regard to  all  the
    evidence and, in particular, to grapple with  the  evidence  supporting
    the appellant's account as well as that which  was  unhelpful  to  him.
    The appellant's  father  gave  evidence  that  sought  to  explain  the
    Kathmandu address as being  related  to  a  period  of  time  when  the
    appellant was temporarily living in Kathmandu  in  order  to  make  his
    application to come to the UK.  If there was a discrepancy,  there  was
    some evidence that, if accepted, would resolve that discrepancy in  the
    appellant's favour and support his account that he lived in the  family
    home.  That was an important issue in relation to whether  he  remained
    dependent upon his  parents  in  the  UK  and  whether  any  dependency
    amounted to "family life" for the purposes of 8.1.

26. In those regards, therefore, the judge erred in  law  in  reaching  her
    adverse findings which were, in my judgement, material to  her  adverse
    finding in para 28 that "family life" had not been established.

27. In addition, I am satisfied that the  judge  misdirected  herself,  and
    thereby imposed too high a  hurdle  for  the  appellant,  in  assessing
    whether the appellant had established "family life".  Whilst the  Court
    of Appeal in Rai did not change the legal  approach  to  the  issue  of
    "family life", it clearly did acknowledge the need for careful scrutiny
    of the evidence and that periods apart, forced upon a Ghurkha family by
    the vagaries of the historic immigration position  of  former  soldiers
    and their families, were relevant when assessing whether  there  was  a
    continuation of the "family life" which existed before the  family  was
    separated.   In my judgment, the judge failed  properly  to  take  into
    account the evidence that explained why the appellant had not initially
    come with his parents (because they could not  afford  the  application
    fee) and the evidence that throughout the period  of  separation  since
    2015, a fair description of the appellant's behaviour was that  he  had
    sought to join his family in the UK.  The four-year separation has,  in
    effect, been forced upon the family by their circumstances.  There  was
    clear evidence of continuing contact (which the judge accepted at least
    in part), money transfers and it was accepted that  the  appellant  had
    not formed an independent family unit.

28. Finally, I also accept the appellant's submission that in para 28,  the
    judge gave improper prominence to the possibility  that  the  appellant
    could be supported by his close family in Nepal.  That, in my judgment,
    did not directly counter the appellant's claim that "family  life"  was
    established with the sponsor in the UK.  The fact that he could  obtain
    (alternative) support from his family in Nepal did not negate his claim
    that he was, in fact, financially and emotionally  dependent  upon  the
    sponsor in the UK.

29. For these reasons, therefore,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    grounds are made out.  The judge erred in law in  concluding  that  the
    appellant had not established "family life" for the purposes of Art 8.1
    and that therefore the refusal of entry clearance did not breach Art  8
    of the ECHR.

Decision

30. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

31. Given that the judge's underlying factual findings  cannot  stand,  the
    proper disposal of this appeal, in the light of the extent  and  nature
    of the fact-finding required and  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President
    Practice Statement, is that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other  than  Judge
    Swinnerton.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            9 September 2020


