
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU059292015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 July 2017                              |On 20 July 2017                |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and



                            Mrs Anoubha Kandasamy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Counsel, instructed by York Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger promulgated on 4 October 2016 in which
    she allowed the appeal of Mrs Anoubha Kandasamy against the decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse her human rights claim.

 2.  Mrs Kandasamy whom we refer to as the  appellant  as  she  was  below,
    entered the United Kingdom most recently on 22 December 2014 with leave
    as a visitor.  She had previously lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave as a Tier 4 student and had returned to Mauritius.  She  is,  and
    this is not in doubt, married  to  a  British  citizen,  that  marriage
    having taken place in Mauritius on 5 June 2014.  She then came  to  the
    United Kingdom and prior to her leave to enter as  a  visitor  expiring
    made an application for further leave to remain using form FLR (FP), it
    being submitted in the covering letter that she was entitled  to  leave
    to remain pursuant to paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and on the basis of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State refused that application,  noting  that  as  the
    applicant had entered as a visitor she did not and could not  meet  the
    suitability requirements in the Immigration  Rules  which  prohibit  in
    effect people switching out of the category as a visitor.

 4. The appeal proceeded on the basis that it would  be  a  breach  of  the
    appellant's human rights pursuant to Article 8 to require her to return
    to Mauritius, The judge concluded that it would  be  a  breach  of  the
    appellant's human rights bearing in  mind  amongst  other  factors  the
    decision in Chikwamba and Section 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act that  a
    decision  in  this  case  requiring  the   applicant   to   leave   was
    disproportionate.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision, primarily on the basis that it would generally be the correct
    course of action for applicants who are in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    visit visa to have to return to  the  country  of  origin  to  make  an
    application unless there are compelling  circumstances  and  there  was
    nothing identified by the  judge  in  this  case  that  leads  to  that
    conclusion.

 6. We heard submissions from Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State
    and Ms Jones on behalf of the appellant.  We consider that the starting
    point in the assessment of whether the judge was right or not  is  that
    it is now  established  law  that  it  will   only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances that where somebody does not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules that nonetheless  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove them.  That is  not  to  say  that  there  must  necessarily  be
    anything exceptional about the case but merely that  there  is  a  high
    threshold which has to be overcome, bearing in  mind  particularly  the
    strong public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control.  As
    was noted in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at [49]:

    49.              In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber said, consistently with
         earlier judgments of the court,  that  an  important  consideration
         when assessing the proportionality under article 8 of  the  removal
         of non-settled migrants from a contracting state in which they have
         family members, is whether family life was created at a  time  when
         the persons involved were aware that the immigration status of  one
         of them was such that the persistence of that  family  life  within
         the host state would from the outset be "precarious". Where this is
         the case, the court said, "it is likely only to be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family  member
         will constitute a violation of article 8" (para 108

 7. We consider that the maintenance of immigration controls  involves  the
    treating of like cases alike.  There is a strong public interest in the
    system of Rules being adhered to by everybody and it is noticeable that
    in effect what this appellant is seeking to do is to say that the Rules
    should not apply to her.  We consider that there are  good  reasons  of
    policy as to why an individual should not be entitled to apply to  stay
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of marriage when they  have  entered
    as a visitor.  That is clearly the Secretary of State's policy.

 8. We consider that the appellant's situation is precarious in  the  sense
    meant in the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  in
    Agyarko.  She had no expectation of being able  to  stay  here,  having
    entered as a visitor.  She had  no  expectation  of  being  allowed  to
    remain as a spouse of a British citizen and her situation  was  clearly
    precarious on that basis alone.  It is difficult to see that  there  is
    anything in this case which  comes  anywhere  near  reaching  the  high
    threshold such that it would be  disproportionate  to  require  her  to
    return to Mauritius to apply to return nor, in our view, does the judge
    come anywhere near setting out any basis on which it could be said that
    interference was disproportionate in this case,  bearing  in  mind  the
    very strong public interest which she  appears  not  properly  to  have
    engaged with in the maintenance of immigration control.

 9. We note that it was submitted  by  Ms  Jones  that  in  this  case  the
    applicants had fulfilled the requirements of the Immigration Rules with
    particular regard to  it  being  a  subsisting  relationship  and  with
    regards to the financial requirements.  We find little  merit  in  that
    observation.  The application was not in this  case  supported  by  the
    necessary documents which would have been required under  Appendix  FM-
    SE, as is clear from the covering letter.  It is a requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE are  met  and
    there appears to be no basis for the conclusion that those were in fact
    met by the appellant in this case. More importantly one requirement  of
    the Rules, that is the requirement not to have entered  as  a  visitor,
    did apply.

10. We do not consider taking into account Ms Jones' submission  that  this
    is a case which can fairly  be  said  to  fall  within  the  rubric  of
    Chikwamba.  There is nothing in this case which brings it anywhere near
    the circumstances of that case where there was  a  child  involved  and
    where it was an impossibility, the appellant's husband being unable  to
    go to Zimbabwe because of the grant of refugee status, that comes  near
    this case.

11. We accept, as we must, what is said by the Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko,
    particularly at paragraphs 50 to 53, but we do not consider  that  this
    is a case in which the judge could properly have found that the  public
    interest was  on  an  analogy  with  Chikwamba  as  understood  and  as
    explained in Agyarko such that there was sufficient diminution  in  the
    public interest that the decision in this case was disproportionate.

12. We are not satisfied that the matter of Zhang is of any  assistance  in
    this case.  It does deal with  a  somewhat  different  situation  of  a
    student and the provisions of the Rules are different.  It also appears
    that the decision predates the changes brought into the 2002 Act  which
    clarified and, I think, in reality strengthened the consideration to be
    given to the public interest and this  is  clearly  a  public  interest
    matter.  That is the large number of cases on the weight to be attached
    to the public interest which have  issued  from  the  Court  of  Appeal
    certainly in the four years since Zhang was decided.

13. We consider finally, as said before, that the judge appears not to have
    looked properly at the provisions of the public interest in immigration
    control.  She appears to have taken issue with the fact that there is a
    blanket prohibition on switching in this case which we consider is  not
    one she should have taken.  It is not for her  to  decide  whether  the
    Secretary of State should have put a blanket requirement nor  does  she
    appear to have appreciated that of  course  that  type  of  requirement
    carries considerable public weight  it  being  a  clear  expression  of
    policy.

14. Accordingly, for these reasons we find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside and remade.

15. Having canvassed the issue with Ms Jones she submitted that this  is  a
    matter which should be remitted to the First-tier, given that there are
    several additional issues now which she wishes to raise.   We  consider
    that as it  is  now  being  said,  although  this  was  not  apparently
    mentioned before the  judge  below,  that  there  are  family  ruptures
    whereby  the  appellant  cannot  return  to  Mauritius   without   some
    difficulty that this is a matter which needs  further  extensive  fact-
    finding that it should be remitted to the First-tier.

16. As we are remitting the matter to the  First-tier  we  have  considered
    whether any of the findings should be preserved.  We are not  satisfied
    that in the circumstances of this case it would be appropriate  for  us
    to preserve any of the findings of fact made and we make no  directions
    to that effect.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and we set it aside.
2    We remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  on
all matters.


Signed                                  Date:  20 July 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



