
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05686/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 15 November 2018                    |On 23 November 2018       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Mr MUHAMMAD QASIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
                    (instructed by AVVS Solicitors Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Landes on 11 September 2018 against the decision to dismiss  the
           Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Ababrese in a decision and reasons promulgated on  1  June
           2018.  The Appellant is a national of  Pakistan,  an  overstayer
           whose last leave to remain expired in 2014.  He  relied  on  his
           relationship to his wife, a British  Citizen  by  naturalisation
           originally from Pakistan.   They  married  in  2016.  They  were
           childless at the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and
           were  pursuing  IVF  treatment  in  the  United   Kingdom.   The
           Respondent accepted that the marital  relationship  was  genuine
           and  subsisting.   There  was  no  reference  to  the  financial
           requirements not being met in the reasons for refusal letter.


      2.    Judge Ababrese found that the eligibility requirements were  not
           met, approaching the Article 8 ECHR appeal through the  lens  of
           the Immigration Rules.  There were no  insurmountable  obstacles
           to the continuation of family life in Pakistan.   There  was  no
           continuing risk for the Appellant's spouse from her  father  (on
           the basis of which she had been granted  asylum  in  the  United
           Kingdom in 2006) and IVF treatment was  available  in  Pakistan,
           despite social disapproval.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not fully considered the  stigma  of
           IVF in Pakistan and the length of time in which the  Appellant's
           wife had been in the United Kingdom.  The other grounds  raised,
           i.e.  that  Appendix  FM  was  met  and  the  situation  of  the
           Appellant's wife's mother had not been  fully  considered,  were
           not encouraged, although were not refused.


      4.    Mr Karim for the Appellant relied on the grounds  submitted  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  The judge  had  not  engaged
           with the Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 argument which  had  been  put
           before him, raised in the  Appellant's  witness  statement.  The
           point was that an entry clearance application  would  have  been
           bound to proceed because the evidence showed that the  financial
           requirements were met.  This was a serious omission  as  Agyarko
           [2017] UKSC 11 had approved the Chikwamba principle.


      5.    The judge had  also  erred  by  failing  to  take  into  account
           societal attitudes in Pakistan towards IVF  treatment.   It  met
           with considerable disapproval, which the judge had ignored.


      6.    The judge's approach  to  the  Article  8  ECHR  assessment  was
           seriously flawed.  He had not considered  all  relevant  factual
           issues.   These submissions were explored in dialogue  with  the
           tribunal.  Counsel argued that  the  onwards  appeal  should  be
           allowed.


      7.    Mr Jarvis for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice  dated
           15 October 2018.  The first ground of appeal, that  Appendix  FM
           had been met, such that Chikwamba applied, had not  been  raised
           before the judge. That could not give rise to an arguable  error
           of law.  In any event, Chikwamba  had  been  considered  by  the
           Court of Appeal in Kaur [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 and  considered  to
           be an extreme case.  The judge had been fully entitled  to  find
           that there had been a material change in circumstances since the
           grant of asylum to the Appellant's wife  in  2006.   She  would,
           amongst other matters, now have the benefit of a male protector.
            There had not been enough  evidence  produced  to  support  the
           Appellant's wife's Article  8  ECHR  claim  in  respect  of  her
           mother. The undoubted fact that IVF treatment was  available  in
           Pakistan showed that  societal  disapproval  was  not  decisive.
           Section 117B of The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
           did not show more than neutral factors.  The  appeal  should  be
           dismissed.


      8.    The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's  view  a
           generous  one.   This  was  a   full,   careful   and   balanced
           determination. The tribunal accepts the submissions made  by  Mr
           Jarvis.  The claim that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
           consider that the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM) had  been  met
           was unarguable because the Chikwamba point, such as it was,  had
           not been pursued as an argument in any intelligible form  before
           the First-tier Tribunal judge.   It is not mentioned by him  and
           there was no evidence from counsel who appeared below  (e.g.,  a
           skeleton argument) to show that it had been.  Mr Karim  had  not
           been involved and accepted he could not assist.  His  submission
           that it was such an obvious point that the  First-tier  Tribunal
           judge should have dealt with it mistakes the role of the  judge.
           In any event, the issue was not the financial  requirements  but
           the eligibility requirements as the Appellant was an  overstayer
           whose relationship was formed after he had no leave  to  remain.
           There had  to  be  exceptional  circumstances  for  that  to  be
           overcome and the judge found there were none on the evidence put
           forward.  As Mr Jarvis pointed out,  Chikwamba  would  not  have
           assisted on the facts found, even if  it  had  been  argued,  as
           (among  other  matters)  the  Immigration  Rules  have   changed
           substantially since 2008.

      9.    The judge was fully entitled to  find  that  there  had  been  a
           material change of  circumstances  in  Pakistan  such  that  the
           Appellant's wife could safely return as a married woman in 2018,
           despite having previously claimed asylum some 12  years  before.
           The determination shows that the claim of  continuing  risk  was
           closely examined and proper reasons were given for finding  that
           there was no real risk in 2018.


      10.   The judge addressed the IVF issue fully, giving close  attention
           to  the  expert's  report.   The  inferences  drawn  about   the
           availability of IVF treatment in  Pakistan  to  the  Appellant's
           wife were open to the judge.  It is obvious that the Appellant's
           wife would have no need to disclose any  medical  treatment  she
           chose to undergo in Pakistan, nor had the Appellant any need  to
           mention her IVF treatment.  It is also perhaps too  obvious  for
           the judge to have mentioned  it,  but  there  are  a  number  of
           medical procedures available in the United Kingdom which do  not
           meet with universal approval, whether cosmetic surgery  or  more
           serious matters.  But there was no evidence to show that persons
           seeking IVF treatment in Pakistan face persecution  or  anything
           similar.


      11.   The other Article 8 ECHR claims which the Appellant raised, such
           as his wife's family relationships in the United  Kingdom,  fell
           short of demonstrating emotional between them  and  required  no
           additional notice from the judge.


      12.   As with so many  similar  appeals,  this  was  about  choice,  a
           personal choice which does not exist under Article 8 ECHR absent
           compliance    with    the    Immigration    Rules    or     very
           compelling/exceptional  circumstances.   Had   the   overstaying
           Appellant returned to Pakistan and applied for  entry  clearance
           application in accordance with the Immigration Rules  long  ago,
           he might have returned to the United Kingdom  lawfully  by  now.
           Instead  time  and  money  have  been  wasted,  and  unnecessary
           anxieties created.


      13.   In conclusion, the tribunal finds that there was no error of law
           and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed                            Dated 15 November 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
