
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05480/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               elvis milkurti
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of continuity, we shall refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, although technically the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cockrill (the judge) which was promulgated on 22  February  2019.
    The judge allowed the appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
    dated 23 February 2018 to refuse a human rights claim in the context of
    an earlier decision to make a deportation order against him  by  virtue
    of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 13 January 2000 aged 8 years  old  with
    his mother.  His mother claimed asylum and included  the  appellant  on
    her application as a dependant.  The asylum  claim  was  refused  on  8
    February  2000.   On  7  February  2002  the  appellant   was   granted
    exceptional leave to remain as the dependant  of  his  mother  until  8
    January 2006.  On 26 February 2008 he was granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain as the dependant of his mother until 26 February 2011.  On  3
    January 2012 he was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The appellant lives with his mother and younger  brother.   His  mother
    and brother are both British citizens.  The appellant did not apply  at
    the same time as his mother and brother for such citizenship.   He  was
    busy supporting his family.  The situation with the appellant's  mother
    is that as a result of her experience in the Kosovan  war  she  suffers
    from anxiety and depression.  She would not return to the country.   We
    were referred to a medical report of Dr Michael Seear dated 4 May  2001
    in which in some detail he refers to what occurred to  the  appellant's
    mother in Kosovo and that is set out in detail which is  not  necessary
    to refer to in this judgment, but it explains why the mother would  not
    return to Kosovo in any circumstances.

 5. The appellant has been in a relationship with [AM], a British  citizen,
    since 2015.  They got engaged in 2017.  Miss [M]'s family is supportive
    of their relationship.

The Conviction

 6. On 15 August 2017  the  appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  an  offence  of
    dangerous driving.  There was a sentence of fourteen  months  immediate
    imprisonment imposed by the Crown Court on 20  October  2017  with  the
    appellant being disqualified from driving for four years.  There was no
    appeal against conviction or sentence.  The nature of  the  offence  is
    described in paragraphs 11 to 13 of the decision below:-

         "11. The background to the index offence is that the Appellant  had
             received a  period  of  disqualification  of  six  months  for
             permitting another individual to drive without insurance.  The
             events  concerning  the  index  offence  took  place  on   the
             afternoon of 17 May 2017.  The Appellant was driving a vehicle
             in a busy part of North London.  He came to appreciate that  a
             police car was following him and  in  response  the  Appellant
             took off at speed in his BMW vehicle.  The  Learned  Judge  in
             his sentencing remarks at Wood Green Crown Court described the
             manner of the Appellant's driving as  appalling.   The  police
             activated their sirens and their lights  were  illuminated  to
             try to get the Appellant to stop.

         12.  The Appellant was chased through residential roads  for  about
             ten minutes, avoiding  obstacles.   He  was  driving  well  in
             excess of the speed limit of 20 miles per hour.   The  Learned
             Judge also observed that at one point  the  Appellant  mounted
             the pavement.  He commented that had a pedestrian been on that
             stretch of pavement at the time,  or  indeed  if  someone  had
             emerged from their property, then they could have been  killed
             or suffered life-threatening injuries.

         13.  It was really a matter of good fortune that no one was  killed
             or injured as a result of this piece  of  driving.   When  the
             Appellant eventually stopped, he then ran off."

 7. On 22 January 2018 the appellant was served with a stage 1  deportation
    decision.  On 26 January 2018 the appellant made  representations  that
    deportation would breach his right in respect of family and/or  private
    life under Article 8 to the European Convention on Human Rights.  On 23
    February 2018 the appellant was issued with a decision  to  deport  him
    and to refuse his human rights claim.  There was then the appeal to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  in  which  the  appellant  contended   that   his
    deportation from this country to Kosovo would constitute  a  breach  of
    those protected rights under the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.   He  made  reference  to  the  relevant  provisions   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  They were set out in the decision at paragraphs 16,
    17 and 21, that is the Immigration Rules at paragraphs A398(a) and  (b)
    and 399(b) and 399A:-

         'A398. These rules apply where:

             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention;
             ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             ...

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; ... the Secretary of  State  in  assessing
             that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies
             and, if it does not, the public interest in  deportation  will
             only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

         '399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             ...

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be  deported
                  ...'

         '399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
             of his life; and

             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported ...'

    Paragraph 399A(a) was said to have  been  met.   However,  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant was socially and culturally integrated.  In
    making that argument reliance  was  placed  upon  the  conduct  of  the
    Appellant in relation to this incident of dangerous  driving.   It  was
    said that the incident put members of the public  at  risk  of  serious
    harm.

 8. The judge reserved the  decision  and  made  findings  and  reasons  at
    paragraphs 60 to 76 of the decision.  The appellant  accepted  that  he
    was a foreign criminal within Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  on
    the basis that he had received a sentence of imprisonment of more  than
    twelve months and thus there must be a deportation under Section  32(5)
    of the Act subject to the exceptions under Section 33.  In the judgment
    at paragraph 60 the relevant exceptions were set out and in  particular
    exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal  in  pursuance  of
    the deportation order would breach:-

      a) a person's Convention rights; or

      b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

    This is not a case which triggered  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  and
    accordingly the focus  of  attention  is  on  the  person's  Convention
    rights.

 9. In light of section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (NIAA 2002) and paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules, the
    focus of the hearing was on the relationship which  the  appellant  has
    with [AM].   [AM]  is  a  British  citizen.   They  have  had  a  close
    relationship for a period of four years.  They have not lived  together
    because of the cultural expectations of their  families  so  they  both
    lived in their respective homes.  Their relationship was formed in this
    country when the appellant was in this country lawfully  and  when  his
    immigration status was not precarious.   The  judge  accepted  that  it
    would  be  unduly  harsh  on  [AM]  to  live  in  Kosovo  due  to   her
    circumstances.  It was accepted that this was a subsisting relationship
    and the issue between the appellant and the respondent was  whether  it
    was unduly harsh for her to live in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant.

10. The Judge pointed out in the decision that it was necessary to give the
    words 'unduly harsh' a restrictive meaning.  That was apparent from the
    decision to which reference was made at paragraph 63 of the decision of
    KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53.   That  case  concerned  the
    meaning of 'unduly  harsh':  see  especially  paragraphs  22,  27.   At
    paragraph 27, the Supreme Court referred to the "authoritative guidance
    as to the meaning of 'unduly harsh'" being given by the Upper  Tribunal
    (McCloskey J President and UT Judge Perkins) in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
    SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46., a decision given
    on 15 April 2015. They referred to the "evaluative assessment" required
    of the tribunal.


11. The Judge referred to the elevated test of 'unduly harsh' at  paragraph
    74 of the decision, mirroring almost word for word the above  mentioned
    paragraph 46 of the MK case approved in  KO  (Nigeria).   Paragraph  74
    which read as follows:-

         "In looking  at  this  issue  of  unduly  harsh,  I  carry  out  an
         evaluation of the consequences and impact  of  deportation  on  the
         Appellant.   I  am  mindful  that  unduly  harsh  does   not   mean
         uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely  difficult,  it
         poses a considerably  more  elevated  threshold.   Harsh,  in  this
         context, denotes something severe or bleak which is indeed,  in  my
         judgment, what would be the position for this Appellant it  is  the
         antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  The addition of the  adverb
         'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher.  I  have
         made the point that in my judgment the  Appellant  has  shown  that
         that standard is reached.  I repeat the  point  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh on the partner."

12. The conclusions of the Tribunal were that it was unduly harsh for  [AM]
    to live in the United Kingdom without the appellant.  The  reasons  for
    that are set out in the decision:-

         "65. In the present appeal the Appellant does not have a child  and
             his case rests upon the argument that he  has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with a partner who is in this  country
             and is a British citizen.  That point is formally accepted  by
             the  Respondent.   It  has  also  been  accepted   that   that
             relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  Appellant's
             situation was not precarious,  he  was  here  lawfully  having
             gained indefinite leave to remain.  The test that is then  set
             involves consideration of the words  'unduly  harsh'.   It  is
             also acknowledged by the Respondent that it  would  be  unduly
             harsh for the partner to have to go and live in Kosovo and  so
             what falls for consideration is whether  it  would  be  unduly
             harsh for the Appellant's partner to remain here, but  without
             the Appellant.

         66.  The situation that has  been  presented  to  me  is  that  the
             Appellant and his partner have been  in  a  perfectly  genuine
             relationship for close on four years now.  The impact  of  the
             Appellant's removal would of course, for  practical  purposes,
             so markedly interfere with that relationship as, in  practice,
             to sever it.  Whilst  references  are  often  made  to  modern
             methods of communication, it really cannot  be  said  sensibly
             that the Appellant could  maintain  a  relationship  with  his
             partner from Kosovo to any meaningful extent  if  they  really
             were not permitted to see each other and  therefore  to  enjoy
             physical time  together  to  develop  their  relationship.   I
             recognise that, as a couple, they  are  not  living  together,
             they are living with their respective families, but that  does
             not mean that they should not have the opportunity to be  able
             to enjoy their relationship and develop it  by  spending  time
             together.  I stress that the Respondent has acknowledged  that
             the partner cannot realistically go to Kosovo and,  therefore,
             I do consider that that period of  physical  separation  would
             constitute circumstances that are not only harsh  for  the  UK
             national  partner,  but  I  stress  this   in   the   specific
             circumstances of this Appellant's case, unduly harsh.  We  are
             dealing here with Kosovo and what is abundantly clear to me is
             that that is a country that no one wants to go to from  either
             the  Appellant's  family  or  his   partner's   family.    The
             consequence of  that,  of  course,  is  that  there  would  be
             physical separation of this couple and, in my  judgment,  that
             is plainly not supportable.  The impact upon the partner would
             indeed be unduly harsh.  I have  made  plain  that  the  other
             criteria set within paragraph 399(b) are met.

         67.  I conclude therefore, as a matter of fact, that Exception 1 as
             set within the Rules is met by the Appellant.  ...".

13. The decision then went on to consider the application of the provisions
    of right to respect for private life in relation to the appellant.   It
    is common ground that the appellant has lived more than half  his  life
    in the United Kingdom as a lawful resident.  However, the challenge  of
    the respondent was first, as to whether he was socially and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom; and secondly,  as  to  whether  there
    would be significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Kosovo.   In
    relation to the question as to whether the appellant was  socially  and
    culturally  integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Judge  said  the
    following at paragraph 68:



         "68.  I  really  do  not  find  any  substance  whatsoever  in  the
             Respondent's submission that the Appellant is not socially and
             culturally integrated. He has  been  here  since  the  age  of
             approximately eight. This is the country that he has known  as
             his home. He speaks English fluently. His mother  and  sibling
             are here  and  I  stress  that  they  are  themselves  British
             citizens. Indeed, the position was that  the  Appellant  could
             have  himself  become  a  British  citizen  had  he  made   an
             appropriate application at the right time. Rather  than  doing
             so, in fact he concentrated on trying to develop  his  career.
             He was holding down two jobs and doing the best  he  could  to
             support himself and providing a fund  so  that  eventually  he
             could purchase  a  property  in  this  country.  He  has  been
             educated in the United Kingdom. He has all his social ties  in
             the United Kingdom. He is perfectly well culturally integrated
             in this country. He has worked here. He has paid  taxes  here.
             There is no question in my judgment, but that the Appellant is
             someone  who  has  demonstrated  that  he  is   socially   and
             culturally integrated. The very fact that he has  committed  a
             serious criminal  offence  by  driving  dangerously  does  not
             detract, and I stress from this, from that social and cultural
             integration."


14. Having determined  that  the  appellant  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom, the Judge then went on to  consider
    the issue as to whether there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his integration  into  Kosovo  which  arises  in  relation  to  section
    117C(4)(c) NIAA 2002 and  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Paragraph 69 contains the key findings of the Tribunal in that  regard.
    We quote paragraph 69 in full:-

         "However, the critical issue that arises in relation  to  paragraph
         399A is whether there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration into Kosovo.  That is not an easy question  to  answer.
         I recognise that the Appellant  does  not  suffer  from  any  noted
         mental health  problems  and  physically  he  is  in  good  health.
         However, the only country that he has really known  is  the  United
         Kingdom and it is very important indeed that it is appreciated  the
         extent to which his family have turned their back on Kosovo because
         of what took place during the war.  We have a situation, therefore,
         where neither the Appellant's mother nor his sibling  would  really
         be in a position to go  to  Kosovo  to  spend  any  time  with  the
         Appellant, that has been made abundantly clear.  The reality of the
         situation, therefore, is that the Appellant would  be  expected  to
         set up in life on his own in a country with which he has got really
         no meaningful links whatsoever.  He left when he was seven or eight
         years old and he has made  it  clear  that  English  is  his  first
         language now and England is his home.  He would  be  deprived,  and
         this is very important when looking at this particular  Appellant's
         situation, of the sort of normal family contacts which might  exist
         in other cases where family members still live in the  old  country
         of nationality, that is conspicuously absent in this  case.   I  do
         consider, therefore, that when one looks at how he could  integrate
         into Kosovo it is very hard to see how he would do so successfully.
          I recognise that he could gain work, but he would be on  his  own.
         He would not be  with  his  partner,  he  would  not  be  with  his
         immediate family and these are people who are meaningful figures in
         his life.  The reality, therefore, is that he would face  not  just
         significant obstacles but, as I  categorise  it,  very  significant
         obstacles to  his  integration  into  Kosovan  society.   In  these
         circumstances, and I stress that  they  are  specific,  I  am  also
         satisfied that the test set in paragraph 399A is indeed met by this
         Appellant." [emphasis added]

15. The conclusion therefore was  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the integration of the appellant into Kosovo,  bearing  in
    mind that England had become his sole home from the very early age of 8
    years old.  In view of the matters to which  I  have  mentioned  above,
    which were set out in the report of Dr  Michael  Seear,  there  was  no
    possibility of his mother coming to visit him.  In the above  paragraph
    69, the Judge was emphasising the family turning  its  back  on  Kosovo
    because of what took place during the war, and so  neither  his  mother
    nor his sibling would be in a position to go to Kosovo. He did not have
    the sort of normal family contacts which might exist in other  contacts
    in the old country of his  nationality.   He  would  not  be  with  his
    partner nor would he be with his immediate family, and therefore  would
    face not just significant obstacles but very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration in Kosovan society.

16. For these reasons, the Tribunal considered  that  exception  1  applied
    and/or exception 2 applied with the effect that the appeal against  the
    making of the deportation order  should  be  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds. The Tribunal also, having  considered  that  the  matter  fell
    within exception 1 and exception 2, considered that if it was wrong  in
    relation to either or both of these  analyses,  it  considered  whether
    there were 'very  compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.

17. We now refer to the grounds of appeal.  The first ground was that there
    was said to be a material misdirection of law.  It was  said  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in considering that the appellant's offence  was  at
    the lower end of  the  scale  at  paragraph  73  of  the  decision,  in
    particular the respondent emphasised the finding of the  Tribunal  that
    "I note how the appellant's criminality falls towards the lower end  of
    that  scale  because  he  received  a  sentence  of  fourteen   months'
    imprisonment".    The   submission   was   made   that   that   was   a
    mischaracterisation.  Having regard to the severity of the  offence  of
    the appellant our attention was drawn to the sentencing remarks  of  Mr
    Recorder Hurst pointing out how serious the offence was and  how  there
    was no alternative other than to make an immediate custodial  sentence.
    It  was  then  submitted  that  the  finding  infected  the  subsequent
    assessment of the public interest in the appellant's  deportation.   It
    seems to us that what is referred to, is the lower end of the scale  of
    the type of offences where deportation questions arise. That is  not  a
    misdirection. It was a finding that was open to the judge  to  make  on
    the evidence.  However, if it had been a  misdirection,  it  would  not
    have been material on  the  basis  that  exception  1  or  exception  2
    applies.

18. We now refer to ground 2 which is an alleged failure to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings on a material matter.  The  judge  found  that  it
    would be unduly harsh on [AM] and  the  submission  is  made  that  the
    finding was not supported by any evidence and it is also said that they
    did not live together and that the partner  is  in  employment  and  is
    therefore able to support herself and  therefore  not  reliant  on  the
    appellant and that the basis for the  finding  seems  to  be  that  the
    partner will not travel to Kosovo.  As regards  the  finding  that  the
    result of the appellant's deportation would sever the  relationship  it
    was submitted that this did not meet the threshold of undue  harshness.



19. In our judgment the Tribunal did have evidence from which it  was  able
    to come to the conclusion which it did.  [AM] was a qualifying partner.
     They have had a close relationship over a period of four years.   They
    became engaged in 2017, but have not lived together due to the cultural
    expectations of the families. [AM] could not go to live in  Kosovo  was
    because she had taken the responsibility of looking  after  her  mother
    who is very unwell and her role in relation to her younger siblings  is
    a very important one, particularly having regard to the illness of  her
    mother.  It is clear  that  the  Judge  considered  all  of  this  very
    carefully at paragraphs 66 and 67, to which  reference  has  been  made
    above.  It is apparent from the material that was before the Judge that
    these findings were based upon the  evidence  before  the  Judge.   The
    Judge heard the oral evidence of the appellant and of the partner.   It
    heard a description of how heavily dependent on them her mother was  on
    [AM] and it heard how close the relationship was over a period of  four
    years, in particular at paragraph 48 the judge said the following:-

         "The witness explained how she and the Appellant had been  together
         for nearly four years.  The Appellant had helped  her  emotionally,
         as well as physically.  The witness does have a brother aged 20,  a
         sister  aged  18  and  a  brother  aged  8.   She  takes   on   the
         responsibility of  taking  her  younger  brother  to  school.   The
         Appellant will also assist as and when he can with picking  up  her
         younger brother from school.  The Appellant has  had  a  very  good
         influence upon her younger brother."

20. As we have set out before, it is also apparent from paragraphs  63  and
    74 that the Tribunal carefully considered  the  meaning  of  the  words
    unduly harsh and its decision on the facts was a proper application  of
    the meaning of those words.  This was a decision  that  was  reasonably
    available to the Tribunal on the  evidence.  It  was  not  perverse  or
    irrational such  that  no  reasonable  Tribunal  could  reach.  In  our
    judgment the appeal therefore on the  basis  of  what  is  set  out  in
    paragraph 3 under the heading of second ground must fail.

21. We now refer to the second paragraph  under  ground  2  (paragraph  4).
    This contains a criticism of the Tribunal for weighing into the  favour
    of the  appellant  the  fact  that  he  had  not  applied  for  British
    citizenship because he was busy working at the time.  That is a  matter
    which does not advance the matter in relation to the application of the
    exceptions.  In any event, if  that  ground  was  being  looked  at  by
    itself, there is nothing in that ground  that  takes  this  appeal  any
    further and wisely the respondent has not  developed  it  orally.   The
    failures of the  knowledge  of  life  in  the  UK  test  were  marginal
    failures.

22. In the third paragraph under ground  2  at  paragraph  5,  there  is  a
    criticism that the Tribunal had found that the appellant  succeeded  on
    private life grounds on  the  basis  that  very  significant  obstacles
    prevent his integration in Kosovo.  The submission was made that  since
    he was young and in good health and had work experience that  he  would
    be able to find work in Kosovo.  It was said that he  lived  in  Kosovo
    during his formative years and therefore would have some  knowledge  of
    the Albanian language and reference was made to some case  law  to  the
    effect that the hurdle is high of very  significant  obstacles  and  is
    more stringent than simply something requiring a lack of  close  family
    ties.

23. In that regard the appellant's Counsel  referred  us  in  her  skeleton
    argument to the  case  of  Kamara  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  and
    paragraphs 14, 16 and 22 of that decision read as follows:-

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  'integration'
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other  country.  It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life.

         ...

         16.  ... In my view, the Tribunal's decision is a careful and well-
             reasoned judgment, based on proper self-directions of law  and
             leading to a conclusion which was clearly  within  the  lawful
             parameters of legitimate evaluative judgment for the  Tribunal
             on the facts of the particular  case.  It  raises  no  special
             issue of principle.

         ...

         22.  Turning, then, to Mr Waite's  submission  on  the  substantive
             merits  of  the  Tribunal's  decision,  there  is  no   proper
             foundation for it. The Tribunal was aware that Mr Kamara was a
             young man in good health and capable of working and  obviously
             took those points into  account  as  the  background  for  its
             consideration of the case at  paras.  [66]-[71].  However,  it
             regarded them as insufficient to cancel  out  the  reasons  it
             gave for finding that, as it set out  there,  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Sierra
             Leone. On a fair reading of the Tribunal's decision, it is not
             possible to infer that it  failed  to  have  regard  to  these
             aspects of the case. On the footing that it did have regard to
             them, Mr Waite did not suggest that  the  Tribunal's  decision
             that the deportation of Mr Kamara to Sierra Leone would be  in
             breach of his rights under Article  8  could  be  regarded  as
             irrational or perverse."

24.  It seems to us that the relevant law is to be found in Kamara, a  Court
    of Appeal decision. References to Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship
    with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415, which came before Kamara, was in respect
    of a person with different considerations from this appellant.  In  our
    judgment Kamara is the more recent case and is binding on us. It refers
    in particular to the fact that what the Tribunal has to do is it has to
    make an evaluative judgment on the facts of the  particular  case.   In
    its approach to the directions of law relating to exceptions  1  and  2
    and its judgment on the facts of the  particular  case,  the  court  in
    Kamara at paragraph 16 (quoted above), concluded  that  the  Tribunal's
    decision was careful and well reasoned based on proper  self-directions
    of law within the parameters of a legitimate evaluative judgment on the
    facts of the case.

25.  We have referred above to the  factual  findings  at  paragraph  69  in
    relation to the very significant obstacles.   They  are  summarised  in
    paragraphs 13 and 14 of the skeleton argument of the respondent, and we
    have come to the view that the decision is for all  those  reasons  one
    that was amply available to the Tribunal below in a very full and well-
    reasoned  judgment  as  regards  the  very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration.

26.  In so far as the grounds rely on what was said at paragraph 46  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  the   argument   is
    misconceived. In  that  paragraph  the  Upper  Tribunal  discussed  the
    elevated threshold for the purpose of the 'unduly harsh' test  outlined
    in section 117C(5) NIAA 2002  and  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It did not purport to discuss  the  test  of  'very  significant
    obstacles to integration' outlined in section 117C(4)(c) and  paragraph
    399A of the Immigration Rules.  The  relevant  authority,  as  we  have
    already identified, is Kamara.

27.  Although the judge did not make specific reference  to  Kamara,  it  is
    apparent from the quoted paragraph 69 of the  Judgment  and  the  words
    "The reality, therefore, is that he would  face  not  just  significant
    obstacles but, as I categorise it, very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Kosovan society."[emphasis added], that he applied the
    relevant principles in practice and was aware of the  stringent  nature
    of the test.

28.  The Tribunal took into account the fact that the appellant is  fit  and
    able to work. However, it was open to the Tribunal to also consider the
    compelling and  compassionate  circumstances  surrounding  the  war  in
    Kosovo. It was open to the Tribunal to take into account the fact  that
    the appellant was forced to leave the country  with  his  family  at  a
    young age due to the persecution of Kosovan Albanians at the time.  The
    war is the reason why he has no family or other  connections  remaining
    in Kosovo who could assist him to understand how to integrate into life
    there. The war is the reason why he has no experience of how to earn  a
    living as an adult in Kosovo. The war is the reason why his partner and
    family would not feel able to return to visit him,  which  would  leave
    him in a situation of long-term social isolation. It was  open  to  the
    judge to evaluate the cumulative effect of these factors  in  assessing
    whether  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration if returned to Kosovo. Another judge may  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion,  but  the  Tribunal's  findings  were  unarguably
    within a range of reasonable responses to the evidence. The decision in
    Bossade was made on a different set of facts and has  little  relevance
    to the circumstances of this case.

29.  For these reasons we conclude that the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the
    exceptions under paragraph  399(b)  (section  117C(5)  NIAA  2002)  and
    paragraph 399A (section 117C(4)) did not involve the making  of  errors
    of law and were open to the Tribunal to make on the evidence.

30.  Reference was made to the fact that in the decision the  Tribunal  went
    on to consider what would happen in the event that either  or  both  of
    the exceptions failed. At paragraph 70 to 75 the Tribunal came to  some
    alternative findings. Firstly, no  challenge  to  this  aspect  of  the
    decision was particularised in the grounds of appeal. Secondly, even if
    the judge erred in respect of his assessment of paragraph 398  (section
    117C(6)) it would have made no material difference to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal given that we have found that his findings relating  to  the
    exceptions to deportation are sustainable and did not involve errors of
    law.

31.  It follows on the basis of the application of those exceptions 1 and  2
    or either of them that the appeal must  fail,  and  that  none  of  the
    grounds are made out.  We conclude that there was no error  of  law  as
    regards those exceptions, and the conclusions were reasonably available
    to the Tribunal based on the evidence.  It follows that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the  making  of  material
errors of law

The decision shall stand


Signed:  MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN            Date 09 July 2019
