

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/05857/2016

                                                   HU/05861/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 16 March 2018                      |            On 20 March 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                              MIMI AKOUSA BOAFO
                           REGINALD KWABINA BOAFO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss F Allen, Counsel instructed by Polpitya & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellants appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge M A Khan promulgated on 13 July 2017 ("the  Decision").  By  the
      Decision the Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the
      Respondent's  decisions  dated  28   January   2016   refusing   their
      applications for entry clearance to join their father ("the  Sponsor")
      in the UK and rejecting their Article 8 human rights claims.

2.    The Judge did not accept that the Sponsor was in fact the  Appellants'
      father.   He  also  found  that  the  Sponsor  did   not   have   sole
      responsibility for the Appellants  as  a  parent  and  there  were  no
      exceptional and compelling circumstances  justifying  the  Appellants'
      entry to the UK.  He found therefore that the  Respondent's  decisions
      did not breach the Appellants' rights under Article 8 ECHR.   On  that
      basis he dismissed both appeals.

3.    In relation to  the  first  of  those  issues,  namely  the  Sponsor's
      relationship to the Appellants, the Appellants sought  an  adjournment
      of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in order to  provide  DNA  evidence
      which was expected to be forthcoming very shortly.  The Judge  refused
      that adjournment request.  The DNA evidence was in fact available  the
      day after the hearing (22 June) and was sent to  the  Tribunal  on  23
      June; therefore, before the Decision was promulgated.  As appears from
      the Tribunal file, however, although the DNA report was in fact  faxed
      to the IAC at Hatton Cross on 23 June, it did find its way to the file
      until 7 August 2017 and the only document printed to the file  is  the
      covering letter.  There is no copy of the DNA report  on  file.  I  am
      though prepared to accept what is implicit from the grounds of appeal,
      namely that the DNA report shows that the Sponsor is  the  Appellants'
      father.

4.    The refusal to adjourn the hearing and the failure  to  take  the  DNA
      report into account forms the principal ground of appeal.   There  are
      two further, subsidiary grounds which challenge  the  Judge's  finding
      that  the  Appellants  attend  boarding  school  and  that  the  Judge
      misquoted an e-mail on which the Second Appellant relies to  show  the
      Sponsor's involvement in his education.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birrell
      on 24 December 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-
           "...[2]     The grounds assert that  the  Judge  erred  in  that
           there was procedural unfairness in refusing  an  adjournment  to
           obtain DNA evidence and failing to  consider  the  DNA  evidence
           submitted the day after the  date  of  hearing  but  before  the
           promulgation of the decision;
           [3]   The assessment of the merits  of  adjournment  request  at
           paragraph 7 is very brief  with  no  reference  to  any  guiding
           principles.  It is unclear whether the  DNA  evidence  was  ever
           sent to the Judge.  The  grounds  disclose  arguable  errors  of
           law."

6.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

7.    Miss  Allen  indicated  at  the  outset  that,  following  discussions
      between herself and  Mr  Walker,  the  Respondent  conceded  that  the
      failure to adjourn constituted an error of law and  that  the  appeals
      should, for that reason, be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
      hearing.  Mr Walker confirmed that position.

8.    Miss Allen directed my attention to [23] of  the  Decision  where  the
      Judge said this:-
           "[23]  Relationship  between  appellants  and  the  sponsor   is
           disputed by the respondent, the documents provided in support of
           the claimed relationships are wholly unreliable, they do not, on
           the balance of probabilities establish the relationship  between
           the appellants and the sponsor."


      As is clear from that  paragraph,  therefore,  the  finding  that  the
           Appellants were not
      related to the Sponsor as claimed forms part of the Judge's reasoning.


9.    The Judge dealt with the adjournment request as follows:-
           "[5]   Ms  Allen  of  Counsel  for  the  appellants'   made   an
           application  for  an  adjournment  on  the  grounds   that   the
           relationship is in dispute in this case  and  that  a  DNA  test
           report is in process of being adduced as evidence  to  establish
           the relationship.
           [6]   Ms Chopra  of  Counsel  for  the  respondent  opposed  the
           adjournment request stating that the refusal is dated 28/01/2016
           which is nearly 18 months.
           [7]   Ms Allen could not say why it has  taken  her  instructing
           solicitor so long to request  a  DNA  evidence.   I  refused  to
           adjourn the matter on the  grounds  that  those  instructing  Ms
           Allen have had more than sufficient time to provide evidence  in
           support of this case.  It is in the  interest  of  fairness  and
           justice that the case should proceed to hearing."

10.   The Appellants rely in their grounds of appeal  against  the  Decision
      on the case of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
      (IAC).  The headnote in that case reads as follows:-
           "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
           decision could, in principle, be erroneous  in  law  in  several
           respects: these include a  failure  to  take  into  account  all
           material considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to
           intrude; denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to
           apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.   In  practice,
           in most cases the question will be whether the refusal  deprived
           the affected party of his right to a  fair  hearing.   Where  an
           adjournment refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is
           important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
           is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be
           applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation  of  the
           affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
           Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
           1284."

11.   Whilst I do not consider the Judge's failure to  refer  to  that  case
      when considering the adjournment request as fatal, the Judge needed to
      show that he had considered the impact of the refusal  to  adjourn  on
      the fairness of the  hearing  for  the  Appellants.    Whilst  he  was
      entitled to take into account the Appellants' failure to seek out  the
      DNA evidence at an earlier stage, he did not  for  example  take  into
      account that the production of that evidence was expected very shortly
      and that an adjournment of the appeal was therefore likely  to  be  of
      very short duration.  He could have considered (but did not) whether a
      direction could be made to permit the Appellants  to  adduce  the  DNA
      evidence after the hearing and before the Decision was  made,  thereby
      ensuring that if the DNA evidence was submitted, it  would  have  been
      filed expressly in accordance  with  that  direction  and  might  have
      therefore reached the file before the Decision was  taken.   He  might
      have considered (but did not) whether he should simply assume  in  the
      absence of  evidence  but  in  the  interests  of  fairness  that  the
      Appellants are related as they claim and gone on to consider the other
      issues. In that way, even without an adjournment, the  Decision  might
      have remained sustainable based on  the  other  findings  as  to  sole
      responsibility.

12.   As it is, though, the taking into account of the lack of DNA  evidence
      having refused a  short  adjournment  precisely  for  the  purpose  of
      producing that evidence and a finding that this  was  fatal  to  their
      case is unfair to the Appellants. For that reason, I accept  that  the
      Respondent's concession is one which should be accepted.

13.   I would not have found an error on account of the Judge's  failure  to
      take into account the DNA evidence as it is clear from the  file  that
      the evidence was  not  brought  to  the  Judge's  attention  prior  to
      promulgation of the Decision.  Similarly, I would not  have  found  an
      error in relation to the e-mail relied upon by the  Second  Appellant.
      The Judge's summary of that evidence at [25] is  a  fair  one.   I  do
      accept though that the Judge was not entitled  to  find  in  the  same
      paragraph that the Appellants attend boarding school.  They  may  well
      do so; I do not know.  However, there is insufficient evidence  before
      the Judge to show that they  do  and  this  amounts  to  impermissible
      speculation.  I do  not  in  any  event  retain  any  of  the  Judge's
      findings.

14.   I discussed with the parties whether it was appropriate to  remit  the
      appeals or whether the decision could be re-taken  in  this  Tribunal.
      Both parties were adamant that the appeals should be remitted.

15.   I have had regard to the Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this
      Tribunal.  That reads as follows:-
        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that:-
   a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the  First-
      tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that  party's
      case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
   b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which  is  necessary
      in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such  that,
      having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

16.   In this case, in light of what I say  at  [11]  and  [12]  above,  the
      effect of the error has been to  deprive  the  Appellants  of  a  fair
      hearing.  Accordingly, the appropriate course is to remit the  appeals
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before  a  Judge  other
      than M A Khan.  When  preparing  these  appeals  for  re-hearing,  the
      Appellants should note that the DNA report on which reliance is placed
      does not appear on the Tribunal's file and that a further copy of that
      will therefore need to be lodged in advance of the hearing.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan
promulgated on 13 July 2017 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


Signed                 Dated:  19 March 2018


[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
