
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05350/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th October 2018                          |On 21st December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                       Olalekaan olatunde alli balogun
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Revill of Counsel, instructed by Rock
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on  6  February  2018,  in  which  Mr
    Balogun's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke   his
    Deportation Order dated 18 March 2017 was allowed.  For ease I continue
    to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    with Mr Balogun as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

 2. I found an error of law in Judge Colvin's  decision  promulgated  on  6
    February 2018 following the first hearing of  this  appeal  on  15  May
    2018.  The history to this appeal is  set  out  in  the  error  of  law
    decision contained in the annex and will  not  be  repeated  here  save
    where reference to the background is  needed.   This  decision  is  the
    remaking of the appeal.

The appeal

Explanation for refusal

 3. The Respondent refused  the  human  rights  application/application  to
    revoke the Deportation  Order  on  13  March  2017  for  the  following
    reasons.  The Appellant's circumstances were considered by reference to
    paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules to the effect  that  his  claim
    under Article 8 could only  succeed  if  there  were  very  exceptional
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A.
     The Respondent considered that there was a significant public interest
    in deporting the Appellant due to his criminal  history  of  submitting
    false documents in support of an application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom for which he was successfully prosecuted  and  sentenced
    to 18 months in  prison;  that  the  Appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
    Deportation Order and has continued to use  deception  as  a  means  of
    remaining in United Kingdom by not declaring his  criminal  convictions
    or alias names on further applications.

 4. The  Respondent  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children pursuant  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, but it was  considered  that  they  could  remain
    residing in the United Kingdom with  their  mother  or  the  option  of
    relocating with the Appellant would be open to them and  neither  would
    be unduly harsh.  There were no exceptional features of the Appellant's
    family or private life to constitute a very compelling circumstance  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.

 5. Overall it was considered that the Appellant's deportation would not be
    a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and the application to revoke the Deportation Order was  refused
    under paragraph 390 and 390A of the Immigration Rules.  It was  however
    accepted that the Appellant's further submissions amounted to  a  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  was
    therefore  a  right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    Deportation Order on human rights grounds.

The Appellant's evidence

 6. In the course of this appeal, the  Appellant  made  written  statements
    dated 24 August 2016 and 21 August 2018.  In these statements  he  sets
    out the following in relation to his history and current circumstances.



 7. In the years 2000 - 2006 the Appellant said he used his  names  in  the
    short version, 'Tunde Balogun', short for 'Olatunde Alli Balogun'.  The
    Appellant was detained on 6 December 2007 at Belfast airport giving his
    un-truncated names and fingerprints.  On 6 June 2008 he was detained at
    Dublin airport, during which his fingerprints were scanned showing both
    of his identities.  These  were  both  referred  to  in  correspondence
    between the authorities in the Republic of Ireland  and  those  in  the
    United Kingdom in relation to a transfer between the two territories.

 8. Although the Appellant states that he recognises his mistake concerning
    his criminal offence, he also describes his conviction in 2006 as being
    due to reliance on the documents provided to him by the  accountant  he
    had employed, which he then in turn submitted to  the  Home  Office  in
    good faith with his application for leave to remain as the spouse of an
    EU citizen in 2000.  The Appellant did not live with his spouse and the
    couple subsequently divorced.

 9. In 2009, the Appellant states that his partner informed  him  that  the
    Respondent had requested the names of her  dependents  further  to  her
    application for leave to remain made in 1999.  All  the  documents  and
    information requested were submitted and the Appellant and  his  family
    were granted indefinite leave to remain in 2010.  The Appellant and his
    partner had assumed that it was not necessary to write details  of  the
    Appellant's other identity when submitting details  of  her  dependents
    because the Respondent had  full  knowledge  of  both  identities  from
    previous fingerprints.

10. The Appellant thought that because of the grant of Indefinite Leave  to
    Remain, the Respondent had no intention to deport him and  he  had  not
    been served with the Deportation Order.  The Appellant further  thought
    that the Respondent had pardoned his criminal convictions and cancelled
    deportation proceedings with the grant of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain.
    For these reasons, no mention was  made  of  the  Appellant's  criminal
    convictions in his 2011 application for the transfer of  the  no  time-
    limit stamp to his new passport.  The Appellant's belief as to this set
    of circumstances was reinforced in 2012 and 2014 when he  travelled  to
    Nigeria and was permitted to re-enter on both occasions.  The Appellant
    states that he was detained on  both  occasions  during  which  he  was
    interviewed and confirmed his conviction in 2006 but was  permitted  to
    enter.  Similarly, there was no difficulty when the Appellant  attended
    a police station in June 2011 for his fingerprints to be  taken  for  a
    Criminal  Record  Bureau  certificate  which  was  subsequently  issued
    containing both of his identities and criminal convictions.

11. After travelling to Ireland,  the  Appellant  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom sometime in February 2010 with his partner.  He stated that  he
    wasn't aware of the Deportation Order against him at that time  and  if
    he was, he would  have  remained  in  Ireland  rather  than  breach  UK
    immigration law.

12. The Appellant has three siblings in the United Kingdom who  are  either
    British Citizens or are settled  here.   He  says  he  has  been  in  a
    relationship with his partner, since 1999 and they have three  children
    together born in 2002, 2003 and 2009.  The Appellant  and  his  partner
    have always lived together other  than  times  when  she  travelled  to
    Ireland for short stays.  The Appellant states that his  children  have
    only known the UK as their home country  and  were  only  born  in  the
    Republic of Ireland because he and his partner did not want their  lack
    of leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  to  effect  them,  so  the
    Appellant's partner travelled to Ireland  to  give  birth  pursuant  to
    advice as the children would have had no leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.

13. The Appellant provides  day-to-day  care  for  his  children  when  his
    partner is at university and/or work and he also provides care for  his
    brothers' two children after his wife passed away.   The  Appellant  is
    closely involved with his children's lives including being the  primary
    contact for their school.

14. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted his written statements
    and gave oral evidence in English.  He stated that his true and correct
    date of birth is 4 December 1968.

15. In cross-examination the Appellant stated that he wasn't aware that  he
    had lost his appeal against deportation in the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    2007, stating that he went to court but  went  to  Ireland  before  the
    decision was received.  When asked if he had chased  the  decision,  he
    only stated that he relied on his lawyer.  He was asked repeatedly when
    he was aware he had lost his appeal to which he gave no  clear  answer,
    claiming not to understand the  questions  or  referring  only  to  the
    intention to deport or not being able to remember.

16. In relation to the application to fix a  no  time-limit  stamp  to  the
    Appellant's passport, the Appellant stated that the form was  completed
    by his partner, although did contain his signature on the  final  page.
    He accepted that 'no' to the question about  criminal  convictions  was
    incorrect and stated that this was a mistake.  It was a mistake because
    he thought it was over and he had learned his lesson.

17. As to his travel to and from Ireland, the Appellant stated that he went
    there to meet his partner and gave contradictory answers as to  whether
    she was living in  Ireland,  or  the  United  Kingdom,  or  both.   The
    Appellant stated that he did not go to Ireland to escape the Respondent
    as although it may look like that, he didn't believe that there  was  a
    Deportation Order against him.  When asked if  he  went  to  avoid  his
    immigration difficulties, the Appellant stated that he got  fed  up  so
    went to Ireland, he wasn't sure what was going to happen after he  left
    but was relieved when he eventually came back.  He did not want to know
    the result of his appeal because he was fed up and so  far  as  he  was
    concerned he had an immigration problem but that did not mean  that  he
    was going to be deported.  In fact he had a strong belief that he would
    not be deported because he had been in the United Kingdom for a  while.
    The Appellant thought that his appeal was still pending  when  he  left
    the United Kingdom and he confirmed that he would not have left had  he
    won his appeal.

18. The Appellant had first tried  to  visit  his  partner  in  Ireland  in
    December 2007 and then again  around  the  middle  of  2008.   On  that
    occasion he stayed about two years, although could not say that for the
    whole duration he was living with his partner and children as  she  was
    in and out of the country.  He decided  to  come  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2010 to  live  here  after  his  partner  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain.

19. I asked the Appellant what he thought his  immigration  status  was  on
    return to the United Kingdom in  2010,  to  which  he  replied  he  had
    settlement here.  He thought that his immigration history didn't matter
    because of knowledge of a friend in prison who was  deported  and  came
    back to be with his wife and he thought a  similar  thing  happened  to
    him, that he had  been  pardoned  for  his  past  given  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain, that some kind of discretion had been  used
    in his favour in February 2010.  He could not  explain  why  discretion
    would suddenly have been exercised at that point in time.

20. The Appellant visited Nigeria in 2004, 2012 and 2014, the last occasion
    for about 10 days.  His partner went to Nigeria last year to visit  her
    mum.  The Appellant has no family in  Nigeria,  but  has  brothers  and
    sisters and their family in the United Kingdom.

21. After the grant of indefinite leave to remain to the Appellant, he  was
    working part-time as bank staff, choosing the days to work when he  was
    free when his  partner  was  at  home.   He  stated  that  his  written
    statement was correct that he worked full-time when his partner was  on
    holiday but when asked clarification, he stated that  he  worked  part-
    time.

22. I asked the Appellant why he would declare his criminal convictions  to
    an immigration officer when detained at the airport in  2012  and  2014
    but not in 2010 or 2011 when he said that he  thought  his  immigration
    history was no longer a problem and that he had been  pardoned  by  the
    Respondent.  His response was that he didn't declare his convictions in
    2012 and 2014, only that he had previous immigration problems when  his
    fingerprints were taken.

23. In re-examination, the Appellant stated that he came back to the United
    Kingdom in the middle  of  2010  with  his  wife  after  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain, although he was reminded that this was made
    on 13 September 2010, he maintained that he returned with leave in  the
    middle of the year.

The Appellant's partner's evidence

24. The Appellant's partner also made a number of written statements during
    the course of this appeal, dated 21 December 2017, 21 August  2018  and
    13 September 2018.  In those statements she states that she has been in
    a relationship  with  the  Appellant  since  2000  and  that  he  is  a
    supportive partner and father, and was responsible for the  daily  care
    of the children while she is at work or studying.

25. Neither the Appellant's partner, the Appellant nor  the  children  have
    been to Ireland since about February 2010  when  they  all  decided  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  regardless  of  the  immigration  threat
    because at that time they had no fear of  the  children  being  removed
    from the United Kingdom because they were Irish citizens.   She  stated
    that Ireland was never their home it was always the United Kingdom.

26. The Appellant's partner travelled to Nigeria to  visit  her  mother  in
    2017 but could not return to live there because of  the  conditions  in
    that country and because the children know nothing about Nigeria, their
    life and culture being centred in the United  Kingdom  and  the  family
    having no resources or property in Nigeria to use to care for them.

27. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant  ensures  that  the  children  are
    washed, taking them to  and  collecting  them  from  school,  attending
    meetings at school and implementing support plans for  them,  sometimes
    cooks for the children, shops for them,  pays  for  extra  tuition  and
    assists the children with their schoolwork and  their  behaviour.   The
    Appellant's partner describes the children as struggling and displaying
    poor behaviour during the period of the Appellant's detention in  2016,
    that the children were very angry, withdrawn, uninterested in going  to
    school and were afraid.  If the Appellant were  deported  the  children
    would be devastated.

28. The Appellant's partner attended the oral hearing, adopted her  written
    statements and gave oral evidence in English.  In cross-examination she
    confirmed that she was in a relationship with the Appellant in 2007 and
    was aware both of his convictions  and  prison  sentence  although  she
    denied being aware of the notification of intention to deport him.  She
    stated she was only aware of this last time he travelled to Nigeria  in
    2016 and had not known of the appeal proceedings in 2007 or 2008.   She
    stated that the Appellant knew she was a worrier and that he would  not
    tell her of the details to avoid this.  It was too stressful for her to
    have ever attended  court.   The  Appellant's  partner  knew  that  the
    Appellant was married to  someone  else  during  the  course  of  their
    relationship.

29. The Appellant's partner went to Ireland in 2002  and  agreed  that  her
    home was there from which she visited the United Kingdom.  Although she
    then said that most of her time was spent in the  United  Kingdom  when
    the children were young and  not  in  education.   The  eldest  started
    primary school in 2007 and completed the first three years of education
    in Ireland.  The Appellant was living in the United  Kingdom  up  until
    2008 at then came to visit in Ireland and moved there in 2008.

30. The Appellant's partner and children returned to the United Kingdom  in
    November or December 2010 and  the  Appellant  returned  a  few  months
    before them.  When asked clarification from her written statement  that
    they left Ireland in February 2010, the Appellant's partner  said  that
    she had been confused and they might have returned in  September  2010,
    then thought it might have  been  2011  as  the  eldest  child's  first
    birthday in December 2010 was celebrated in Ireland.  When referred  to
    a London address being used in June and September 2010, the Appellant's
    partner stated that she was always coming back to  the  United  Kingdom
    and she gave the address she had always used here  where  she  normally
    lived when in the country and where her post was sent.

31. The application for a no time limit stamp in the  Appellant's  passport
    was completed by the Appellant who signed  the  form  and  his  partner
    could not explain why his evidence was that she completed it.

32. In re-examination the Appellant's  partner  said  she  lived  with  the
    Appellant when she was, in her words, in and out of the United Kingdom,
    which she said was most  of  the  time.   She  stated  that  they  were
    currently living in the same house although the Appellant had  given  a
    different address which was his brother's address because this was  his
    bail address.  She then stated that he shares time between her property
    and his brother's property to  comply  with  bail  conditions  and  her
    working nights when he has to be there with the children.

Other witness evidence

33. The Appellant's bundle also contained a number  of  written  statements
    from other family members and friends, of which the Appellant's brother
    and sister also attended court and gave oral evidence.  I set out their
    evidence in much less detail but a full record of it is on the file and
    has been taken into account.

34. In  particular  the  Appellant's  brother,  gave  evidence  as  to  the
    Appellant's support to him and his children following the death of  his
    wife and as a consequence of his medical condition and  treatment.   He
    stated that he relies on the Appellant  for  the  support  which  other
    members of the family could not give him for their own personal reasons
    and in part because he needed to rely on a  male  family  member.   The
    Appellant's sister also gave evidence that she relied on the  Appellant
    for childcare and as a father figure as her son who had no relationship
    with his own father.  Again, she said that other family  members  would
    not be able to assist in the Appellant's absence.

Closing submissions

35. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Wilding  relied  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  He submitted that the starting point in this  case  is
    that there was an application to revoke  a  Deportation  Order  meaning
    that paragraph 390 and following of  the  Immigration  Rules,  together
    with paragraphs 398 to 399A of the same were as relevant to  his  human
    rights claim as they would be in the first instance decision.

36. The Respondent's position is that the Deportation Order was valid  even
    though it was not served on the Appellant as he had left  the  country,
    it was signed and had taken effect and was deemed  enforced  given  the
    Respondent's knowledge that the Appellant was in Ireland.   The  making
    of a Deportation Order was the  only  rational  consequence  which  was
    could follow from the Appellant's unsuccessful appeal and it  is  clear
    that the only rational inference for the Appellant's travel to  Ireland
    was to make his immigration problems go away.

37. The Appellant's submissions that the Deportation Order  was  valid  but
    not in force or effective unless and until it had been  served  on  the
    Appellant, or he was notified of its existence, were  not  accepted  by
    the Respondent.  The facts of the present  appeal  are  very  far  from
    those in R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  ex  parte
    Anufrijeva [2003] UKHL 36, where  there  was  lack  of  any  notice  of
    anything happening at all and a third party later informing  the  party
    in that case.  In the present case the statutory  scheme  required  the
    Respondent to notify the Appellant of the intention to deport  him  and
    that was the decision which gave  rise  to  a  right  of  appeal.   The
    Appellant was aware of that decision and pursued his appeal against it.
     There could be no further appeal against the actual Deportation  Order
    which follows.  There can be no suggestion that the  rule  of  law  was
    breached in this process.

38. Mr Wilding also submitted that the same reasoning as given by the Court
    of Appeal in the case of Decker v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1752, applies  to  the  present  case  as  a
    natural extension of the consequences of a person attempting  to  avoid
    the effect of a  Deportation  Order.   The  Respondent  knew  that  the
    Appellant was in Ireland which was outside  its  jurisdiction  and  was
    entitled to conclude that the Deportation Order was  deemed  effective.
    There is nothing in primary legislation or in case law  which  supports
    the Appellant's claim that the Deportation Order could not take  effect
    until he had been physically served with it and had notice of it.

39. As to the Appellant's evidence, it was submitted that the Appellant was
    not credible.  He was continuously evasive in response to questions and
    when answers were given those were deeply unimpressive and  leaves  the
    Tribunal none the wiser as to his circumstances between 2007 and  2010.
    From his evidence it is possible to submit that the Appellant  went  to
    Ireland to avoid the consequences of proceedings he was involved in  in
    relation to his immigration problems and despite his claimed  inability
    to remember.  We do  know  that  he  attended  to  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearings as this is recorded in the decisions issued as a result.    It
    is also the inevitable consequence of the failure in his appeal that  a
    Deportation Order would follow.  It was submitted as not credible  that
    the Appellant was stressed about his  immigration  status  but  had  no
    concern whatsoever as to the outcome of his appeal.

40. The Appellant has submitted the public interest in deportation has been
    reduced on the unusual circumstances of this appeal, on  the  basis  of
    the Appellant's claimed reasonable belief that his grant of  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2010 was not obtained by deception and was somehow a
    pardon  of  his  conviction  and  previous   history.    However,   the
    Appellant's application in 2011 for no time limit stamp in his passport
    was on its  face  incorrect  as  he  failed  to  declare  his  criminal
    convictions and this is just one example of the Appellant  on  numerous
    occasions attempting to conceal information in  his  interactions  with
    the  Respondent.   There  remains  inconsistent  evidence  as  to   who
    completed that application in 2011.  In the circumstances there can  be
    no reduction in the public interest in deportation.

41. The Appellant was refused leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  25
    August 2016 on the basis that his leave had been obtained by deception.
     This is reflected in the Respondents GCID notes and that decision  was
    the subject of an application for Judicial Review.   The  decision  for
    the cancellation of leave to enter on the basis of deception was not in
    any way impugned in those proceedings which was settled  on  the  basis
    that further submissions could be made  as  a  human  rights  claim  in
    support of an  application  to  revoke  a  Deportation  Order.   It  is
    therefore not correct to say that leave to remain was not  obtained  by
    deception.

42. The Appellant's reliance on the period of time  since  the  Deportation
    Order was  signed  is  also  misplaced  under  paragraph  391A  of  the
    Immigration Rules as this is only relevant to a period of time in which
    the Appellant has in fact complied with a  Deportation  Order  and  has
    remained outside of the United Kingdom.  In any event, this still  does
    not talk about a reduction in the public interest but that this may  be
    a change of circumstances instead.  In this case the Appellant has  not
    complied with the Deportation Order and re-entered the  United  Kingdom
    in breach of it.  The facts of MN-T (Colombia) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 893, relied upon by  the  Appellant
    are very different to the facts in the present appeal  and  provide  no
    support for his position.

43. Overall it was submitted by Mr Wilding that the Appellant  is  required
    to establish a very strong case indeed to outweigh the public  interest
    in his deportation in all of  the  circumstances.   It  is  clear  that
    applying the unduly harsh criteria, this is not met in relation to  his
    family in the United  Kingdom  and  there  is  little  to  suggest  any
    disproportionate interference with family life on a standard Article  8
    basis.  The Appellant has been convicted of an offence of deception and
    has  continued  to  have  difficulties  with  being  honest  with   the
    Respondent since his conviction.  Mr Wilding invited me to dismiss  the
    appeal.

44. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted in outline that  paragraph
    399D of the Immigration Rules does not apply to  the  Appellant,  first
    because although it was accepted that the Deportation Order was  valid,
    it was not effective because no notice of it  has  been  given  to  the
    Appellant until at the earliest 2016 and secondly because  he  had  not
    been deported by  the  Respondent,  he  had  left  the  United  Kingdom
    voluntarily.  On that basis, the Appellant could  rely  on  the  unduly
    harsh provisions, that it will be unduly  harsh  for  his  children  to
    either remain in the United Kingdom without him  or  to  accompany  him
    Nigeria and in any event there would be very  compelling  circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in  deportation.   In  the  event  that
    paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules  is  found  to  apply  to  the
    Appellant,  it  was  in  any  event  submitted  that  there  were  very
    exceptional circumstances in this case to outweigh the public  interest
    in deportation.  Those submissions were developed in detail both in the
    skeleton argument submitted by Ms Revill and also in  oral  submissions
    as follows.

45. In relation to paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules,  the  Appellant
    accepts following the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Decker,  that  the
    Deportation  Order  made  against  him  on  8  May   2008   was   valid
    notwithstanding the lack of service on him until  18  March  2017,  but
    Counsel submitted that it was not effective or in force  until  it  was
    served upon him, or at the earliest,  until  he  was  notified  of  its
    existence.  Reliance was  placed  on  the  opinion  of  Lord  Steyn  in
    Anufrijeva, at paragraph 26, that notice of the  decision  is  required
    before it can have the character of a determination with legal  effect.
    Although it was accepted the facts of that  case  were  very  different
    from the present appeal, the basic principles were said to still apply.
      A  Deportation  Order  has  a  specific  legal  effect,  including  a
    requirement to leave and a prevention of re-entry and  invalidation  of
    any existing or future grant of leave to remain, which goes beyond  the
    effect of an intention to deport a person which was,  at  the  time  in
    2008, subject to a specific right  of  appeal.   If  the  Appellant  is
    right, his entry to the United Kingdom before 18 March 2017 (or  before
    22 August 2016, the date of initial notification of it) did not  breach
    the Deportation Order because it was not effective prior to that  date.
    Accordingly, paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules does not apply  to
    the Appellant.

46. In the alternative,  it  was  submitted  that  paragraph  399D  of  the
    Immigration Rules did not in any event apply because the Appellant  had
    left the United Kingdom voluntarily and had not  'been  deported',  the
    natural and ordinary meaning of that phrase being someone whose removal
    had been enforced by the Respondent.

47. With regard  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation,  although  the
    significant public interest in the Appellant's  removal  as  a  foreign
    criminal was acknowledged by the Appellant, it was submitted  that  the
    public interest is reduced in the unusual circumstances  of  his  case.
    First, as  the  Appellant  had  or  reasonably  believed  that  he  had
    Indefinite Leave to Remain from 13 September 2010  until  at  least  22
    August 2016 and this leave to remain was not obtained by deception.  No
    such application had been specifically made by  the  Appellant  or  his
    partner, it was granted following a review of the Appellant's partner's
    status by the Respondent's Case Resolution Directorate (otherwise known
    as the legacy exercise) during which she listed details of her  partner
    as a dependent.  There is no evidence from the Respondent that  at  any
    stage during this process was the Appellant or his partner asked  about
    any other identities or past criminal convictions.

48. Further, the Respondent has been aware of the two different  identities
    used by the Appellant since at least 2008  with  both  being  expressly
    acknowledged in correspondence between the Respondent  and  authorities
    in Ireland  with  regards  to  a  takeback  request.   The  Appellant's
    reasonable belief with regards to the  grant  of  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain was based on the Respondent knowing of both  of  his  identities
    and also that he had successfully applied for a no time limit stamp  to
    be entered into his passport in 2011 and had been permitted to re-enter
    the United Kingdom in 2012 and 2014.  The Appellant's explanation as to
    why he did not disclose his criminal conviction in his application  for
    a no time limit stamp in his passport was a reasonable one  given  that
    it was some years previously and he had since been  granted  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain.

49. Secondly, the Deportation Order was  signed  over  10  years  ago,  the
    Appellant  has  never  reoffended  and  has  since   held   responsible
    employment when permitted to do so.   The  offence  for  which  he  was
    convicted which triggered the intention to deport was nearly  13  years
    ago and it was submitted that the Appellant had rehabilitated  in  this
    period.

50.  Thirdly,  the  Respondent  has  significantly  delayed  enforcing  the
    Appellant's deportation given that he was aware of his  return  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2010 and took no action until 2016.  This operates to
    reduce the  public  interest  in  deportation  and  has  permitted  the
    Appellant to strengthen his private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the intervening period.  Reliance was placed on the Court of
    Appeal's decision in MN-T  as  to  the  reduction  in  public  interest
    further to a delay on the basis of the same principles in EB (Kosovo) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41.

51. The passage of time is also said  to  be  relevant  given  its  express
    inclusion in  paragraph  391  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  the
    Respondent's policy that maintenance of  a  deportation  order  may  no
    longer be the proper course after a period  of  10  years  had  elapsed
    where a person had been sentenced to less than four years imprisonment.
     It was submitted that these factors cumulatively significantly  reduce
    the strength of the public interest in the Appellant's deportation.

52. With regard to the issue of whether the Appellant's  deportation  would
    be unduly harsh, it was submitted that there is no dispute  as  to  the
    existence of family life in this case and  the  preserved  findings  of
    fact are that it  would  be  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children to remain in the United Kingdom with both  parents.   Further,
    it was submitted that the Appellant has a closer relationship with  his
    children than average given that he is the primary carer for  them  due
    to their mother's work and  studies.   The  Appellant's  removal  would
    therefore have a greater effect on the children than it  would  in  the
    circumstances of an average  relationship  with  an  average  level  of
    involvement by a father, which means that separation  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  The Appellant also relies on relationships with extended family
    with care and support provided to  his  siblings  and  their  children,
    which would also be unduly harsh on them.

53. Finally, it was submitted that in any event there are very  exceptional
    circumstances which outweigh the public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    deportation,  notwithstanding  the  Appellant's  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of the Deportation Order  (if  his  position  on  the
    effectiveness of the Deportation Order  is  not  accepted).   The  same
    private and family life submissions are relied upon, with immediate and
    extended family members, as well as the factors in  relation  to  delay
    and the  grant  of  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain.   In  addition,  the
    Appellant speaks  fluent  English  and  is  likely  to  be  financially
    independent through employment if permitted to work.  Cumulatively,  it
    was  submitted  that  these  factors  are  sufficient  to  create  very
    exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation required in paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules  or  if
    necessary, very compelling circumstances pursuant to  section  117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Findings And reasons

 1. I deal with the legal position and findings of fact in relation to  the
    Appellant's claim initially in chronological order.  At the outset,  it
    is important to set out that  the  Appellant  has  used  two  different
    identities, initially with the name Tunde Lekan Balogun, date of  birth
    4 December 1967 and also Olalekaan Olatunde Alli Balogun, date of birth
    4 December 1968.  The Appellant claims that the latter is  his  correct
    name  and  date  of  birth  (and  is  the  one  used  in  these  appeal
    proceedings), seeking to explain that the former was only  a  truncated
    version of his own name and that there was originally an administrative
    error as to his year of birth which he later corrected.  The use of two
    different identities at particular times and the  question  of  whether
    the Respondent knew (or at least had constructive knowledge of this) is
    relevant throughout parts of the analysis that follows.

 2. At the outset, I make general comments as to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and the evidence he gave before  me.   I  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness for a number of reasons and specific
    examples of these are given throughout my decision below.   In  general
    terms, although the Appellant had made detailed written  statements  by
    reference to specific dates, these  were  inconsistent  with  his  oral
    evidence and his general approach to giving oral  evidence  before  me.
    In cross-examination, the Appellant was vague, evasive and deliberately
    sought to avoid answering direct questions.  He made repeated claims to
    not understand straightforward  questions  and  contrary  to  what  was
    adopted from his written statement, claimed  not  to  remember  a  wide
    variety of matters and dates.  The appellant  failed,  for  example  to
    even be able to give a consistent answer about his work history  as  to
    whether  he  works  full  or  part-time  giving  answers   which   were
    inconsistent  or   heavily   caveated.    Secondly,   the   Appellant's
    explanation for certain matters was inherently  implausible.   Thirdly,
    the evidence of the Appellant and his partner  was  inconsistent  in  a
    number of respects (again examples  will  be  given  below).   Finally,
    there was in general a lack of supporting evidence from the  Appellant,
    for example documentary evidence of where he  was  living  or  when  he
    travelled between the United Kingdom and Ireland.

 3. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998, but
    there is  no  evidence  to  support  entry  at  that  time,  lawful  or
    otherwise.  In the identify of Tunde Lekan Balogun, he  made  a  postal
    application for asylum on 8 June 2000 which was withdrawn following his
    marriage to a Portuguese national on 28 July 2000 further to  which  he
    was granted an EEA Residence Card as her dependent on 16 November 2000.
     That residence permit was valid to 16 November 2005.   An  application
    was made on 11  February  2005  by  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom which was  refused  on
    31 May  2005,  by  reference  to  the  Respondent's  awareness  of  the
    Appellant's wife writing to him from  Portugal  in  2004  requesting  a
    divorce.  A further application was made on 8 December 2005 on the same
    basis which was refused on 28 June 2006.  The Appellant states that  he
    separated from his  ex-wife  in  2007  and  he  claims  to  have  in  a
    continuous relationship with his  partner  since  1999,  prior  to  his
    marriage and during his marriage, albeit no mention of the same is made
    of this relationship, or the children born to  it,  to  the  Respondent
    until many years later.

 4. The Appellant's first child was born in Ireland on [~] 2002,  with  the
    father named as Olalekan Alli-Balogun and an address for him  given  in
    Lagos, Nigeria.  His second child as born on [~] 2003 in Ireland,  with
    the same details for the father entered on the birth  certificate.   It
    is noted that on both birth certificates the Appellant's full  name  is
    used, contrary to his evidence that for the period 2000 to 2006 he  was
    only using the truncated version of his name.  The  Appellant  has  not
    claimed that he was living in Nigeria at this time,  nor  has  he  ever
    suggested that he was living with his partner and children  in  Ireland
    prior  to  2008.   The  use  of  the  same  address  in   Lagos   given
    approximately a year apart does however indicate that the Appellant was
    living there at the time, rather than in the United Kingdom as  claimed
    and there is no reasonable explanation  as  to  why  a  United  Kingdom
    address would not be used if that was the correct  one  and  where  the
    Appellant was actually living at the time.

 5. On 30 November 2006, the Appellant was convicted of  seeking  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  by  deception  and  possessing  a  false
    identity document (including submitting false P60s in his  wife's  name
    in support his application for further leave to remain)  for  which  he
    was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment on each  count  to  be  served
    concurrently.  There was no appeal against sentence or conviction.  The
    Appellant was convicted in the name of Tunde Balogun, date of  birth  4
    December 1967, with two alias names of Olatunde  Olalekan  Alli-Balogun
    and Tunde Lekan Balogun and an alias date of birth of 4 December  1968.



 6. The Appellant sought to minimise his role in this offence and blame  an
    accountant for providing him with false documents that he  then  simply
    passed on in the course of his application.  That does not accord  with
    his conviction nor length of sentence, nor the subsequent findings that
    the marriage was not genuine or  subsisting  and  the  finding  by  the
    Tribunal that the EEA national never exercised treaty rights in  United
    Kingdom.   The  Appellant  was  convicted  of  two  offences  involving
    dishonesty, both of which were for  the  ultimate  purpose  of  evading
    immigration control and were for all of these reasons serious offences.

 7. The Appellant applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain, in  the  identify
    of Tunde Lekan Balogun, on the basis of long residence on 3  May  2007,
    in which he did not declare  his  criminal  convictions  (he  expressly
    ticked no to the question of whether he had any criminal convictions in
    the UK or any other country and  did  not  complete  the  sections  for
    giving details  of  any  such  convictions)  and  the  application  was
    ultimately withdrawn on 14 April 2011.  The Appellant did not volunteer
    any explanation as to why he did  not  declare  his  then  very  recent
    criminal convictions in this application.  There can be  no  suggestion
    at that stage that the convictions were some time  ago  and  no  longer
    relevant.  The Appellant would have either still been in prison at that
    time or only very recently released.

 8. On 18 June 2007, the Appellant, in the identify  of  Olalekan  Olatunde
    Alli-Balogun, applied for an EEA Residence Card on the  basis  that  he
    had an Irish born child.  The application was refused on 4  March  2008
    and the Respondent has noted that at that time  the  Appellant  was  on
    bail in the identity of Tunde Lekan Balogun.  This appears  to  be  the
    first occasion on which the Appellant  used  his  full  name  with  the
    Respondent although  it  had  been  used,  for  example  on  the  birth
    certificates, prior to then.  There is no explanation  as  to  why  two
    different identities were used in two separate applications  made  less
    than two months apart to the Respondent.

 9. On 15 June 2007, the Appellant was served with a notice of decision  to
    make a deportation order by the Respondent, which  he  appealed  on  27
    August 2007.

10. On 28 September 2007, an application was made for an EEA Residence Card
    on behalf of the Appellant's  son,  with  linking  to  the  Appellant's
    identity of Olalekan Olatunde Alli Balogun and with no mention  of  his
    other identity or criminal convictions.  That application was refused.

11. In the first appeal decision against the notice of intention to  deport
    the Appellant, promulgated  on  20  November  2007,  Immigration  Judge
    Cockerill and Mr AP Richardson  JP  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant attended  the  hearing  and
    gave evidence but was not found to be a reliable or truthful witness on
    important  issues  concerning  his  case.   There  was  a   fundamental
    inconsistency over the date when he entered the country, asserting that
    he had arrived in 1998  to  the  Respondent  but  before  the  Tribunal
    asserted that he entered in April 1992 and  had  not  left  the  United
    Kingdom since.  He had also stated in evidence that he left in 2004  to
    go to Nigeria and it was found that his asylum application was  clearly
    not genuine for this reason.  At that time, the Appellant  was  not  in
    contact with his wife, in fact he could not trace her  at  all.   There
    was no reliance by the Appellant in the course of that  appeal  on  any
    relationship with his current partner or  children  born  in  2002  and
    2003, rather, the Appellant's claim was judged to be on the basis  that
    the Appellant perceived he would have  a  better  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, particularly for employment, than he would in Nigeria.

12. On 6 December  2007,  the  Appellant  was  encountered  by  immigration
    officers in Belfast attempting to travel to the Republic of Ireland  to
    visit his partner and children who lived there.  It was considered that
    he was attempting to abscond from bail granted  in  United  Kingdom  to
    travel to Ireland and was re-detained after seeking to frustrate his re-
    documentation.  At this time he would also have been in the process  of
    appealing against the first Tribunal decision  dismissing  his  appeal,
    which he was therefore clearly aware of when he  sought  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant was then granted  bail  on  21  December
    2007.

13. The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  from  the  first  Tribunal
    decision, which was granted and ultimately the appeal was  remitted  on
    EEA grounds only.  In the second appeal decision promulgated on 3 March
    2008, Immigration Judge M E Lewis and Mrs J Harris (non  legal  member)
    dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    Appellant appeared in person before them  on  19  February  2008.   The
    Appellant's written statement before that tribunal dated 23 August 2007
    relied on a continuing relationship with his Portuguese  wife,  with  a
    statement that although there were problems in 2004 with  a  threat  of
    divorce, they had reconciled and made an application to the council for
    accommodation wanting their own place  rather  than  living  in  shared
    accommodation.  It does not appear that there was any evidence  at  all
    from the Appellant's then wife.  Again, no  mention  was  made  by  the
    Appellant of his partner or two children.

14. The Tribunal  were  cautious  about  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    marriage was one of convenience at its inception and never intended  to
    be of any substance as they  did  not  have  a  copy  of  the  original
    application made to the Respondent, but made a clear finding  that  the
    evidence they did have was that the marriage had no substance  and  the
    Appellant's wife had  never  exercised  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The best evidence from the Appellant was the P60s  but  these
    were false and the subject of criminal charges.  Although the Appellant
    pleaded guilty, he sought to minimise his offending before the Tribunal
    (as he has continued to do in the course of this appeal) and was unable
    to give  any  satisfactory  answer  as  to  why  false  documents  were
    submitted if his wife was genuinely  working.   There  was  a  lack  of
    evidence of cohabitation and it was noted  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    propensity to use fraud such that what documents there were carried the
    possibility of someone using a false identity.

15. The Appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 20 March 2008.

16. The Appellant's evidence, supported by related documentation  from  the
    Irish authorities, is that he left  the  United  Kingdom  and  went  to
    Ireland around the middle of 2008 and we can  see  from  correspondence
    with the Irish authorities that he was there by 6 June 2008.  In  fact,
    the Appellant's evidence was that he was detained at Dublin airport  on
    that date, suggesting that he may have been detained on entry given the
    location  which  he  was  encountered.   The  Appellant  maintained  in
    evidence that he did not know of the  outcome  of  his  appeal  hearing
    before he left and had not chased it up since nor tried to find out the
    outcome.

17. The Appellant's evidence was that he was fed up  with  his  immigration
    difficulties but did not go to Ireland to escape them.  He went so  far
    as saying that he did not want  to  know  the  outcome  of  his  appeal
    because he had a strong belief that  in  any  event  he  would  not  be
    deported.  However, he also confirmed that if he had won his appeal  he
    would not have left the United Kingdom at all.  On the basis  that  the
    latter is true, combined with his claimed strong beliefs of winning his
    appeal,  it  is  inherently  implausible  and  inconceivable  that  the
    Appellant would have  left  the  United  Kingdom  without  knowing  the
    outcome of his appeal.  The suggestion that he relied on his lawyer  is
    also not credible in relation to the final outcome of his appeal  given
    that he was appearing in person without  legal  representation  by  the
    time of the second hearing in early 2008.

18. Contrary to his oral evidence, I find the Appellant was  clearly  aware
    of the outcome of the first Tribunal  decision  dismissing  his  appeal
    because he sought and obtained permission to appeal that  decision  and
    thereafter appeared in person before the second Tribunal  dealing  with
    the EEA aspect of his appeal.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence or otherwise to suggest that he had left  the  United  Kingdom
    before being notified of that second decision promulgated  on  3  March
    2008 and no reason why he would not therefore have received  it  before
    going to Ireland.  Contrary to the Appellant's  claim  that  he  simply
    left the United Kingdom without chasing the decision or waiting for it,
    I find that he knew full well that his appeal had been dismissed and  a
    Deportation Order was imminently likely.  That is also consistent  with
    what he told the Immigration Officer in August 2016  when  detained  on
    arrival from Nigeria, that he had fled  the  United  Kingdom  to  avoid
    deportation.

19. I find that the Appellant was fully aware that he had lost  his  appeal
    against deportation in the Tribunal and deliberately  fled  the  United
    Kingdom to avoid the almost inevitable consequences  of  a  Deportation
    Order being signed and served on him.  Of course, moving to Ireland was
    not in fact a solution to his immigration difficulties  in  the  United
    Kingdom, nor was it a viable option to avoid  immigration  difficulties
    more generally.  The Appellant entered Ireland unlawfully and there  is
    nothing to suggest he made  any  application  for  entry  clearance  to
    Ireland nor ever had any lawful leave to remain there either.

20. A Deportation Order was signed against the Appellant (in  the  name  of
    Tunde Lekan Balogun) on 8 May 2008 but could not be served on him as he
    was treated as an absconder from 3 March 2008 following his failure  to
    report in accordance with his bail conditions.

21. The Appellant accepts, for the reasons given by the Court of Appeal  in
    Decker that the Deportation Order signed against him  was  valid,  even
    though he claims to have been out of the United Kingdom  by  that  date
    (although it seems more likely that he went to Ireland at the beginning
    of June after the Deportation Order was signed, it  was  just  that  it
    could not be served on him because he had absconded).  In  Decker,  the
    Court of Appeal refers to the three effects of a Deportation Order, the
    first being the removal of a person from the United Kingdom, the second
    being the prohibition on the person re-entering the United  Kingdom  on
    the third, that any leave to enter or remain in United Kingdom given to
    a person before the order is made or whilst  in  force  is  invalidated
    (section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971).

22. However, the Appellant submitted that although valid,  the  Deportation
    Order was not effective against him unless and until he was served with
    it, or at least made aware of it, which did not happen until 2016/2017.
     That point was not directly addressed by the Court of Appeal in Decker
    and it is not apparent that any such argument was made to the Court  on
    that point.  In the alternative, the Appellant relies on the  House  of
    Lord's decision in Anufrijeva,  the  key  relevant  passages  of  which
    include as follows:

         "26. The arguments for the Home Secretary  ignore  the  fundamental
         principles of our law.  Notice of a decision is required before  it
         can have the character of a determination with legal effect because
         the individual concerned must be in a  position  to  challenge  the
         decision in the courts if he or she wishes to do so.  This is not a
         technical rule.  It is simply an application of the right of access
         to justice.  That is a fundamental and constitutional principle  of
         our legal system: Raymond v Honey [1983]  1  AC  1,  10G  per  Lord
         Wilberforce; R v Secretary of State for the Home Department,  ex  p
         Leech, [1994] QB 198, 209D; R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, Ex p Simms [2000] 2 AC 115.

         28.  This  view  is  reinforced  by  the  constitutional  principle
         requiring the rule of law  to  be  observed.   That  principle  too
         requires that a constitutional state must accord to individuals the
         right to know of a decision before their rights  can  be  adversely
         affected.  The antithesis of such a state was described by Kafka: a
         state where the rights of individuals are overridden by hole in the
         corner decisions or knocks on doors in the early  hours.   That  is
         not our system.  I accept, of course, that there must be exceptions
         to this approach, notably in the criminal field, e.g.  arrests  and
         search warrants, where notification is not  possible.   But  it  is
         difficult  to  visualise  a  rational  argument  which  could  even
         arguably justify  putting  the  present  case  in  the  exceptional
         category.  If this analysis is right, it also engages the principle
         of construction explained by Lord Hoffman in Simms.

         29.  In European  law  the  approach  is  possibly  a  little  more
         formalistic but the thrust is the same.  It has been held to  be  a
         "fundamental principle in the Community  legal  order  ...  that  a
         measure adopted by the public authorities shall not  be  applicable
         to those  concerned  before  they  have  the  opportunity  to  make
         themselves acquainted with it". ...

         30.  ...  Where  decisions  are  published  or  notified  to  those
         concerned  accountability  of  public  authorities   is   achieved.
         Elementary fairness therefore supports a principle that a  decision
         takes effect only upon communication."

23. Although  the  House  of  Lords  refer  to  fundamental  constitutional
    principles, the context  in  which  that  decision  was  made  is  very
    different to the one in this appeal.  The background to  the  challenge
    in that case was that the person had  their  Social  Security  benefits
    stopped from the date on which their asylum claim had been recorded  as
    determined, which itself was the result  of  specific  requirements  of
    notice set out in legislation.  The person had no notice at all of  the
    refusal  of  the  asylum  claim  and  therefore  no  warning   of   the
    consequences of that on the financial support she was  in  receipt  of.
    It is clear on the  facts  that  that  person  had  been  significantly
    adversely affected before having any knowledge of the decision  or  any
    opportunity to challenge it.

24. In the present appeal, the decision is a Deportation Order which is  of
    a fundamentally different character and was not subject to any  express
    requirements in primary legislation  or  otherwise  as  to  service  or
    notice of it.  It is  also  preceded  by  the  Respondent's  notice  of
    intention to make a deportation order, which carried with  it  at  that
    time a statutory right of appeal which this Appellant  duly  exercised.
    Although there may be reasons,  most  likely  administrative  failings,
    meaning  that  a  Deportation  Order  is  not  always  the   inevitable
    consequence of a notice of intention  to  deport  which  has  not  been
    successfully appealed, it is at least  the  expected  next  step  which
    could and should have been anticipated by the Appellant.

25. The Deportation Order itself  gave  rise  to  no  separate  of  appeal,
    although does  of  course  have  specific  consequences  to  the  named
    individual in terms of removal, prohibition of entry  and  invalidation
    of any leave to remain.  The removal part was of no practical effect in
    the present case because the  Appellant  voluntarily  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  That leaves the prohibition of entry and invalidation of  any
    possible future grant of leave to remain  as  the  formal  consequences
    which the Appellant claims to have been unaware of because he  was  not
    served with the Deportation Order.  However, from the process beginning
    with the notice of intention to deport  from  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant's subsequent appeal, the Appellant was or  should  have  been
    fully acquainted with the consequences and likelihood of a  Deportation
    Order being signed against him and not only had he a statutory right of
    appeal against the intention to deport  but  he  duly  exercised  this.
    There was also no statutory route by which he  could  mount  a  further
    challenge to the consequent Deportation Order itself.  This is not,  on
    its facts, a case in which it can be said that the  Appellant  had  not
    had the opportunity to acquaint himself with the situation nor that  he
    had not been given any opportunity to challenge  the  decision  in  the
    Courts.  There is therefore no breach of any fundamental constitutional
    principle of our legal system such as that  identified  in  Anufrijeva,
    nor any restriction on  access  to  justice  to  challenge  an  adverse
    decision before the consequences of it fully took effect.

26. In the alternative, if I am wrong to distinguish the application of the
    basic principles in Anufrijeva, on the stark difference  in  the  facts
    compared to the present appeal, I consider that in any event this would
    be an exceptional circumstance in which the usual principle  which  not
    apply.  That is the case not only because of the  history  of  decision
    making and appeal which precedes the  Deportation  Order  in  which  an
    individual has a full right of access to justice and knowledge  of  the
    basis for the decision  and  consequences,  but  also  because  of  the
    potential for the type of abuse identified by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Decker that a person  could  avoid  the  consequences  by  leaving  the
    country (or even by lesser methods to avoid service, as  in  this  case
    for example by absconding), even for a  short  period  of  time,  which
    would significantly undermine effective immigration  control  in  cases
    where there is  significant  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals and clearly set out consequences for those who do re-
    enter in breach of a Deportation Order.

27. In conclusion on this point therefore, the Deportation Order signed  on
    8 May 2008 in respect of this Appellant was valid  and  effective  from
    that date.

28. The Third Country Unit advised the Respondent on 6 June 2008  that  the
    Appellant was residing  in  Ireland  having  voluntarily  departed  the
    United Kingdom and therefore his Deportation Order was deemed enforced.
     The correspondence arose from the claim for asylum by the Appellant in
    Ireland, which was subsequently examined there due to information  that
    the Appellant had a partner and children residing in Ireland.  There is
    no further documentation or evidence in relation  to  this  application
    and it is presumed that it was unsuccessful.

29. On 20 November 2009, the Appellant's partner returned a  pro  forma  to
    the Respondent's Case Resolution Directorate naming the  Appellant  and
    the two children as her dependents, including a declaration of age  for
    the Appellant and birth certificates for the children.

30. The Appellant's third child was born  on  [~]  2009,  with  the  father
    listed  as  Olatunde  Olalekan  Alli-Balogun,  a  student  resident  in
    Ireland.

31. In their written statements, the Appellant and his partner  both  refer
    to returning to the United Kingdom in February 2010, although that  was
    not consistent with their oral evidence.  The Appellant claimed to have
    returned later in 2010 after the grant of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,
    such that he was returning with settled status.  He  specifically  said
    that he travelled back with his partner and children as  a  family,  at
    the same time.  To the contrary, the Appellant's  partner  stated  that
    she had always been coming back and forth to the  United  Kingdom  from
    Ireland and that  they  returned  permanently  in  either  November  or
    December 2010, several months after the Appellant did.  When asked  for
    clarification, she  then  thought  that  she  might  have  returned  in
    September 2010 or even in 2011, but was consistent in her evidence that
    she did not return with the Appellant.  It was not possible to tell the
    date of return by the use of an address in London in June and September
    2010 because of her use  of  that  address  on  and  off  whenever  the
    Appellant's partner returned to the United Kingdom from Ireland.   That
    explanation was not specifically relied upon by the Appellant who  sent
    correspondence from a London address in July 2010  and  had  previously
    used different addresses in the United Kingdom.

32. I find that the Appellant returned to the United  Kingdom  in  February
    2010 as originally and consistently claimed in the  written  statements
    made by himself and his partner, all of which were formally adopted  by
    the witnesses  at  the  outset  of  their  oral  evidence  without  any
    corrections.  The only plausible explanation for that position to  have
    changed in oral evidence was to fit the date of return  to  the  United
    Kingdom after the grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain in September 2010
    which was pointed out to the Appellant and his partner as  being  after
    their return, and thus inconsistent with the Appellant's claim to  have
    been returning lawfully to the United Kingdom with settled status.  The
    Appellant has failed, on the balance of probabilities  to  provide  any
    supporting evidence of when he returned to the  United  Kingdom  and  I
    make  this  finding  taking  into  account  the  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence, the  rational  explanation  for  the  inconsistency  and  the
    documentary evidence from the Appellant from a London address  in  July
    2010 indicating that he had returned to the country by then.   Contrary
    to the evidence in relation to the Appellant's  partner  and  children,
    there was no suggestion that the Appellant was fluidly  moving  between
    the two countries, only that he  had  moved  to  Ireland  in  2008  and
    returned in 2010.

33. In his written statement, the Appellant states that he was  unaware  of
    the Deportation Order against him at the time  of  his  return  to  the
    United Kingdom and if he was, he would have remained in Ireland  rather
    than breach the United Kingdom's immigration laws.  I did not find  his
    explanation on this to be credible  and  was  contrary  to  his  entire
    immigration history to date which had showed a consistent  and  blatant
    disregard for the immigration rules of  both  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Ireland, even to the extent that he  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to
    imprisonment for seeking leave to remain by deception.  The  suggestion
    by the Appellant that all of a sudden in 2010 that he would not have re-
    entered the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  immigration  law  is  not
    credible.

34. However, whether or not he was aware of the Deportation Order, for  the
    reasons set out above, it was in any event valid and effective  whether
    he returned in February 2010 or later after  the  grant  of  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain in September 2010 (which pursuant to  section  5(1)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971 was invalidated by the Deportation Order)  and
    therefore he entered the United Kingdom in breach  of  the  Deportation
    Order.  Paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules  therefore  applies  to
    this Appellant such as  that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  for  a
    Deportation Order to be enforced  unless  there  are  very  exceptional
    circumstances to outweigh that significant public interest.

35. Even on the Appellant's claim that he was unaware  of  the  Deportation
    Order, he in any event breached immigration law by returning unlawfully
    prior to the purported grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain, without any
    entry clearance or leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  That conduct
    is consistent with the Appellant's  criminal  and  immigration  history
    including multiple  breaches.   As  the  Appellant's  partner  candidly
    accepted in her written statement, the family decided to remain in  the
    United Kingdom in February 2010 regardless of  the  immigration  threat
    because they no longer had any fear of removal from the United  Kingdom
    because their children were Irish  citizens.   Her  travel  to  Ireland
    being undertaken deliberately so that her children would be born there,
    thus obtaining Irish citizenship and avoiding  a  lack  of  immigration
    status in the United Kingdom which she and  the  Appellant  as  parents
    have since sought to benefit from.

36. On  21  May  2010,  the  Respondent  wrote  to  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives requesting information as to when the Appellant entered
    the United Kingdom and what he has been doing during his time here, for
    example to provide wage slips.  Further information was also  requested
    about the Appellant's partner's time in the United  Kingdom  and  about
    the children, for example school reports.  A further letter was sent to
    the Appellant's partner directly on 16 June 2010 requesting information
    about her and the Appellant including information  on  what  they  have
    done since the time  in  the  United  Kingdom,  friends,  social  life,
    employment and so on as well as a further request  for  school  reports
    evidence in relation to their children.

37. The Appellant responded to this correspondence on 1 July 2010, from  an
    address in London, stating that 'due to our circumstances we have  been
    moving from one place to the other in the course of this we  have  been
    unable to keep records of most documents.'  There followed a  plea  for
    compassion in their case.  It is not apparent that any of the questions
    asked by the Respondent were answered nor any documents  enclosed  with
    the reply.  There is only a letter from a GP practice dated 6 July 2010
    confirming that the Appellant's partner is registered as a  patient  at
    the practice and has been since 7 February 2001, with  visits  in  2004
    and 2005.  It is not clear if or when that document  was  submitted  to
    the Respondent.

38. Although technically the Appellant's claim  that  he  was  never  asked
    about any criminal convictions or use of different  identities  in  the
    process leading to the grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain to him,  his
    partner and children appears to be correct (the  Respondent  not  being
    able to show any such specific enquiries having been made), it is clear
    from his response on 1 July 2010 that he was being  evasive  about  his
    circumstances and I would find deliberately  so,  consistent  with  his
    history of use  of  deception  and  evasiveness  to  avoid  immigration
    control.  A direct question was asked  about  when  the  Appellant  had
    entered the United Kingdom, what he had been doing and in particular of
    any employment and he simply responded that he has  not  been  able  to
    keep records of documents.  That fails to answer any of  the  questions
    posed  and  specifically  fails  to  notify  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant had not in fact even been in the United Kingdom between  2008
    and earlier in 2010.  The bland reference to moving from one  place  to
    another I find is deliberately vague and contrary  to  the  Appellant's
    partner's evidence that at least she maintained the use of a consistent
    address in the United Kingdom throughout  the  time  that  she  was  in
    Ireland from 2002 until her return, whether permanently or on  a  fluid
    basis living between the two countries or at least frequently  visiting
    one from the other.

39. The Appellant's partner,  together  with  her  listed  dependents  were
    granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  13
    September 2010.  It is however apparent from the  Respondent's  records
    that that grant was made on a mistaken factual basis, namely  that  the
    Appellant's partner  had  been  continuously  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 10 years and nine months, together with her partner and two
    children born in the United Kingdom, all living together  as  a  family
    unit.  PNC checks were said to have been  complete  and  there  was  no
    evidence of employment  submitted  or  on  file.   However,  the  birth
    certificates submitted by the Appellant's partner shows  that  the  two
    children were born in  Ireland  and  the  evidence  before  me,  albeit
    inconsistent and contradictory in a number  of  respects  (to  which  I
    return further below), was that the Appellant's  partner  and  children
    had resided in Ireland for at least some of the  period  (between  2002
    and 2010, although neither the Appellant his  partner  give  any  clear
    evidence on this point) and had not always resided  as  a  family  unit
    with the Appellant.

40. On 8 February 2011, the Appellant applied for a no time limit stamp  to
    transfer his Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,  in  the  name  of  Olalekan
    Olatunde Alli-Balogun into his Nigerian passport.  In that  application
    he was expressly asked whether he or any dependents who  were  applying
    with him had any criminal convictions in the UK or  any  other  country
    (including traffic offences) or any civil judgements made against  him.
    The box for 'no' was ticked and the space to  include  details  of  any
    such convictions was left blank.  The  form  included  a  note  on  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 as enabling  criminal  convictions
    to become spent or ignored after a rehabilitation period, the length of
    such periods depending on the sentence given in this opposed to further
    information and advice is given.  The  Appellant  did  not  suggest  in
    evidence that he considered his conviction  to  have  become  spent  in
    accordance with this Act and  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  in
    section 5 of the same, it would not be in any event be treated as spent
    until 17 May 2012.

41. In oral evidence, the Appellant stated that he did  not  complete  this
    application for a no time-limit stamp in  his  passport,  that  it  was
    completed by his partner, although he accepted that  the  signature  at
    the end of the document was his.  A similar  application  made  by  the
    Appellant's partner  on  16  August  2011  shows  distinctly  different
    handwriting and in her own oral  evidence  she  denied  completing  the
    Appellant's form.  In the alternative the Appellant appeared to suggest
    that he thought he did not need to disclose his criminal conviction due
    to the passage of  time  since  he  received  it  and  because  he  had
    effectively been pardoned by the Respondent prior to or at the time  he
    was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.  I find the Appellant completed
    the application form himself (and claimed his partner did so so  as  to
    distance himself from yet a further example of dishonest  conduct)  and
    deliberately lied to the Respondent to conceal his past conviction,  as
    he also did in 2007 when making an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    which omitted his then very recent conviction.  For  the  reasons  also
    set out elsewhere in this decision, there is no reasonable or  rational
    basis upon which the Appellant could have thought that he  had  somehow
    been pardoned from his previous offences, or that the Respondent had no
    further interest in deporting him.  There is  nothing  to  suggest  any
    active consideration by  the  Respondent,  no  representations  by  the
    Appellant, no evidence provided by him to the  Respondent  for  example
    what he had been doing or rehabilitation and no basis  upon  which  the
    Respondent could or would review the Appellant's circumstances at  this
    or any other time.  The deliberate false answer to the  question  about
    convictions is just one  of  many  examples  of  the  Appellant  acting
    deliberately and dishonestly to evade immigration control.

42. The Appellant in his written statement and submissions  more  generally
    relied upon his re-entry to the United Kingdom in 2012  and  2014  from
    Nigeria,  which  in  his  written  statement  he  said  included   full
    disclosure to the Immigration Officer at the time  about  his  previous
    convictions and other identities.  However, he did  not  maintain  that
    statement in oral evidence when challenged as to why he would do so  if
    he genuinely thought he had been pardoned with no further intention  to
    deport him  in  2010.   I  find  the  Appellant  lied  in  his  written
    statement, seeking to elevate his re-entry to  the  United  Kingdom  as
    being based on a full assessment of his history after full  disclosure,
    whereas in fact, the Appellant continued to do  what  he  had  on  many
    occasions in the past, which is not to mention his criminal conviction,
    his alternative name or date of birth and hope that the Respondent  did
    not notice the same.

43. A letter from the Royal Borough of  Greenwich  dated  30  August  2016,
    stated that the they had been involved with  the  Appellant's  children
    under a Child in Need plan and in November 2015,  the  Appellant's  son
    had gone to reside with his father, although has since been returned to
    his mother's care.  This strongly indicates that the Appellant has  not
    been living consistently with his partner in a family unit as  claimed.
    Similarly, as above there is nothing to suggest that the Appellant  and
    his partner were residing together  between  2002  and  2008  when  she
    predominantly lived in Ireland (particularly in the latter  years  when
    the eldest child was in full-time education) and where there is nothing
    to suggest that the couple were  even  in  the  same  country  for  any
    consistent period of time, in fact to the contrary, the Appellant  gave
    evidence to a previous Tribunal that he was in Nigeria in 2004 and  the
    birth certificates of his two eldest children also supported him living
    there in 2002 and 2003.  In addition, at this time he was claiming,  up
    to at least 2008, that he was in a genuine and subsisting marriage with
    a Portuguese national and no mention  had  been  made  of  his  current
    partner or children at the time.

44. As to the more recent position, it is clear from  the  social  services
    letter that the Appellant and his partner had not been living  together
    as a family unit at least in November 2015.  The Appellant's  partner's
    oral evidence also indicated that the current  position  was  that  the
    Appellant did not live with her on a full-time basis, given that he had
    been bailed to his brother's address and spent time  there  other  than
    when she was working nights when he had to stay with his children.

45. On 22 August 2016, the Appellant was detained on arrival  from  Nigeria
    returning in breach of a  Deportation  Order  following  a  fingerprint
    match showing both of his claimed identities.   When  interviewed,  the
    Appellant accepted he had used two different identities  and  had  left
    the  United  Kingdom  previously  to  avoid  deportation,  although  he
    maintained he had not  obtained  his  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  by
    deception.  The Appellant was served with the detention  paperwork  and
    was scheduled return to Nigeria on 26 August 2016, however removal  was
    deferred further to an application for Judicial Review  and  subsequent
    agreement for the Respondent to consider human rights  representations.
    At this time the Appellant's Indefinite Leave to Remain was revoked due
    to the signed Deportation Order  and  that  part  of  the  Respondent's
    decisions were upheld in the application for Judicial Review.  In fact,
    given the operation of section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971,  there
    was no need to revoke the Indefinite Leave to Remain on the basis  that
    it was obtained by deception because it was in any event invalidated by
    operation of statute because the Deportation Order was in force.

46. As to the Appellant's current circumstances, it was not  disputed  that
    he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  partner  (who
    has now naturalised as a British Citizen) and three  children  (all  of
    whom are Irish nationals) in  the  United  Kingdom,  albeit  there  are
    factors in the evidence  which  undermined  that,  including  that  the
    Appellant married someone else in 2002, the lack  of  evidence  of  any
    cohabitation between the Appellant and his  partner  between  2000  and
    2008, that the couple were not living together  at  least  in  November
    2015 and that they are only partially  cohabiting  now,  it  seems  for
    childcare reasons.  The Appellant  provides  day-to-day  care  for  his
    children and as per the preserved findings of fact from the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is in the children's  best  interests  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with both parents, including the  Appellant.   There  is
    also evidence from the Appellant and his brother and sister  about  the
    relationship the Appellant has with their children and the  support  he
    also provides to them, which has not been  specifically  challenged  by
    the Respondent.

47. Overall and for the reasons set out above, I did not find the Appellant
    to be a credible witness,  nor  did  his  partner  give  consistent  or
    reliable evidence about the  relationship  and  her  circumstances,  in
    particular where she was living or even which country she was living in
    for what period of time.  On the limited evidence before me, I find  it
    more likely than not that the Appellant's partner  was  living/residing
    in Ireland between 2002 and 2010, with only short visits  back  to  the
    United Kingdom  during  that  period.   The  Appellant's  evidence  was
    inconsistent and evasive and there is almost a  complete  lack  of  any
    supporting documentary evidence for many of the claims he has made  all
    to support his travel residents to and  from  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Ireland and to from Nigeria in the past.  I also bear in mind that  the
    Appellant has convictions for offences  of  dishonesty,  has  continued
    since those convictions to fail to answer  direct  questions  from  the
    Respondent about his  convictions  honestly  or  at  best  has  avoided
    answering questions which  could  identify  his  adverse  criminal  and
    immigration history.

48. I find the most reliable part of the evidence  to  be  the  Appellant's
    partner's candid admission in her written statement that she  organised
    her life and place of residence according to  the  perceived  means  of
    either mitigating her lack of immigration status in the United  Kingdom
    or using  of  the  Irish  nationality  of  her  children,  deliberately
    obtained by travelling there to give birth  when  there  was  no  other
    reason to go or connection with the country and which expressly  sought
    to avoid a consequence of removal from the  United  Kingdom.   Although
    the Appellant's partner's grant of Indefinite Leave to  Remain  appears
    to be based on factual errors by the Respondent, at  least  as  to  the
    nationality of her children, the responses given to enquiries  made  by
    the Respondent by the Appellant were deliberately evasive and  did  not
    admit to the number of years or even any time spent living in Ireland.

49. Considering all of the evidence and the above history in the  round,  I
    find that the Appellant and his partner have conducted themselves  over
    an extended number of years in a way which  has  been  to  deliberately
    avoid immigration  control,  either  by  dishonesty  (for  example,  by
    stating that there were no criminal  convictions  and  by  the  use  of
    deception in an application for leave to remain for which the Appellant
    was successfully prosecuted), omission (for example, in the Appellant's
    reply in 2010 to the Respondent which gave  no  actual  details  as  to
    where he had been or what he had been doing in the preceding years)  or
    deliberate acts such as the Appellant fleeing the United Kingdom to try
    to avoid the consequences of deportation and the Appellant's  partner's
    move to Ireland to  obtain  Irish  nationality  for  the  children  and
    thereby rely on the same to avoid removal from the United  Kingdom  due
    to her own previous lack of immigration status.

50. Against those  background  facts  I  consider  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 30  March  2007,  refusing  the
    Appellant's  human  rights  application/application   to   revoke   the
    Deportation Order.  The relevant parts of the Immigration  Rules  which
    apply are set out directly below.

54.  Paragraph  390  and  following  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out
    provisions relating to the revocation of a deportation order, which  so
    far as relevant to the present appeal provide as follows:

         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

             i) the grounds on which the order was made;

            ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

           iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of
                an effective immigration control;

            iv) the interests of the applicant, including any  compassionate
                circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391. In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction for criminal offence, the continuation of a  deportation
         order against a person will be the proper course:

                (a)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than four years, unless 10  years  have  elapsed  since  the
                making of the deportation order when, if an application  for
                revocation is received, consideration will  be  given  on  a
                case-by-case basis with  the  deportation  order  should  be
                maintained, or ...

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating  to
         the  Status  of  Refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors.

         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
         be authorised unless the situation  has  been  materially  altered,
         either by change of circumstances since the order was made,  or  by
         fresh  information  coming  to  light  which  was  not  before  the
         appellate authorities or the Secretary of State.   The  passage  of
         time since the person was deported may also  in  itself  amount  to
         such a change of circumstances as one revocation of the order."

         ...

         398. Where a person claims that the deportation would  be  contrary
         to the U.K.'s obligations under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

                (a)    ...

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  U.K.'s
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than four years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)    ... the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim
                will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if
                it does not, the public interest in deportation will only be
                outweighed by other factors where there are very  compelling
                circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
                399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is
                in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                    least seven years immediately preceding the date of  the
                    immigration decision; and in either case

                     a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to leave the
                        country to which the person is to be deported; and

                     b) it would be unduly harsh of the child to remain  in
                        the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or
                settled in the UK, and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                    person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
                    immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh with that partner sliver
                    the country to which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,
                    because of compelling circumstances over and above those
                    described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                    remain in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                    deported.

         ...

         399D.    Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the
         deportation orders in the public interest and will  be  implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.

55. The Appellant submitted that paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules is
    not applicable to him, first because  the  Deportation  Order  was  not
    effective at the date he returned to the United Kingdom  and  secondly,
    because he had not in fact been  deported.   For  the  reasons  already
    given above, the Deportation Order was valid  and  effective  from  the
    date it was signed, 8 May 2008 and the  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 in breach of it.

56. As to the second submission, the Appellant cannot  seek  to  avoid  the
    application of paragraph 399D by virtue of the fact that he voluntarily
    fled the United Kingdom rather than waiting  to  have  his  deportation
    enforced by the Respondent, particularly in circumstances where he  had
    absconded whilst on bail.  On the basis of the same reasoning given  by
    the Court of Appeal in the case of Decker, it is not a precondition  of
    the application of paragraph 399D that a person has  been  deported  by
    the Respondent (i.e. his removal being enforced by the Respondent),  it
    is sufficient that a Deportation Order has in effect been enforced by a
    person voluntarily leaving the  United  Kingdom,  particularly  in  the
    circumstances in the present appeal.  To find  otherwise  would  be  to
    significantly undermine  effective  immigration  control  and  allow  a
    person to effectively avoid the  full  consequences  of  a  Deportation
    Order by voluntarily leaving the United Kingdom on his own volition.

57. In the present appeal, pursuant to paragraph 399D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, the  test  is  therefore  whether  there  are  very  exceptional
    circumstances to outweigh the  public  interest  in  enforcement  of  a
    Deportation Order, a test which is more onorous on the  Appellant  than
    the unduly harsh criteria in the exceptions to deportation and the test
    of very compelling circumstances in  paragraphs  398  to  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As the Court of Appeal found in Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  v  SU  (Pakistan)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1069  at
    paragraph 45;

         "The difference  in  the  language  of  paragraphs  398  and  399D,
         suggesting a  more  stringent  requirement  under  paragraph  399D,
         reflect the real difference in the circumstances  covered  by  each
         paragraph.   Paragraph  398  addresses  the  question   whether   a
         deportation order should be made, or an existing order  maintained,
         against a person who has yet to be deported, whereas paragraph 399D
         addresses the very different case of a person who has been deported
         and then re-entered illegally and in breach of that order.  In  the
         latter case, any Article 8 claim that was raised  by  the  deportee
         before his original deportation will, it is hypothesised, have been
         decided against him.  It is  readily  understandable  that  in  the
         cases covered by paragraph 399D of the Secretary  of  State  should
         have formed the view that there is  a  particularly  strong  public
         interest in maintaining the integrity of the deportation system  as
         it applies to foreign criminals."

58. That is in effect to say that the hurdle faced by the Appellant is even
    higher than being able to show that the situation is  unduly  harsh  on
    family members and even higher than the need to show  very  exceptional
    circumstances for those situations in  which  a  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of over four years or who does  not
    otherwise individually meet either of the exceptions.   Whilst  bearing
    in mind that higher hurdle, it is useful to start with  a  reminder  of
    the  application  of  the  normal  rules  to  be  considered  before  a
    Deportation Order is made.  These were set out by the Supreme Court  in
    the case of Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60, by reference to  the  then  new  Immigration  Rules  in
    paragraph 399 and 399A, confirming the approach  to  be  considered  to
    these provisions and the task of the tribunal as follows:

         "38. The implication of the new rules is that rules  399  and  399A
         identify particular categories of case in which  the  Secretary  of
         State accepts that the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by  countervailing  factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four  years,  or  who  have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of rules  399
         and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
         such  offenders,  but  that  it  can  be  outweighed,  applying   a
         proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:  in  other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as  Laws  LJ  put  it  in SS
         (Nigeria).  The  countervailing   considerations   must   be   very
         compelling in order to outweigh the general public interest in  the
         deportation of such offenders, as assessed by  Parliament  and  the
         Secretary of State. The Strasbourg jurisprudence indicates relevant
         factors to consider, and rules 399 and 399A provide  an  indication
         of the sorts of matters which the Secretary  of  State  regards  as
         very compelling. As explained at para 26 above,  they  can  include
         factors bearing on  the  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the particular offender, such as his  conduct  since
         the offence was committed, as  well  as  factors  relating  to  his
         private or family life. Cases falling within the scope  of  section
         32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in  deportation  is
         outweighed, other than those specified in the new rules themselves,
         are likely to be a very small minority (particularly in non-settled
         cases). They need not necessarily involve any circumstance which is
         exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the
         Secretary of State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007] 2  AC
         167, para 20), but  they  can  be  said  to  involve  "exceptional
         circumstances" in the sense that they involve a departure from  the
         general rule.

         50.  In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out  its  task  on
         the basis of the facts as it finds  them  to  be  on  the  evidence
         before it, and the law as established  by  statute  and  case  law.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether deportation  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation  of  the  offender  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to Parliament's and  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessments of the strength of the general public interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders, as explained in paras  14,  37-38
         and 46 above,  and  also  consider  all  factors  relevant  to  the
         specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal will
         generally be whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation of  the  offender  in  the  case
         before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to  outweigh
         it. In general, only a claim which is very  strong  indeed  -  very
         compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."

59. The Supreme Court also recommended  to  the  Tribunal  a  balance-sheet
    approach when undertaking the proportionality  assessment,  considering
    the factors in favour and against an appellant.

60. In addition, by virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), a court or tribunal  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts reaches  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8
    and as result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998 must in all cases have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act and in cases concerning the deportation of
    foreign criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C of  the
    same.  So far as relevant to the present appeal, section 117B  provides
    as follows:

          1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

          2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

               a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

               b) are better able to integrate into society.

          3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

               a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

               b) are better able to integrate into society.

          4) Little weight should be given to -

               a) a private life, or

               b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

          5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

61. So far as relevant to the present  appeal,  section  117C  provides  as
    follows:

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

          2) The more serious the offence committed  by  foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

          3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             one or Exception to applies.

          4) Exception 1 ...

          5) Exception to applies where  C  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

          6) In the case of a foreign criminal  has  been  sentenced  to  a
             period  of  imprisonment  at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest required deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  Exceptions
             one and two.

62. These statutory provisions, which were not in  force  at  the  relevant
    date of the facts which arose in the case of Hesham Ali, have  recently
    been considered by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53, with  the  focus  on  the
    assessment within the exception to as to whether deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on a family member, which remains relevant when looking at
    whether a person can show "very compelling reasons" over and above  the
    exceptions, or in this case, the even  more  stringent  requirement  to
    show very exceptional circumstances.  The Supreme court summarised  the
    applicable test for the second exception as follows:

         "22.  Given  that  exception  1  is  self-contained,  it  would  be
         surprising to find exception 2 structured in a different  way.   On
         its face it raises a factual issue seen from the point of  view  of
         the partner or child:  would  the  effect  of  C's  deportation  be
         "unduly harsh"?  Although the language is perhaps less precise than
         that of exception 1, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  the  word
         "unduly" is intended as a reference back to the issue  of  relative
         seriousness introduced by subsection (2).  Like  exception  1,  and
         like the test of "reasonableness" under section 117B,  exception  2
         appears self-contained.

         23.  On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of harshness, that is a level  which  may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons".  That would be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

63. I turn now to the Appellant's circumstances and those of his family  to
    conduct the proportionality exercise to  determine  whether  there  are
    very exceptional circumstances to outweigh the very significant  public
    interest in his deportation from the United Kingdom in accordance  with
    the provisions set out above, starting in this case with paragraph 399D
    of the Immigration Rules and using the proposed balance-sheet approach.

64. The factors in favour of maintaining the Deportation  Order  this  case
    are as follows.  First,  as  is  clear  from  section  117C(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is in the  public  interest  (as  is  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control pursuant to section 117B(1)).   Secondly,
    there is a very significant public interest not only the deportation of
    foreign criminals but in maintaining a Deportation Order  against  such
    persons  who  have  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  a
    Deportation Order.  Thirdly, the Appellant has been  convicted  of  two
    serious offences of dishonesty, including  using  deception  to  obtain
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and has  consistently  failed  to
    disclose those convictions, even  when  asked  a  direct  and  specific
    question about  past  convictions.   Fourthly,  the  Appellant  has  an
    exceptionally poor immigration history, aside from being issued with an
    EEA Residence Card  in  2000  (the  correctness  of  which  has  to  be
    questioned in light of the subsequent findings of the Tribunal in  2008
    and the Appellant's  conviction  for  relying  on  false  documents  in
    relation to a subsequent application for  permanent  residence  on  the
    same basis), the Appellant has never had lawful leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has made  numerous  unsuccessful  applications  for
    leave to remain and has, for the reasons already given above,  shown  a
    blatant disregard for the laws of the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant
    and his partner have deliberately contrived on numerous occasions  over
    a  significant  period  of  time  to  create  circumstances  in   which
    immigration control can be evaded  and/or  avoided  with  the  ultimate
    objective of remaining in the United Kingdom.

65. The Appellant relies on having been granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain
    in the United Kingdom in 2010,  which  was  not  curtailed  until  2016
    (however as stated above, pursuant to section 5(1) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971,  it  was  invalidated  immediately  by  the  existence  of  a
    Deportation Order) and upon which he claims to have legitimately relied
    to continue to exercise and strengthen his family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a number of years, with what  he  claims  is  a  reasonable
    belief that he had been pardoned for previous offences.  Although it is
    clear from the face of the contemporaneous paperwork from the grant  of
    Indefinite Leave to Remain to the Appellant, his partner  and  children
    that errors were made by the Respondent in making the grant which  were
    not directly attributable to the Appellant or his partner, it  is  also
    clear from evidence around this time from the  Appellant  that  he  was
    less than open  and  honest  with  the  Respondent  as  to  his  actual
    circumstances which is likely to have contributed to the grant as well.

66. Further, the Appellant's evidence that he made a full disclosure as  to
    his criminal immigration history to an Immigration Officer on return to
    the United Kingdom from Nigeria in 2012 and 2014 was not maintained  in
    his oral evidence and I have not found even the original  claim  to  be
    consistent as it is not plausible that  the  Appellant  would  suddenly
    start making such disclosures after a long history of failing to do  so
    and in fact falsely answering questions and it is inconsistent with his
    claim to have thought that he had somehow been pardoned in 2010 with no
    further immigration problems.

67. Although the unusual circumstances in this case of a  person  remaining
    in the United Kingdom for an extended period of time, pursuant to  what
    appeared to  be  a  grant  of  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  (although
    curtailed and/or  invalid  from  its  start)  may  allow  a  person  to
    strengthen their private and family life in the United Kingdom, in  the
    same way that delay by the Respondent may do so  (for  example  in  the
    case of MN-T (Colombia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 893), I do not find that it reduces the public interest
    in deportation and can only potentially be relevant to  whether  it  is
    outweighed by very exceptional circumstances.   It  is  however  to  be
    noted that in MN-T, the individual was entirely blameless and no  fault
    could be attributed to her at all for the Respondent's delay in signing
    a Deportation Order.  Although in the present case it is clear that the
    Respondent  at  least  had  constructive  knowledge  of  the   multiple
    identities used by the Appellant at the  latest  by  2008,  (given  the
    fingerprint matches and correspondence with the Irish authorities which
    acknowledge both identities) the Appellant continued to  contribute  to
    the circumstances in which this was not detected and no action taken by
    the Respondent.

68. As to the factors in favour of the Appellant, he  relies  primarily  on
    family life  with  his  partner  and  three  children.   The  preserved
    findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal in this case are that the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting family life with his partner and
    three children and that it would be in  the  best  interests  of  those
    children to remain in the United Kingdom with both parents.   Over  and
    above that, on behalf of  the  Appellant  it  was  submitted  that  the
    relationship the Appellant has with  his  children  is  a  particularly
    close one, greater than the average given that he is the primary  carer
    for them due to their mother's work and study.  It was  suggested  that
    his removal would therefore have a greater effect on the children  than
    it would in the circumstances of a more average relationship.   On  the
    facts, that submission must be slightly countered by the fact that  the
    Appellant  has  not  historically,  or  even  at   the   present   date
    consistently cohabited with the family, not residing with them prior to
    2008 and not continuously or on a full-time basis since returned to the
    United Kingdom in 2010.  They were living apart in 2015 when one of the
    children went to live with the Appellant for an unknown period of  time
    and at the present date the Appellant lives with his  brother  pursuant
    to conditions of his bail, only staying  with  his  children  when  his
    partner's working nights.

69. There was a paucity of evidence before me as to the  likely  effect  on
    the Appellant's partner and children if he were  to  be  deported,  and
    what there was  went  no  further  than  describing  the  ordinary  and
    inevitable consequences of the deportation of a parent which  is  trite
    to say has  an  adverse  impact  on  family  members  and  children  in
    particular.  I reject entirely the submission that the  effect  on  the
    children would be greater because of a closer than average relationship
    with the Appellant, given  that  this  as  well  would  be  the  normal
    consequences of deportation of a parent who is more likely to be a day-
    to-day primary carer of children because, being subject to  deportation
    proceedings, that person would have no entitlement to work,  such  that
    the  other  parent  would  therefore  have  to  assume  the  burden  of
    employment or providing for the family.  At its highest,  the  evidence
    on behalf of the Appellant in this  regard  falls  far  short  even  of
    establishing that the effect of deportation would be  unduly  harsh  on
    his partner or children.  For the avoidance of doubt, although  it  was
    stated in the original refusal letter from the Respondent that it would
    not be unduly harsh for the children in particular to relocate with the
    Appellant to Nigeria, this was not positively asserted before me,  with
    the focus during the hearing and in the evidence as to  the  effect  on
    the Appellant's partner  and  children  if  they  remained  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  It is of course remains a matter of choice as  to
    whether the family would relocate to Nigeria with the Appellant.

70. Secondly, the Appellant also relies on  relationships  with  his  wider
    family members in the United Kingdom, in  particular  his  brother  and
    sister and their children.  I had before me detailed  evidence  of  the
    difficult family circumstances of the Appellant's brother in particular
    and the role the Appellant has played in supporting his brother and his
    children  through  difficult  times  after  bereavement  and  during  a
    continuing period of ill-health.  However, the Appellant is  not  in  a
    parental relationship with his siblings' children and if deported  they
    would remain with their primary carers, their  parents  with  at  least
    some family support remaining, even if less than or different  to  what
    the Appellant is currently doing for them.

71. Thirdly, the Deportation Order was signed over 10 years ago in May 2008
    and the index offence which triggered this was in 2006, since  when  he
    has  not  reoffended  and  it  was  therefore  submitted  that  he  had
    rehabilitated during the period  of  nearly  13  years.   Although  the
    Deportation Order was signed over 10 years ago, it has  of  course  not
    been properly enforced for that period given  that  the  Appellant  re-
    entered the United Kingdom in 2010.  In fact, he was only away from the
    United Kingdom for less than  two  years  of  that  period.   In  these
    circumstances,  paragraph  391  of  the  Immigration  Rules   and   the
    Respondent's policy as to the maintenance of a Deportation Order  after
    a passage of 10 years where there has been a sentence  of  imprisonment
    of less than four years can offer no positive weight in the Appellant's
    favour, nor can it reduce the public interest in deportation.

72. Fourthly, as set out above,  the  Appellant  relies  on  the  delay  in
    enforcing his Deportation Order since his return to the United  Kingdom
    in 2010 and the period of nearly 6  years  during  which  he  had  what
    appeared to be a grant of Indefinite Leave to  Remain  here.   For  the
    reasons set out above that period is taken into account as part of  the
    Appellant's family life in the United  Kingdom,  which  has  inevitably
    been strengthened during this period, albeit commenced during a  period
    when he had no leave to  remain  such  that  section  117B(4)  applies.
    However, in the circumstances where the Appellant  has  contributed  to
    that situation by his own conduct, this factor has a  relatively  minor
    positive effect in the proportionality exercise.

73. Fifthly, the Appellant speaks English and it is said that he  would  be
    financially independent given permission to work in the United Kingdom,
    but those factors in section 117B(2) and (3) have  any  neutral  rather
    than positive weight to be placed on the balance for the Appellant.

74.  Finally,  the  Appellant  relies  on  there  cumulatively  being  very
    exceptional circumstances, given the unusual recent situation and grant
    of Indefinite Leave to Remain as well as the strength  of  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom over an extended period of time.

75. I have weighed up all of the facts  and  circumstances  in  this  case,
    balancing the very significant public interest  factors  in  favour  of
    deportation against all of those factors outlined above and during  the
    course of the hearing in favour of the Appellant and find that in  this
    case the Appellant has not established very  exceptional  circumstances
    to outweigh the very significant public interest  in  his  deportation.
    The Appellant's conduct and history significantly increases the already
    weighty public interest in his  deportation  further  to  his  criminal
    conviction and there is simply nothing even arguably  approaching  very
    exceptional circumstances, even on the  slightly  unusual  facts,  that
    could outweigh the public interest.  The Appellant's family life,  even
    taking into account that this has been strengthened  between  2010  and
    2016, combined with all of the factors cumulatively falls far short  of
    the test given the paucity of evidence of even an unduly  harsh  impact
    on family members in the event of deportation.  Mere assertion of  this
    based on a closer than average  relationship  is  wholly  insufficient.
    The Appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed on all grounds.


76. Even if I am wrong as to the applicable test  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in this case (if paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules  does
    not apply), I would not in any event have found that the Appellant  met
    either exception in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules  or  section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (because  the
    effect of his deportation would not be unduly harsh on his  partner  or
    children remaining in the United Kingdom, as per the meaning  of  those
    sections set out by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and  there  being
    no suggestion that he could meet the private life exception) nor has he
    established very  compelling  circumstances  that  could  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  The Appellant's appeal on human rights
    grounds against his Deportation Order is bound to fail on  any  of  the
    applicable tests and/or  exceptions  under  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    outside of them.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given in the error  of  law  decision,  the  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  a  material
error of law and as such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

I remake the appeal as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     17 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05350/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2018                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       olalekaan olatunde alli balogun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill of Counsel, instructed by Rock
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on  6  February  2018,  in  which  Mr
    Balogun's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke   his
    Deportation Order dated 18 March 2017 was allowed.  For ease I continue
    to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    with Mr Balogun as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 4 December 1967 or 1968
    (both dates of birth have been used by the Appellant).   The  Appellant
    claims to have first arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 but there is
    no record of him being here prior to June 2000 when he  made  a  postal
    application for asylum and later on 16 November 2000 he was issued with
    an EEA Residence Card as the dependent of an EEA national he married in
    July that year.  His application for asylum was  withdrawn  and  on  11
    February 2005 and prior to the expiry of his Residence Card, he and his
    wife made a joint application for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain.   That
    application was refused on 31 May 2005.

 3. On 8 December 2005, the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national which was refused on 28
    June 2006.  In  the  course  of  this  application  the  Appellant  had
    submitted false P60s in the name of his wife  and  was  prosecuted  for
    this and other fraud offences.  On 17 November 2006, the Appellant  was
    convicted at Croydon Crown Court in a different identity  of  obtaining
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom by  deception  and  possessing  a
    false identity document.  He was sentenced 18 months'  imprisonment  on
    each count to be served concurrently.

 4. On 3 May 2007, the Appellant submitted an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of long residence, in  which  he  did  not
    declare his criminal convictions.   The  application  was  subsequently
    withdrawn on 14 April 2011.

 5. Following the criminal convictions, the Respondent served the Appellant
    with notice of the decision to make a Deportation order, against  which
    the Appellant appealed.  The appeal was dismissed  on  all  grounds  by
    Judge Cockrill in a decision promulgated on 20 November 2007.   Adverse
    credibility findings were made against the Appellant  and  it  was  not
    considered that he had any objective fear on  return  to  Nigeria,  nor
    that he had any family life in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  has
    separated from his wife was in the process of a divorce and  there  was
    no mention of the partner  he  currently  claims  to  have  been  in  a
    relationship with since 2000.  There are also  issues  raised  in  that
    appeal as to when the Appellant first entered the  United  Kingdom,  he
    claimed that this was in 1992 and that he had not left the country ever
    since, but in his evidence the Appellant also stated that  he  returned
    to Nigeria in 2004.

 6. On 6 June 2008, the Respondent  was  advised  that  the  Appellant  was
    residing in Ireland, having voluntarily departed  the  United  Kingdom,
    such that his Deportation Order was deemed enforced.

 7. The Appellant's partner had applied for indefinite leave to remain  and
    in 2010 named the Appellant as one of her dependents, in one of the two
    identities that he had used past and the Respondent asserts that  there
    was  no  disclosure  of  the  Appellant's   criminal   convictions   or
    alternative identity in the application.  That application was  granted
    on 13 September 2010, although it is apparent from a minute  about  the
    grant that this was done on a  mistaken  basis  where  the  Appellant's
    partner was thought to have resided continuously in United Kingdom  for
    nearly 11 years, when in fact she had held residency in Ireland between
    2007 and 2010, and on the basis that her two eldest children were  born
    in the United Kingdom and had always resided here,  when  in  fact  all
    three children were born in Ireland,  where  Irish  nationals  and  had
    resided there for at  least  part  of  their  lives.   The  Appellant's
    partner subsequently naturalised as a British Citizen on 20 June 2013.

 8. On 8 February 2011, the Appellant applied for a no time limit stamp  in
    his passport to transfer his indefinite leave  to  remain  to  his  new
    passport which was completed on the same day.

 9. On 22 August 2016, the Appellant was detained in the United Kingdom  on
    arrival from Nigeria as a person returning in breach of  a  Deportation
    Order when fingerprints matched his two different identities and showed
    up his criminal  conviction  and  subsequent  Deportation  Order.   The
    intention was to return the Appellant to Nigeria a few days later,  but
    an application for Judicial Review was issued, removal deferred and the
    Respondent agreed to make a fresh decision  on  the  Appellant's  human
    rights claim.  That decision was made on 18 March  2007  which  refused
    the Appellant's further human rights submissions, but accepted them  as
    a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  It is that
    decision which is appealed against in these proceedings.

10. At the time of his  detention  in  2016,  the  Respondent  revoked  the
    Appellant's indefinite leave to remain  in  light  of  the  outstanding
    Deportation Order.  In the course of Judicial Review  proceedings,  the
    Upper Tribunal  found  that  this  cancellation  was  both  lawful  and
    justified in all the circumstances.  That is not challenged further  in
    the current appeal proceedings.

11. The Respondent refused  the  human  rights  application/application  to
    revoke the Deportation  Order  on  13  March  2017  for  the  following
    reasons.  The Appellant's circumstances were considered by reference to
    paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules to the effect  that  his  claim
    under Article 8 could only  succeed  if  there  were  very  exceptional
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A.
     The Respondent considered that there was a significant public interest
    in deporting the Appellant due to his criminal  history  of  submitting
    false documents in support of an application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom for which he was successfully prosecuted  and  sentenced
    to 18 month's in prison;  that  the  Appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
    Deportation Order and has continued to use  deception  as  a  means  of
    remaining in United Kingdom by not declaring his  criminal  convictions
    or alias names on further applications.

12. The  Respondent  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children pursuant  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 it was considered that they could remain  residing
    in the United Kingdom with their mother or  the  option  of  relocating
    with the Appellant would be open to them and neither  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  There were no exceptional features of the Appellant's family or
    private life to constitute a very compelling circumstance  to  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.

13. Overall it was considered that the Appellant's deportation would not be
    a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and the application to revoke the Deportation Order was  refused
    under paragraph 390 and 390A of the Immigration Rules.  It was  however
    accepted that the Appellant's further submissions amounted to  a  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  was
    therefore  a  right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    Deportation Order on human rights grounds.

14. Judge Colvin allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 6 February
    2018.  I will return in detail below to those findings, but in summary,
    the appeal was allowed following  reliance  on  a  number  of  factors.
    These included that it was not considered that the Appellant  had  been
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully and in breach of a  Deportation  Order
    from 2010 given the Respondent's grant of indefinite leave to remain to
    him at that point; the strength of the Appellant's family life with his
    partner and three children as well as being an  integral  part  of  the
    lives of his brother and sister and their respective children; that the
    Deportation Order would lapse in  May  2018,  three  months  after  the
    appeal hearing and that there would be no strong public policy  reasons
    for maintaining the Deportation Order beyond that time.   Overall,  the
    public interest in removal was reduced in all the circumstances and  it
    was considered that it would be unduly harsh to  require  the  children
    and consequently their mother, to return to Nigeria with their  father.
    It was also found to be unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    children to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him.   In  these
    circumstances the exception in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules
    and section 117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Act  2002
    applied  and  the  Deportation  Order  should  be  revoked.    In   the
    alternative, it would  also  be  disproportionate  not  to  revoke  the
    Deportation Order in all the circumstances.

The appeal

15. The Respondent appeals essentially on two  grounds.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has failed to  give  the  required  weight  to  the
    public interest and in particular that  any  breach  of  a  Deportation
    Order is likely to be a strong public policy ground for maintaining  an
    order even after a lapse of 10 years.  Similarly, the  public  interest
    in deportation is not necessarily diluted by the passage  of  time  and
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account that the  Appellant
    did not disclose his previous conviction and use of different names and
    dates of  birth  thus  contributing  to  the  error  in  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain to him.

16. Further, the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  engage  with  the  public
    interest factors when assessing whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the family members to remain without the Appellant or return to Nigeria
    with him as required and  confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    450, and instead conflates the best  interests  of  the  children  with
    whether it would be unduly harsh.

17. Secondly, that as a matter of law there could not  be  very  compelling
    circumstances for the revocation of the Deportation Order on the  facts
    as found in relation to family life.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parkes on 6 March 2018 on all
    grounds.

19. At the oral hearing, Mr Wilding on behalf of the Respondent  relied  of
    the grounds of appeal and skeleton  argument  submitted  prior  to  the
    hearing.  In addition, it was highlighted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    attached  weight  to  what  was  considered  to  be  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant's Deportation Order would lapse in May 2018, 10  years  after
    it was made, which is a material mistake of fact.  A Deportation  Order
    does not lapse, there must be an application to revoke  it,  regardless
    of the passage of time since it was made and a decision would  have  to
    be made on whether or not it should be revoked.   A  Deportation  Order
    will remain in force until revoked.

20. Mr Wilding submitted that as every stage, the decision reads as if  the
    First-tier Tribunal is undertaking a searcher reasons why the Appellant
    should not be deported  rather  than  conducting  a  genuine  balancing
    exercise.  The  Appellant's  deeply  unattractive  immigration  history
    appears to have been entirely swept under the carpet and no  weight  is
    given to the public interest against him for his own conduct.   It  was
    emphasised that the  Appellant  had  been  released  on  bail  and  had
    absconded.  He travelled  to  Ireland  and  returned  in  breach  of  a
    Deportation Order.  The Appellant's claim that the grant of  indefinite
    leave to remain overtook any intention to deport him was not accepted.

21. On behalf of the Appellant, Miss Revill relied on her skeleton argument
    and made further oral submissions.  In relation to the first ground  of
    appeal, it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  expressly  cited
    paragraph 399D of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  appreciated  the  high
    threshold for breach of Article 8 when the  has  been  a  breach  of  a
    Deportation Order but that the threshold exceptional circumstances  had
    been met, in particular because the Appellant held a reasonable  belief
    that indefinite leave to remain had been granted by the  Respondent  in
    full knowledge of the Deportation Order and that he had  been  lawfully
    resident from 13 September  2010  to  22  August  2016.   This  factual
    finding has not been challenged by the Respondent  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to  take  that  into  account,  as  well  as  the
    Appellant's assumption that the Respondent was aware  of  both  of  his
    identities and in any  event  gave  adequate  reasons  why  the  public
    interest was reduced in the circumstances.  For these reasons, there is
    no material error of law for the reasons set out in the first ground of
    challenge.

22. Specifically in relation to whether the First-tier Tribunal had reached
    a decision in accordance  with  MM  (Uganda),  it  was  submitted  that
    paragraphs 43 to 46 of the decision should  be  read  together  and  in
    particular paragraph 46 did not require repetition  from  the  previous
    paragraph and it has to be assumed that  the  same  balancing  exercise
    taking into account the public interest had been applied, as it was  in
    paragraph 45.

23. As to whether the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  consider  that  the
    Deportation Order would lapse in 2018, it was submitted  that  contrary
    to the express wording of the decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    indicated a proper understanding of the situation and in any event this
    did not form part of the grounds of appeal submitted by the Respondent.
     Further, it was appropriate for a Tribunal to place weight on the fact
    that a Deportation Order can be revoked after 10 years.

24. It was submitted that there was also no material error of  law  on  the
    second ground of challenge as  adequate  reasons  were  given  for  the
    separate assessment of the best  interests  of  the  children  and  the
    reduction in public interest in deportation  in  this  case  such  that
    taking everything into account there were very compelling circumstances
    against deportation.

Findings and reasons

25. For the reasons set out below I find  errors  of  law  on  all  grounds
    identified by the Respondent in the decision of  Judge  Colvin  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

26. As to consideration of the public interest in deportation, in paragraph
    30 of the decision it is recorded that the more serious the  offence  a
    person is convicted on the greater weight is  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest in removal.  In this case the Appellant  was  convicted
    of an offence of deception in relation to  an  immigration  application
    for which he was given an 18-month prison sentence and therefore should
    be considered a serious  offence.   Judge  Colvin  went  on  to  state:
    "However, it was committed over 10 years ago and there has been no  re-
    offending.  There is also  the  relevance  of  matters  set  out  below
    regarding the grant of ILR to the appellant in 2010 and the  fact  that
    he has lived here on this basis  since  then  despite  the  deportation
    order which, in any event, is soon to lapse in May 2018.  I  find  that
    in all the circumstances the public interest in deporting the appellant
    is lessened significantly in this case and this  is  a  matter  that  I
    refer to below again."

27.  Judge  Colvin  goes  on  to  consider  and  make  findings  about  the
    Appellant's immigration history in paragraph 31 to 35 of the  decision.
    These paragraphs record the Appellant's belief that the Respondent knew
    all of the details about names and dates of birth he had used and  that
    his fingerprints had been taken such  that  the  Respondent  was  fully
    aware of all the details of his identity.  Further, on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent it was accepted that the Home Office 'ought to  have  known'
    that the Appellant had previously used two  names  and  errors  in  the
    grant of indefinite leave to  remain  in  2010  were  accepted.   Judge
    Colvin did not accept that the issue of indefinite leave to  remain  in
    2010 implied any intention on the behalf of the Respondent not rely  on
    the Deportation Order but had simply not joined up the dots when making
    the decision.  It was further noted that the grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain was revoked in 2016 and the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
    cancellation was both lawful and justified.  The decision continues  as
    follows:

         "34.  However, there is another aspect to this grant of ILR in 2010
         that is relevant to this appeal: namely, that it is submitted  that
         the appellant has correctly assumed and conducted his life  on  the
         basis that he had legal status in the  UK  since  this  time.   For
         example, the appellant applied for the ILR to be transferred  to  a
         new passport in 2011 which was done.  He then travelled to Nigerian
         2012 and 2014 with this document  in  his  passport  without  being
         apprehended or detained on return to the  UK.   It  was  only  when
         returning from Nigeria in 2016 that he was detained as a person who
         was entering in breach of a deportation order.  In  assessing  this
         submission I have taken account of the fact that the appellant  has
         been found to have used  deception  in  the  past  in  relation  to
         submitting false documents to support a claim  that  he  was  in  a
         genuine marriage with an EEA national.  It means that whilst  I  do
         not find that it can be shown that the appellant used deception  by
         relying on the ILR document over the five years from 2010 to  2016,
         I consider that he probably took a pragmatic view that  as  it  had
         been granted he was entitled to rely on it  -  particularly  as  he
         lived in the reasonable belief for the reasons given above that the
         Home Office has always been aware  of  the  Deportation  order  and
         criminal conviction and, indeed, his presence in the UK during this
         time.

         35.   This  means  that  the  appellant's  immigration  history  is
         somewhat mixed.  It seems that on his own evidence he  entered  the
         UK remained without lawful status from 1998 to 2000 when he made an
         asylum claim.  He has clearly used deception  including  submitting
         false documents in relation to the EEA marriage that was found  not
         to be genuine.  It is also said that in March  2008  he  failed  to
         report to Beckett House in accordance with conditions imposed after
         he had finished the prison sentence.  However, I do not  find  that
         in all the circumstances referred to above it would  be  reasonable
         to hold the appellant has been in the UK unlawfully and  in  breach
         of a deportation order from 2010 when it  has  been  accepted  that
         there were errors on the part of the Home Office  in  granting  the
         appellant with ILR and effectively allowing him to remain here."

28. These passages within the decision  contain  a  number  of  errors  and
    omissions which collectively, if not individually as  well,  amount  to
    material errors of law.  First, the public interest in  deportation  is
    said to be reduced due to the passage of time since the  offences  were
    committed, but there is no sustainable reason for this,  in  particular
    having regard to statements of the public interest made in relation  to
    deportation both in primary legislation and in the Immigration Rules.

29. Secondly, although aspects of the  Appellant's  very  poor  immigration
    history are referred to together with his criminal history, there is no
    clear finding as to whether he entered the United Kingdom in breach  of
    a Deportation Order (only as to whether  he  remained  here  in  breach
    since 2010) and no account taken of the Appellant's and/or  Appellant's
    partner's contribution to the mistaken grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain by failing to disclose his other  identity,  date  of  birth  or
    criminal conviction. These matters which are adverse to  the  Appellant
    and would strengthen the public interest in maintaining  and  enforcing
    the Deportation  Order,  are  ginored  rather  than  given  appropriate
    weight.

30. Thirdly, it has to be questionable as to whether the  Appellant  could,
    as a matter of law, not be in  breach  of  a  valid  Deportation  Order
    because of the mistaken grant of indefinite leave to remain to  him  in
    2010.  Paragraph 35 of the decision fails to set out  adequate  reasons
    as to  why  this  would  be  the  case,  separate  to  the  Appellant's
    reasonable belief  which  may  alter  the  weight  to  be  attached  to
    remaining in breach but of itself cannot alter the legal position.

31. Fourthly, whilst not expressly raised in the grounds of appeal, it is a
    very obvious error on the face of the decision  that  Judge  Colvin  is
    under the mistaken impression that a Deportation Order  can  lapse  and
    will do so in  this  case.   This  is  dealt  with  more  expressly  in
    paragraph 42 of the decision as follows:

         "42.  In this case the Deportation  order  lapses  under  paragraph
         391(a) of the Immigration Rules after 10 years on 8 May 2018 - that
         is, in just over three months' time.   Whilst  the  respondent  may
         consider whether it should be maintained past this  period,  strong
         public  policy  reasons  need  to  justify  this.    Although   the
         respondent's decision letter does not refer to  the  lapse  of  the
         order permitted to enforcing it on the grounds  that  it  has  been
         breached, it could be said that no specific public  policy  reasons
         for extending the order beyond May 2018 have been put forward.   On
         the other hand, the main purpose of the deportation  to  exclude  a
         person from the UK and a breach of the order  is  likely  to  be  a
         strong public policy reason for maintaining the order  even  though
         10 years has elapsed.  However, for the reasons given above, it  is
         difficult  to  find  that  the  appellant  has  indeed  breach  the
         deportation order.  In particular, since being granted ILR in  2010
         he has, with the apparent or 'ought to have known' knowledge of the
         respondent, been living and working  in  the  UK,  caring  for  his
         family and travelling to and from Nigeria - in other words, he  has
         been 'allowed' to remain living here.  In these circumstances I  do
         not find on the evidence presently before me that there are  strong
         public policy reasons for maintaining the deportation order  beyond
         8 May 2018."

32. I cannot accept the submission on behalf of the Appellant that  despite
    the express wording used repeatedly throughout the decision,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  understood  the  correct  legal  position  that  a
    Deportation Order is valid unless and until  it  is  revoked.   To  the
    contrary, the decision  in  paragraph  42  above  shows  a  fundamental
    misunderstanding of the process.  It is clear from paragraphs  390  and
    following in the Immigration Rules that an application must be made for
    revocation of a Deportation Order, following which the Respondent  must
    make a decision.  Although the  continuation  of  a  deportation  order
    would be the proper course, in specified  situations  it  may  not  be,
    including where a person has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
    of less than four years and 10 years have elapsed since the  making  of
    the deportation  order.   This  however  has  to  be  balanced  against
    paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules as to  the  consequences  of  a
    person entering the United Kingdom in breach of a Deportation Order and
    the circumstances looked at as a whole.  It is not for  the  Respondent
    to establish strong public policy reasons for maintaining a Deportation
    Order for more than 10 years, to the contrary it is for  an  individual
    to  make  an  application  which  may  then  be  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

33. The First-tier Tribunal then falls into error in the test to be applied
    for revocation of  the  Deportation  Order  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Paragraph  43  of  the  decision  states  that  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules applies in this case and therefore consideration must
    be given to the matters set out in paragraph 399 and section 117C(5) of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   However,   no
    reference is made here to paragraphs 390  to  392  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, nor to paragraph 399D of the same, nor is there any evidence  of
    their application in the following final paragraphs of the decision.

34. Paragraph 44 of the decision starts with a statement  that  it  is  not
    possible to require family as a unit to relocate outside of the EU  nor
    that the Respondent could submit that it was reasonable for them to  do
    so.  There is then a conclusion that the best interests of the children
    would be to remain in the United Kingdom.  The assessment of  the  best
    interests of the  children  should,  at  least  as  a  matter  of  best
    practice, be undertaken first  and  separately  to  any  assessment  of
    reasonableness.

35. Judge Colvin then deals with the  questions  of  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's family to relocate with him or  remain
    in the United Kingdom without him in paragraphs 45 and 46  which  state
    as follows:

         "45.  It was held by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  450,  that  when
         considering whether deportation would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
         purpose of rule 399 of the Immigration Rules and section 117C(5) of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2000 to regard  has  to
         be given to all of  the  circumstances,  including  the  deportee's
         criminal and immigration history.  The  more  pressing  the  public
         interest in removal, the harder it was to show that the effects  of
         deportation would be unduly harsh.  As stated above, in this  case,
         I have found that the public interest in removal  is  significantly
         less pressing a number of reasons including  the  passage  of  time
         since the appellant's conviction and the  fact  that  he  has  been
         'allowed' to live in the UK  since  then  despite  the  Deportation
         order.  Therefore for these reasons I consider  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to require  the  children  -  and  consequently  their
         mother who cares for them - to return to Nigeria with their father.

         46.  The next issue is whether it would be unduly harsh to separate
         the partner and children from the appellant by  them  remaining  in
         the UK without him.   In  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public
         interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14 the principles restated that the
         best interests of the children are to be assessed  separately  from
         any wrong-doing of their parents.  In this case because the  strong
         relationship that these children have with their  father  including
         on a day-to-day practical basis there is again no doubt that  their
         best interests would be served by  continuing  to  live  with  both
         parents in the UK.  This is particularly so in relation to the boys
         of this family who seek the guidance of the father as they  grow-up
         as emphasising the written statement  of  the  eldest  child.   The
         witnesses used the expression that it would be 'devastating' do not
         have the presence of the appellant in their lives: on the  evidence
         before me unsatisfied that this is likely to be the consequence  of
         the children and therefore find that it would be unduly harsh to be
         separated from him."

36. In paragraph 45, Judge Colvin reaches the  finding  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to require the family to relocate, expressly on  the  sole
    basis that there is a reduced public interest in removal.  Although the
    preceding paragraph refers to the best interests of the children, there
    is no express consideration of all of the circumstances, including  the
    deportee's criminal and immigration history as confirmed is required by
    the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda).   Those  same  considerations  also
    apply to the issue considered in paragraph 46 about whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the family to remain in  United  Kingdom  without  the
    Appellant.  However, the decision on that point is  expressly  made  on
    the basis that the best interests of the children equate  to  it  being
    unduly harsh for them to  be  separated  from  him  without  any  wider
    considerations of  all  of  the  circumstances,  including  the  public
    interest, the Appellant's criminal and immigration history.  I  do  not
    find that even reading  paragraphs  45  and  46  together,  it  can  be
    inferred  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  undertaken   a   proper
    assessment in accordance with MM (Uganda) before reaching a  conclusion
    as to whether the consequences would be unduly harsh.

37. Paragraph 47 of the decision repeats the earlier errors in relation  to
    a reduced public interest and that the Deportation Order  is  to  lapse
    and again refers only to paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    without  any  reference  to  the  wider  provisions  relevant  to   the
    circumstances in an application for revocation of a  Deportation  Order
    where an individual has entered the United Kingdom in breach of it.  It
    also contains no reasons as to why in the alternative  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances making the decision to refuse  to  revoke  the
    Deportation Order a disproportionate interference with the  Appellant's
    right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  The statement in paragraph 48  to
    there being very exceptional circumstances regarding  family  life,  is
    not supported by the findings contained in the  earlier  parts  of  the
    decision.

38. For all of these reasons, there are material errors of law contained in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision such that it is necessary to set  it
    aside and remake the decision on the appeal.

39. There has been no challenge to the findings  of  fact  in  relation  to
    family life, nor to  the  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children in this case, such that those are preserved when the  decision
    is remade.  However, it is likely that those findings will need  to  be
    supplemented with more detailed findings for the decision to be remade.
     There will also need to be further findings of fact, in particular  in
    relation to the circumstances in 2009/2010 when the application for and
    grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain  was  made;  to  enable  a  full
    assessment of whether removal would be unduly harsh  and  to  determine
    whether in the alternative, there are any very compelling circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation in this case.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
remaking of the decision under  appeal  will  be  undertaken  by  the  Upper
Tribunal on the basis identified above.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

 A. The Appellant to file and serve any further  written  statement(s)  and
    evidence to be relied upon, no later than 14 days prior to the relisted
    hearing.
 B. The parties to file and serve a copy of the  2009/2010  application/re-
    opened application for leave to remain made by the Appellant's partner,
    and the details provided to the Respondent by her of her dependents, if
    available, no later than 14 days prior to the relisted hearing.


 C. Parties are at liberty to file and serve a further or updated  skeleton
    argument, no later than 7 days prior to the relisted hearing.


Signed   [pic]             Date     22nd June 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


