
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05250/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 7th June 2017                    |On: 13th June 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          Md Samsul Hoque Tarafder
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh  born  on  the  15th  June
       1984.

    2. On the 2nd September 2015 the Secretary of State refused him leave to
       remain on human rights grounds. The  basis  of  the  refusal  was  an
       allegation that the Respondent had, on the 17th April  2012,  used  a
       proxy to take an English language test on his  behalf.    This  meant
       that his application for leave to remain as a partner  and  a  parent
       fell to be refused on  'suitability'  grounds.   That  was  the  only
       ground for refusal.

    3. On the 1st August 2016 the First-tier Tribunal heard the Respondent's
       oral evidence about the day that he took his English language test at
       Portsmouth  College,  a  test   administered   by   the   ETS.    The
       determination  notes  that  the  Respondent  gave  that  evidence  in
       "perfect and fluent" English. He gave details of the length  of  both
       tests, the contents of the tests, how they were  conducted,  what  he
       had to do, and to whom he had to show his passport, and said that  he
       had not used anyone else to take the test.    Having  regard  to  the
       evidence presented by the Secretary of State for the Home Department,
       namely witness statements by Rebecca Collins  and  Peter  Millington,
       the Tribunal found the evidential burden that lay on the Secretary of
       State to be discharged:  "I  am  satisfied  on  the  basis  of  their
       evidence that the  necessary  evidential  threshold  to  require  the
       Appellant to explain the circumstances surrounding the test has  been
       met". The Tribunal went on to find that it was  "blindingly  obvious"
       that the Respondent had no need to use a proxy since his  English  is
       excellent. He had given clear and detailed  evidence  about  when  he
       took the test. The Tribunal weighed this in the  balance  along  with
       the fact that the test recordings had long since been  destroyed  and
       that the Respondent had thereby been deprived of  an  opportunity  to
       have his own analysis conducted.   Weighing all of those  matters  in
       the balance the Tribunal was not satisfied that the overall burden on
       the Secretary of State was discharged. The charge  of  deception  was
       not made out and it followed that the appeal had  to  be  allowed  on
       human rights grounds, it being accepted that there is a British child
       in this family.

    4. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department's  appeal  raises
       several points, most of which are nothing more than an attempt to re-
       argue the case.  It is suggested, for  instance,  that  the  Tribunal
       somehow erred in placing weight on its acceptance  that  Mr  Tarafder
       did attend the test centre on the day in question: "in any event, any
       attendance at the test does not preclude the  use  of  a  proxy  test
       taker".  This ground does not identify any error  of  law.  It  is  a
       submission which at best might be put in the First-tier Tribunal, and
       in fact in this case was not.

    5. I deal only with those grounds pursued before me.

       Did the  Tribunal  make  contradictory  findings  about  whether  the
       evidential burden had been discharged by the Secretary of State?

    6. The short answer is no. The determination  quite  clearly  finds  the
       evidential burden to be discharged. The determination does note  that
       there is a possibility  of  false  results  in  the  fraud  detection
       system, but this does not  amount  to  a  contradictory  finding.  It
       amounts to discussion of the evidence, which is followed by the clear
       finding in favour of the Secretary of State for the Home Department.







       Did the Tribunal take the correct approach?

    7. Yes. The Tribunal considered whether the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department had produced  evidence  capable  of  discharging  the
       evidential burden,  moved on to  consider  whether  Mr  Tarafder  had
       produced a plausible innocent explanation, and then weighed up all of
       that evidence in the round, whilst reminding itself  that  the  legal
       burden ultimately lies  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  civil
       standard.  That was the approach recommended by the President in SM &
       Qadir (ETS- evidence- burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 299 (IAC)  and  it
       is the approach that the Tribunal has applied.

       Was there an error in failing to address the 'spreadsheet'?

    8. At paragraph  6  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  mentions  the
       statements of Millington and Collins. It  makes  no  mention  of  the
       'spreadsheet' which specifically mentions Mr Tarafder. The  Secretary
       of State contends that this must be an error, since it means that the
       Tribunal did not weigh that  evidence  in  the  round  in  the  final
       reckoning. Mr Harrison points  to  paragraph  9  where  the  Tribunal
       states that it has "not been provided" with  a  statement  of  report
       specifically relating to Mr Tarafder.

    9. This was the only ground that was in my view remotely arguable. It is
       an odd omission that the spreadsheet is not mentioned. Having  regard
       to the decision as a whole  I  am  not  however  satisfied  that  the
       Secretary of State has established there to be  any  material  error.
       I am satisfied that  the  Tribunal  did  take  the  spreadsheet  into
       account. It must have done: otherwise it is very difficult to see how
       it could possibly have found the evidential burden  of  proof  to  be
       discharged on the basis of two wholly generic  statements  about  the
       ETS fraud.   I note the direction at paragraph 5 that the evidence is
       to be summarised only briefly.

   10. Mr Harrison's point about paragraph 9 does  not  establish  that  the
       spreadsheet was missed. What the determination there says is "I  have
       not been provided by  the  Respondent  with  a  statement  or  report
       specifically relating to Mr Tarafder explaining  in  detail  why  the
       person listening to the interview and those against which it has been
       compared believes the recordings to be of the  same  person...."  (my
       emphasis).   That was a statement of incontrovertible fact.

       Decisions

   11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.

   12. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               7th June 2017
