
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05766/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 28 July 2021                  |On the 6 September 2021              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     MA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Solomon, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Atreya) (hereinafter referred  to
         as the "FtTJ") who allowed the appellant's human rights appeal in a
         decision promulgated after a hearing on the 15 January 2021.  There
         is no date on the decision, but it is common ground that the appeal
         was promulgated as it resulted in these proceedings being initiated
         by the Secretary of State.

      2. The FtTJ made an anonymity direction for the  reasons  set  out  at
         paragraph 1 of his decision. I am mindful that considerations arise
         in this matter as to the  appellant's  mental  health  concerns.  I
         observe Guidance Note 2013, No. 1 which is concerned with anonymity
         directions, and I note that the starting point for consideration of
         such directions in this chamber of the Upper Tribunal,  as  in  all
         courts and tribunals, is open justice.  Rule 14(1) of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules') contains a
         power to make an order prohibiting the publication  of  information
         relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members
         of the public to  identify  any  person  whom  the  Upper  Tribunal
         considers should not be identified.  Rule 14(7) of the  2008  Rules
         contains a presumption that information about mental  health  cases
         and the names of the people concerned in such will not be disclosed
         in the  absence  of  good  reason.  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
         circumstances which arise to be considered in this matter, that the
         interests of justice require that the appellant  is  not  named  in
         these proceedings. I therefore confirm the  decision  made  by  the
         FtTJ when making the the anonymity direction.

      3. The hearing took place on 28 July  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant so that he could listen and observe  the
         hearing. There were no issues regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing, and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      4. Whilst this an appeal brought by the Secretary of State,  I  intend
         to refer to the parties as they were before the FtTJ.

Background:

      5. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      6. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  The  appellant  entered
         the United Kingdom on 28 September 2007 with entry clearance  as  a
         student valid from 11 September 2007 to 31  January  2011.  He  was
         subsequently granted further leave to remain under the Tier 1  Post
         Study route valid from 21 October 2010  to  21  October  2012.  The
         appellant completed his MBA in the UK in July 2010.

      7. On 19 October 2012 he made an application as a Tier 4 student which
         was refused on 24 May 2013 on the  basis  that  he  had  failed  to
         provide specified documents, namely  bank  statements.  His  appeal
         against this decision was initially  dismissed  by  way  of  a  FtT
         decision promulgated on 28 February  2014.  After  an  appeal,  the
         appellant's appeal was allowed by UTJ Pinkerton on 19 May 2014. UTJ
         Pinkerton was satisfied that the appellant did supply  evidence  of
         sufficient funding with his application.  It  transpires  that  the
         licence of his Tier 4 sponsor was revoked on 18 July 2014 (see GCID
         note 21/11/2014).  Therefore on 21  November  2014  the  respondent
         decided to grant leave to remain for a period of 60 days  until  20
         January 2014 to enable the appellant to find a new tier 4  sponsor.
         However his BRP later received  on  12  December  2014  erroneously
         granted him leave to remain from 9 December 2014 until  20  January
         2015 which was 41 days and not 60 days.  The  appellant  sought  an
         extension until 20 February  2015  as  the  period  of  leave  also
         included the Christmas period but only an extra period  of  2  days
         until 23 January 2015 was agreed.

      8. On 20 January 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain  as  a
         Tier 4 (General) student migrant.

      9. On 14 April 2015 the appellant indicated he would like to  withdraw
         the application but needed to know where to make the application.

     10. On 15 April  2015  he  withdrew  the  application  by  writing  the
         respondent. However on 16 April 2015 his application  was  rejected
         owing to the appellant's failure to provide his biometrics.

     11. On 11 May 2015 (and within 28  days)  the  appellant  submitted  an
         FLR(O) application for leave to remain outside the rules which  was
         sent to the wrong address but was then resubmitted to  the  correct
         address on 19 May 2015 and within  33  days  not  22  May  2015  as
         asserted in the decision letter.

     12. On 23 July 2015 the  appellant  varied  the  above  application  by
         applying for leave to remain based on his private life in  the  UK.
         This application was refused and certified on 16 January  2016  but
         was not served until the 9 or 11 June 2018.  It  is  said  that  in
         February 2016 and November 2017 he was informed that the respondent
         was still considering his application.

     13. On 20 June 2018, the appellant wrote to the respondent  asking  him
         to reconsider the decision and withdraw the certification.

     14. On 6 March 2019 the respondent refused the  claim,  but  this  time
         gave an in country right of appeal.

     15. It was this decision which the appellant appealed before the  FtTJ.
         The decision letter set out that on 23 July  2015  he  had  made  a
         human rights claim in an application for leave to remain in the  UK
         on the basis of his private life. The decision letter set  out  his
         immigration history. As the appellant did not claim any family life
         in the UK the decision maker considered his application  under  the
         rules applicable to private life (under paragraph 276ADE).  It  was
         noted that his application did not fall for refusal on  grounds  of
         suitability.

     16. As to his eligibility, it was noted  that  he  was  a  national  of
         Bangladesh, who was over 18 years of age and who had entered the UK
         on 28 September 2007 and therefore lived in the UK for 11  �  years
         but it was not accepted that he lived continuously in the UK for at
         least  20  years   and   therefore   could   not   meet   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iii) or (iv) and (v).

     17. As regards paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the respondent stated  that  it
         was not accepted that there would be very significant obstacles  to
         his integration into Bangladesh if he were required to leave the UK
         because he spent the  formative  years  living  in  Bangladesh,  he
         claimed speak  English  and  Bengali  which  were  both  recognised
         languages in Bangladesh and claimed to have visited  Bangladesh  as
         recently as March 2011 and  claimed  also  to  have  family  living
         there.  The  respondent  concluded  that  he  could  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

     18. When considering GEN 3.2 of Appendix FM, the respondent  considered
         whether there were any exceptional circumstances which would render
         refusal  a  breach  of  Article  8  because  it  would  result   in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant, the  respondent
         concluded that he had previously been offered guidance  and  advice
         on how to proceed if he was needing support him  in  his  claim  to
         commit suicide and also had to proceed with an asylum claim  if  he
         felt he was in fear of his life or in fear of being  persecuted  if
         returned to Bangladesh. It was noted that he did not  pursue  those
         avenues open to him. The details of support that would be available
         was set out and also the details for how to make a claim for asylum
         at the screening unit.

     19. It  was  therefore  concluded  by  the  respondent  there  were  no
         "exceptional circumstances" in his case and  thus  the  application
         did not fall for a grant of leave to remain outside of the rules.

     20. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT (Judge  Atreya)  on
         the 15 January 2021. In a decision promulgated on a date  following
         the hearing she allowed the appeal on human rights grounds,  having
         found that the appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
         (1) (vi) and that there were "very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration" into Bangladesh (  at  paragraphs  [70]-72]).  As  the
         judge found that that was "positively determinative of his  Article
         8 appeal," applying TZ (Pakistan) and PG(India) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 1109, the judge found it  would  be  disproportionate  for  the
         appellant to be removed. Thus she found that  the  decision  was  a
         breach of Article 8 of the ECHR and thus allowed the appeal.

     21. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was granted by  FtTJ
         Andrew on 26 March 2021 the following reasons:

             "Ground 1: the judge found that the respondent could meet  the
             immigration rules but in doing so gave inadequate  reasons.  I
             find this is an arguable error of law.

             Ground 2: as a result the judge finding the appellant met  the
             rules there is no proper consideration of  Article  8.  Indeed
             the judge is not considered section 117B.

             Ground 3: there has been no consideration by the judge of  the
             impact on United Kingdom resources of allowing the appeal.

             Accordingly, I find that there arguable errors of law  in  the
             decision."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     22. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of  the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing and that this could take place via Microsoft teams.
         Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

    The submissions on behalf of the respondent:

     23. Mr McVeety appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State. He  relied
         upon the grounds and that he did not seek to make any further  oral
         submissions. However where at  paragraph  21  of  the  grounds  the
         respondent referred to the appellant having been working  illegally
         and that enforcement papers were served upon him whilst working  as
         a waiter. This was advanced on the basis that the FtTJ  had  failed
         to take that into account under the  public  interest  factors.  Mr
         McVeety accepted that there had been no evidence before the FtT  to
         support such an assertion.

     24. I therefore shall set out the written grounds:

     25. Ground 1:

         (1)  the judge did not provide  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
             appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi).

         (2)   His  findings  at  paragraph  70  -  72   are   limited   and
             "unsubstantiated against the facts  as  noted  throughout  the
             determination and relevant jurisprudence."

         (3)  At paragraph 4 of ground  1  it  is  said  that  the  "judge's
             finding on very significant obstacles under paragraph 276  ADE
             (1) (vi) is "unsubstantiated against the facts.

         (4)  paragraph 63 and 66 conflict whether the appellant  is  or  is
             not in contact with his family in Bangladesh. The judge  finds
             it is not but then  is  able  to  conclusively  say  that  the
             appellant's mother has no money which  suggest  the  appellant
             was to be in contact with.

         (5)  the appellant went to Bangladesh in 2011 and if destitute  how
             did he manage it? He has family in Bangladesh  and  the  judge
             "does not reconcile the material facts against the  assessment
             that they will be very significant  obstacles  on  return  and
             simply accept the appellant's account  without  the  requisite
             anxious scrutiny."

         (6)  paragraphs 20 - 30 also demonstrate the appellant's skills and
             language and family ties to Bangladesh  and  he  has  shown  a
             fortitude to come to the UK to study  and  adapt.  Letters  of
             support from the appellant's friends  are  mostly  Bangladeshi
             suggest the appellant has not lost his Bangladeshi customs  or
             heritage whilst in the UK. There is therefore no reason why he
             would not be able to reintegrate  in  Bangladesh.  These  were
             relevant factors which were omitted from the consideration  as
             to why he could not return there.

         (7)  there is no evidence that loan sharks  would  have  sufficient
             reach if he were to internally relocate, and the  judge  fails
             to address why the appellant did  not  make  protection  claim
             regarding the loan shark debt  and  its  and  it  is  entirely
             unclear why the judge would find that the appellant could  not
             return, or would be reliant on family to support him or why he
             could not borrow money from them to pay back the loan shark.

         (8)  there is insufficient evidence or reasoning that the appellant
             would face very significant obstacles on  return  taking  into
             account his qualifications, his Bangladeshi heritage,  culture
             and customs in notwithstanding his mental health and there are
             no exceptional circumstances or very significant obstacles  to
             return and the judge's findings are in adequate.

     26. Ground 2:

          1) it is submitted that the FtTJ's  erroneous  finding  that  the
             appellant meets the rules has infected his reasoning  and  the
             public interest and proportionality considerations.  The  very
             limited  proportionality  findings  are  flawed  and  do   not
             adequately employ the mandatory considerations  under  S117A-D
             of the 2002 Act.

          2) The appellant has had no valid leave since 2015 although it is
             accepted there was a delay in decision-making.

          3) In respect of the claimed debts to the loan shark his reliance
             on friends and financial support impacts on the assessment  of
             whether he will or can maintain himself  without  recourse  to
             public funds. This has not been  done  even  though  it  is  a
             relevant and weighty factor.

          4) The appellant's claim to be destitute is not evidenced and  he
             produced no bank statements.

          5) It is  submitted  that  the  "judge's  findings  are  entirely
             contrary to the public interest and place  unfair blame on the
             Home Office in its legitimate aims and efforts to enforce fair
             and effective  immigration  control  (paragraph  60)  and  the
             requirement to need to  balance  the  need  for  an  effective
             immigration control and the importance of the  economic  well-
             being of the country ( see Younas  (section  117B;  Chikwamba;
             Zambrano Pakistan UTIAC 24 March 2020 where a section is cited
             to support the  claim  that  "it  is  clear  that  the  public
             interest  in  effective  immigration  control  overrides   the
             appellant's limited evidence of private life in the UK and the
             judge's reasons on this point wholly inadequate."  Furthermore
             the appellant has failed to produce a causal link between  the
             Home Office actions and the debt and the judge overlooked  the
             evidential requirements which would have been easy to  procure
             such as bank statements (paragraph 70).

          6) Against these factors the judge  does  not  explain  what  the
             exceptional circumstances are to warrant a discretion  in  the
             appellant's favour. Article 8  does  not  confer  a  right  of
             individuals to  choose  where  they  prefer  to  live  (citing
             Huang).

          7) There are  neither  very  strong,  compelling  or  exceptional
             reasons to engage Article 8 outside the rules or  to  outweigh
             the public interest in maintaining fair and  firm  immigration
             control. Citing Agyarko the grounds state "the critical  issue
             will generally be whether, given due weight to the strength of
             the public interest in the removal  of  the  person  the  case
             before it, the Article 8 claim especially strong  to  outweigh
             it. In general...  A  very  strong  and  compelling  claim  is
             required to outweigh the public interest immigration control."
             On the facts, this point is not made out  in  the  appellant's
             favour."

          8) There has not been a full assessment of the  appellant's  case
             against the burden on the resources of the  UK  regarding  his
             health  needs,  financial  uncertainties  and   private   life
             considerations must be properly balanced against a very strong
             public interest.

     27. Ground 3:

          1) By reference to paragraphs 31, and 64 - 66 it  is  clear  that
             the appellant has utilised the NHS at public cast  and  if  he
             were to remain the judge does not consider the impact  on  the
             UK resources and that the UK cannot medicate the world.  There
             is no assessment of the appellant's treatment in the UK at  UK
             taxpayers expense.  This  is  especially  important  when  the
             evidence has shown set out in the presenting Ofc's  submission
             that the appropriate care is available abroad.

          2) The grounds cite Akhalu (health claim; ECHR Article 8  )[2013]
             UKUT 400.

     28. In his oral  submissions  he  confirmed  that  it  was  a  "reasons
         challenge" and not a "perversity challenge".

     29. In answer to the submission made by Mr  Solomon  that  it  was  not
         stated nor was it clear what the term  "unsubstantiated"  meant  he
         clarified this as stating that the judge had allowed  a  protection
         claim under Article 8 and the judge had to give  full  reasons  and
         that finding the appellant credible was not sufficient and that was
         what "unsubstantiated" referred to in the written grounds.

     30. No further submissions were made on behalf of the respondent.

    The submissions on behalf of the appellant:

     31. Mr Solomon of Counsel, who had appeared on behalf of the  appellant
         at the FtT hearing, appeared on behalf of the appellant and  relied
         upon the written submissions contained in his Rule 24 response.

     32. Those submissions can be set out as follows:

     33. The judge does not materially err  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
         Article  8  within  the   Rules   with   reference   to   Paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) as the judge accepted that Article 8 is engaged,  and
         the appellant had established significant private life  in  the  UK
         [58].  The FtTJ gives adequate reasons for doing so namely that:

          i) he has now lived in the UK for over 13 years [58];

         ii) through over 13 years of residence, study,  and  community  of
             close friends he has established strong ties [59][74]; and

        iii) the respondent accepted the appellant has established a degree
             of private life in the UK [25][32][49].  It is submitted  that
             at paragraph 2 of the grounds seeks to erroneously resile from
             the respondent's acceptance of private  life  at  the  hearing
             (albeit  contradicted  by  paragraph   10,   wherein   it   is
             acknowledged  the  respondent  accepted  the   appellant   had
             established a degree of private life).

     34. It is submitted that the judge correctly directed  herself  in  law
         regarding the requirements of the  Rules  namely  very  significant
         obstacles to integration [69], and acknowledges the high  threshold
         involved in the test at [70][74].  The  allegation  throughout  the
         grounds that the judge has made a material misdirection of  law  is
         unparticularised.

     35. The judge gives adequate reasons for concluding there would be very
         significant obstacles to integration  [72]  (paragraph  10  of  the
         grounds) namely that:

          i) the appellant is  depressed  and  in  significant  debt  as  a
             consequence of the  respondent's  erroneous/unlawful  decision
             making and delays [70];

         ii) he is estranged from family members  who  blame  him  for  the
             financial loss he finds himself in [70];

        iii) he does not have the means to repay the debt and there are now
             court proceedings in relation to the debt he owes [70];

         iv) he may be beyond the age of government employment and  has  no
             work history having  never  previously  worked  in  Bangladesh
             [70];

          v) he is in fear of the person to whom he owes money to and there
             have been threats made and a legal notice issued  in  relation
             to the debt [70];

         vi)  he  will  return  to  Bangladesh   with   no   accommodation,
             significant debt, no money or assets, and  no  family  support
             [71].

     36.  In  concluding  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration, the judge takes into account material matters as above
         and that the appellant is an adult man who is  highly  educated  to
         MBA level and who has spent the majority of his life in  Bangladesh
         [70].  Further, she takes into account that he speaks the  language
         of Bangladesh and has lived there from birth to adulthood [70].

     37. Mr Solomon submitted that the judge  does  not  materially  err  as
         alleged in the grounds, as follows:

          a. the matters referred  to  at  paragraphs  6  and  11  (skills,
             language, family  ties,  qualifications,  heritage,  etc)  are
             clearly  considered  by  the  judge,  who  also  finds  he  is
             estranged from family;

          b. the matters referred to at  paragraph  4  (conflict  regarding
             family contact), paragraph 5 (how visit Bangladesh in 2011  if
             destitute) and paragraph 7 (fortitude, Bangladeshi  community,
             friends' support) are  mere  disagreement  and  amount  to  an
             attempt to reargue  the  substantive  merits  of  the  appeal,
             without identifying legal error.  Further these  matters  were
             not argued at the hearing.  The judge cannot be criticised for
             failing to engage with arguments not  raised  at  the  hearing
             including internal relocation (paragraph 8). Nevertheless, the
             appellant never claimed to be destitute in 2011;

          c. In any event,  the  judge  does  not  have  to  address  every
             argument raised by a party (paragraph 9, no protection claim).



     38. It is unclear what is meant in the  grounds  by  stating  that  the
         judge's findings at paragraphs 70 to 72 of  the  determination  are
         "limited and unsubstantiated" (paragraph 1, also see paragraph  3).



     39. The judge's reasons for concluding there would be very  significant
         obstacles to integration are based on the findings  of  credibility
         and fact at paragraphs 48 to 69 of the determination,  as  follows:



          a. The judge accepts the appellant is  a  reliable  and  truthful
             witness and gives adequate reasons for doing so namely that he
             gave detailed, measured, and balanced oral  evidence,  he  did
             not  avoid  answering  questions,  he  answered  them   in   a
             straightforward and non-evasive way, he did not exaggerate his
             evidence, and his evidence on the whole  has  been  consistent
             throughout [48]; (ii))

          b. The judge finds that:

               i. the appellant  is  of  positive  good  character  with  no
                  convictions nor did the respondent suggest he has breached
                  immigration laws or  was  otherwise  undesirable  [50](the
                  decision letter accepts the application does not fall  for
                  refusal on grounds of  suitability),  he  entered  the  UK
                  lawfully in 2007, had valid lawful leave  until  2015  and
                  thereafter he has had authority to remain in the  UK  (his
                  immigration   history   was   not    disputed    by    the
                  respondent)[49][50][51-56];

              ii. the appellant speaks the English language fluently [4], he
                  has studied and achieved  postgraduate  qualifications  in
                  the UK including an MBA [59];

             iii. being a foreign student requires a significant  investment
                  of funds and the appellant has not relied  on  any  public
                  funds since being here [62], he has worked in the  UK  but
                  the respondent denied him permission to work a  number  of
                  years ago [62], there are various supporting letters  from
                  individuals  who  support  the  appellant  [60],   he   is
                  supported  and  accommodated  by   friends   because   the
                  appellant is destitute [61](she accepts his oral  evidence
                  absent any bank statements [62]), the support from friends
                  is temporary in nature and he has no funds of his  own  to
                  rely on [63];

              iv. there  has  been  delay  in  decision  making  (which  was
                  accepted  by  the   respondent)[49],   there   have   been
                  significant delays on the respondent's part and  erroneous
                  decision in 2013 which was not resolved until 2014 as well
                  as a shorter than 60  days  period  being  issued  to  the
                  appellant to find another college [53, 54, 57], there  has
                  been a clear  and  unambiguous  lengthy  delay  where  the
                  decision which was refused and certified  was  not  served
                  until June 2018 which was then substantively refused  with
                  a right of appeal on 6 March 2019 [56-57];

               v. the appellant had a plan to qualify in Health  and  Social
                  care but because of erroneous decision making on the  part
                  of the respondent in  2013  and  various  delays/erroneous
                  decision making the appellant had to borrow money at  high
                  interest rates and is now in debt and owes  money  because
                  of time, money and fees and owes a  loan  shark  money  as
                  well as his family [66],  he  is  destitute  and  in  debt
                  because of home office fees and  delays  in  the  decision
                  making and there is a causal connection between  the  home
                  office inaction and his debt [62];

              vi. he is isolated and not in contact with  his  family  [63],
                  his family relationships are strained because of his  debt
                  and failures to return to Bangladesh  with  qualifications
                  and work [66], he is in debt  to  a  loan  shark  who  has
                  served legal notice to  recover  the  money  (he  produced
                  evidence from a barrister  making  clear  that  he  is  in
                  significant debt including the final legal notice [68] and
                  the respondent did not dispute that  a  legal  notice  has
                  been issued [70](a copy  of  which  was  included  in  the
                  appellant's voluminous appeal bundle [6])) and his  family
                  has abandoned him and are not in a position to support him
                  [67];

             vii. as a result of  delays  and  debt  the  appellant  is  now
                  depressed (which view is strengthened by the evidence from
                  the GP and Consultant Psychiatrist) [64-65].

     40. It is further submitted that as the appeal is allowed under Article
         8 within the Rules, the  judge  does  not  materially  err  by  not
         considering Article 8 outside  the  Rules  [75]  including  Section
         117B. This is because the  judge  correctly  directs  herself  that
         where  the  Rules  are   satisfied,   this   will   be   positively
         determinative of the appeal  [73-74],  see  TZ  (Pakistan)  and  PG
         (India) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 1109 at paragraph 43: "...where  a  person  satisfies  the
         Rules, whether or  not  by  reference  to  an  Article  8  informed
         requirement, then this will be  positively  determinative  of  that
         person's Article 8 appeal,  provided  their  case  engages  Article
         8(1), for the very reason that it would  then  be  disproportionate
         for that person to be removed.";

     41. In the alternative, any error in this regard  is  immaterial  since
         the  judge's  reasons  and  findings   above   adequately   address
         proportionality, Huang, and Agyarko including the  public  interest
         considerations in Section 117B;

          a. Further or alternatively, the respondent's grounds  of  appeal
             fail to disclose a material err of law, as follows:

               i. paragraph 14 (accepts  delay  but  no  valid  leave  since
                  2015), and paragraphs 17 and  18  (debt  attribution)  are
                  mere disagreement and amount to an attempt to reargue  the
                  substantive merits  of  the  appeal,  without  identifying
                  legal error;

              ii. financial independence includes  reliance  on  others  for
                  support (paragraph 15, debts and reliance on friends);

             iii. the judge  clearly  addresses  the  destitution  claim  by
                  finding   the   appellant   credible   in   his   evidence
                  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  bank  statements   [62]
                  (paragraph 16);

              iv. paragraph 19 (Younas) fails  to  adequately  identify  any
                  legal error and is immaterial in the circumstances;

               v. paragraph 20  (causal  link)  ignores  the  judge's  clear
                  finding in this regard [62];

              vi. paragraph 21 (illegal working)  is  a  new  matter,  never
                  raised at the hearing, in the brief refusal letter or  the
                  respondent's small 12-page appeal bundle [6](it is  denied
                  by the appellant);

             vii. Given the judge allowed the appeal under Article 8  within
                  the Rules,  she  did  not  have  to  consider  exceptional
                  circumstances warranting  discretion  in  the  appellant's
                  favour (paragraph 22).

     42. Thus it is submitted that the impact on United Kingdom resources of
         utilising  the  NHS  is  not  a  material  consideration   in   the
         circumstances.  Alternatively, this  argument  was  not  relied  on
         previously and the judge ought not  to  be  criticised  (see  brief
         refusal  letter  [10-11],  summary   of   the   respondent's   oral
         submissions at the hearing [25-33]  and  the  presenting  officer's
         typed note of the hearing [attached to the respondent's  grounds]).
         The grounds amount to an attempt to reargue the substantive  merits
         of the appeal, without identifying legal error.  In any event,  the
         appellant has  paid  (i)  the  Immigration  Health  Surcharge  when
         applying and (ii) privately for  the  report  from  the  Consultant
         Psychiatrist.

     43. In his oral submissions, he submitted that  the  challenge  in  the
         grounds is that the judge had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons.
         However for the reasons set out in the rule 24 response  the  judge
         had given adequate reasons having accepted the appellant's evidence
         as to the strength of his private life.

     44. He submitted that the judge directed herself properly in law as set
         out at paragraph [69]. When asked  if  there  had  been  any  self-
         direction to the applicable test  when  considering  whether  there
         were "very significant obstacles" Mr Solomon submitted  that  there
         was no reference to any case law but there was no need to do so and
         that the judge had sufficiently directed herself  to  the  term  by
         referring to the  "high  threshold"  at  paragraph  [70].  Thus  he
         submitted there was no misdirection in law.

     45. As to  the  substance  of  the  challenge  of  whether  there  were
         "inadequate reasons" the judge had given adequate reasons  for  her
         conclusions and the reasons are summarised at paragraphs [70 - 72].
         They were as follows:

           . the appellant was depressed  and  in  significant  debt  as  a
             consequence of the respondent's  erroneous/unlawful  decision-
             making and delays [70];

           . he is a strange and family  members  who  blame  him  for  the
             financial loss he finds himself in [70]

           . he does not have the means to repay the debt and there are now
             court proceedings in relation to the debt he owes [70]

           . he may be beyond the age of government employment, and he  has
             no work history having never briefly worked in Bangladesh [70]

           . he is in fear of the person to whom he owes money to and there
             have been threats made and a legal notice issued  in  relation
             to the debt [70]

           .  he  will  return  to  Bangladesh   with   no   accommodation,
             significant debt, no money or assets, no family support [71].

     46. Mr Solomon submitted that the judge gave adequate reasons, and  the
         cumulative nature of  the  reasons  are  set  out  in  the  judge's
         decision. There is no perversity challenge to those findings.

     47. By reference to his rule 24 response at page 2  (d),  he  submitted
         the judge taken account of material  considerations  and  that  the
         appellant was an adult man who was highly educated  MBA  level  and
         was spent the majority of his life in Bangladesh (at[70]). She also
         took into account that he spoke Bengali and had  lived  there  from
         birth to adult hood.

     48. When considering the respondent's grounds at paragraphs  6  and  11
         (skills, language, family  ties,  qualifications  and  heritage  et
         cetera) they are all clearly considered by the judge who also finds
         that he is estranged from his family.

     49. When considering ground 1  and  paragraphs  4  (conflict  regarding
         family contact), paragraph 5 (how we visited Bangladesh in 2011  if
         destitute)  and  paragraph  7  (fortitude,  Bangladeshi  community,
         friends support) are disagreements with the decision and amount  to
         attempt to reargue the substantive merits of  the  appeal,  without
         identifying any legal  error.  Furthermore  and  importantly  those
         matters were not argued at the hearing and the judge should not  be
         criticised for failing to engage in arguments that were not  raised
         at the hearing including internal relocation (see  paragraph  8  of
         ground 1). The appellant never claimed to be destitute in 2011  and
         his problems arose in 2012 - 2013 onwards.

     50. Mr Solomon submitted that the judge did not  have  to  address  all
         arguments as set out in R(Iran).

     51. He further submitted that there was a  "vague  suggestion"  in  the
         grounds that the FtTJ's conclusions at paragraphs  [70  -  72]  are
         limited  and  unsubstantiated.  However  if  it  meant   that   the
         conclusions were unsupported by evidence that is not the  position.
         It is clear that the judge set out  his  factual  findings  on  the
         evidence at paragraphs  48  -  69  and  then  summarise  them  when
         considering the issue of "very significant obstacles" and that this
         was the right approach. The judge accepted the appellant  to  be  a
         reliable and truthful witness who had given detailed evidence,  and
         this was reflected in the credibility findings (at [48]). The  FtTJ
         noted that the respondent did not dispute the  immigration  history
         as advanced by counsel (at[49]) and also accepted  there  had  been
         delay in decision-making in the appellant's case, and also accepted
         that he established a degree of private life in the  UK  (at  [49])
         and at [50) found the appellant to be of "good positive  character"
         and the respondent did not suggest  that  he  breached  immigration
         laws or was otherwise undesirable.

     52. As regards his immigration history, the delay  and  the  effect  of
         this was also accepted by the FtTJ as set  out  at  [54]-[57].   Mr
         Solomon submitted that this was the "historic  injustice"  referred
         to in the skeleton argument and that the erroneous  decision-making
         had caused the problems for the appellant.

     53. As to S117B factors, the appellant spoke English fluently,  and  at
         [62] he had worked in the UK until denied permission  that  he  had
         not relied on any public funds since being in the UK  and  that  at
         [63] he was currently financially  supported  and  accommodated  by
         friends but had no funds of his own to rely on.

     54. Mr Solomon  submitted  that  the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
         account as to why he had had to borrow money from  the  loan  shark
         and that he was destitute and in debt and that there was a  "causal
         connection between the Home Office in action and his debt." It  was
         because of the debt he had no means to support himself upon  return
         and was in fear of loan sharks. It was the debt that contributed to
         his estrangement from the family who believe  the  money  had  been
         spent on life in the  UK  are  not  his  studies  and  had  led  to
         estrangement. Mr Solomon submitted that the respondent not  dispute
         the legal notice set out in the appellant's bundle. The judge found
         that as a result of the delay the appellant had been diagnosed with
         depression.

     55. As regards ground 2, Mr Solomon submitted that  as  the  judge  had
         found the appellant met the rules  he  did  not  have  to  consider
         Article 8 outside of the rules. However  in  the  alternative,  any
         error would be immaterial given the judge's findings of fact  which
         would address the proportionality issues under S117B. The burden on
         the state was addressed by the judge finding that the appellant was
         financially  independent  having  been  supported  by  friends  and
         accommodated by them. There were no claims on the public funds. The
         issue of delay was accepted and were all matters  which  the  judge
         had dealt with.

     56. Mr Solomon's final point was that the grounds were  an  attempt  to
         reargue the appeal and relies upon arguments that were not advanced
         before the FtT nor raised the decision letter therefore  the  judge
         should  not  be  criticised  for  not  addressing  them.  This   is
         particularly the position relating to ground 3 (and the  assertions
         made about the NHS  debt)  and  in  any  event  was  wrong  as  the
         appellant had paid the immigration surcharge.

     57. Mr Solomon invited the tribunal to uphold the decision.

     58. At the conclusion of the submissions reserved my decision  which  I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     59. There are three grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.
         Before  dealing  with  the  merits  of  the  appeal  I  make   some
         observation on those grounds as drafted.  There  are  a  number  of
         paragraphs which do not make any attempt  to  identify  a  material
         error of  law  but  attempt  to  reargue  the  appeal  without  any
         reference to the evidence before the FtTJ and the factual  findings
         made. In this regard, paragraphs 4-7 of ground  1  fall  into  this
         category. Paragraphs 63 and 66 do not  conflict;   the  appellant's
         account, which the judge accepted was that as a result of the  debt
         and failure to return to Bangladesh with qualifications and work he
         was estranged from his family and at [63] the judge found  that  he
         was isolated and not in  contact  with  his  family.  There  is  no
         conflict  when  the  factual  findings  are  properly   considered.
         Paragraph 5 refers to the appellant's visit to Bangladesh  in  2011
         and then asks; if the appellant was destitute  how  did  he  manage
         this? He clearly has cousins in Bangladesh." However as Mr  Solomon
         points out, the evidence related to the events that occurred  after
         2011 therefore paragraph 5 of Ground 1  is  based  on  an  entirely
         different factual premise. Similarly paragraphs 6 and 7 and 11  are
         no more than a disagreement with the findings made.

     60. Other parts of the grounds refer to issues  that  were  not  raised
         before the FtTJ. In this category paragraph 8 of ground 1 refers to
         internal relocation but this was never raised as  an  issue  before
         the FtTJ.  In relation to Ground  2,  paragraph  21,  refers  to  a
         illegal working but as conceded by Mr McVeety,  he  could  find  no
         evidence upon which to base  such  an  assertion.  In  relation  to
         ground 3, it was not argued on behalf of the respondent that he had
         utilised the NHS  at  public  cost  and  where  it  was  argued  at
         paragraph 29 that the judge failed to address the burden on the  UK
         taxpayer in accordance with the case law  cited  at  paragraph  30,
         this was not advanced on behalf of the respondent before the FtT.

     61. Other parts of the grounds refer to case  law  which  has  no  real
         relevance (see Ground 1 paragraph 19 referring to the  decision  in
         Younas and the case references made to ground 3.

     62. The grounds read as if  they  were  the  skeleton  argument  to  be
         advanced before the FtT rather than grounds focusing on the  appeal
         that took place before the FtT.

     63. I have therefore sought to identify from the grounds what  are  the
         key points relied  upon.  As  Mr  McVeety  submitted  in  his  oral
         submissions, the grounds advance a "reasons challenge" and that the
         FtTJ failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the appellant
         met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) which relates  to
         whether there were "very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
         the UK."  In this regard Mr  McVeety  clarified  that  he  was  not
         seeking to advance a "perversity challenge" or that there  was  any
         irrationality on the part of the FtTJ.

     64. When considering the submissions, it is important in  my  judgement
         to  consider  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtTJ  and  the
         assessment of that evidence.

     65. The FtTJ plainly accepted the appellant's  evidence  and  expressly
         gave reasons for reaching that view at paragraph  [48].  The  judge
         found the appellant to be "a reliable  and  truthful  witness"  who
         gave "detailed, measured and balanced  oral  evidence".  The  judge
         found that the appellant did not seek to  exaggerate  his  evidence
         and that his account had been consistent.

     66. Mr McVeety on behalf of the respondent submitted where the  grounds
         refer to the appellant's claim as "unsubstantiated" that this meant
         that the judge's findings that the appellant was credible  was  not
         sufficient to support his factual findings. I  cannot  accept  that
         submission. The judge had the  opportunity  to  hear  the  evidence
         before her and for it to be the subject of  cross-examination.  The
         judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that she did at [48] and
         there is no need for the judge to require  any  further  supporting
         evidence having found that she accepted the appellant's evidence on
         the particular factual matters in dispute.

     67. It is also plain that some of the factual  background  was  not  in
         dispute between the parties. The judge recorded at  paragraph  [49]
         that the respondent did not  dispute  the  appellant's  immigration
         history, and this was relevant to the weight the FtTJ gave  to  the
         issue of delay and that of historical injustice and  there  was  no
         dispute that there had been  significant  delay  in  the  decision-
         making process on more than one occasion.  Also,  contrary  to  the
         grounds, the respondent accepted that the appellant had established
         a private life in the UK (at [25], [32] and [49]).

     68. Against  that  background  the  FtTJ  made  the  following  factual
         findings:

          1) Article 8 was engaged and that the appellant had established a
             significant private life in the UK having lived in the UK  for
             over 13 years (at [58]).

          2) During the  length  of  his  residence,  he  heard  undertaken
             studies  and  established  close  and  strong  ties  with  his
             community and close friends ( at [59] and[74]).

          3) He was a positive good character with no convictions  nor  was
             it suggested by the respondent that  he  breached  immigration
             laws or was otherwise undesirable (at [50]. The appellant  had
             lawful leave until 2015 and thereafter had authority to remain
             in the UK (at [49],[50], [51-[56]).

          4) The appellant spoke English fluently (at [4]) and studied  and
             achieved a postgraduate qualification in the UK (at [59]).

          5) The appellant's immigration history summarised  at  paragraphs
             [50] - [56] was accepted and that the significant delays  were
             due to the respondent in 2 respects; the decision in 2013  was
             not resolved until 2014 and are shorter than 60-day period was
             issued to the appellant. In addition there had been  a  "clear
             and unambiguous delay" where the decision was refused in  2015
             not served until June 2018 and then substantively refused with
             a right of appeal on 6 March 2019 (at [57]).

          6) Being a foreign student required a significant  investment  of
             funds and the appellant had not relied  on  any  public  funds
             since being in the UK (at [62]). The appellant had  worked  in
             the UK but having been denied permission to work a  number  of
             years ago he had been supported  by  friends  because  he  was
             destitute (at [60]-[62]).

          7) As a consequence of the delay in the decision-making  process,
             the appellant got into debt having borrowed money  at  a  high
             interest rate and owed money to a loan shark as  well  as  his
             family.  This  had  led  to  family   relationships   becoming
             estranged and had lost the opportunity to  qualify  in  health
             and social care.  A  further  consequence  of  the  delay  and
             ensuing debt was that the appellant's health had  suffered  as
             set out in the medical evidence (at [57],  [62],  [64],  [65],
             [66], [67]).

          8) The appellant was isolated and not in contact with his  family
             (at [63]).

          9) His relationships with family were strained as a result of his
             debt and failure to return to Bangladesh  with  qualifications
             and work (at [66]).

         10) As a result of the delay, the appellant was in debt to a  loan
             shark and had served legal notice to recover  the  money.  The
             appellant did not have the means to repay the debt  and  there
             are now court proceedings in relation to the debt he owes. The
             respondent did not dispute that  the  legal  notice  had  been
             issued (at [68] and [70]).

         11) The appellant is in fear of the person to whom he  owes  money
             and there have been threats made (at [70]).

         12) The appellant may be beyond the age of  government  employment
             and has no work history  having  never  previously  worked  in
             Bangladesh (at [70]).

         13) The appellant's family have abandoned him and  are  not  in  a
             position to support him (at [67]).

     69. On the basis of those factual findings when viewed cumulatively the
         FtTJ was satisfied that they were of such weight  and  significance
         that they would entail very serious hardship and she was  satisfied
         that he met the "very high threshold" necessary to demonstrate that
         they were  "very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration"  to
         Bangladesh. The FtTJ's assessment under the rules was summarised at
         paragraph [70]-[73] of the decision.

     70. Whilst the judge did not expressly set out  the  case  law  on  the
         issue of "very significant obstacles", the judge did direct herself
         to the appropriate threshold as a "high threshold to satisfy"  both
         at [70] and at [74] and sought to  identify  in  the  decision  the
         factual elements which she was satisfied met the high threshold.

     71. The relevant law that was applicable when considering the issue  of
         whether there are "very significant obstacles  to  integration"  is
         set out in the decision of  SSHD v  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,
         where Lord  Justice  Sales  in  considering  a  foreign  criminal's
         "integration" into the country where he is to be  deported,  stated
         at [14] that the idea "integration" calls for a  "broad  evaluative
         judgment"

     72. In Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) the Tribunal found that  mere
         hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere  upheaval,  and  mere
         inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to  satisfy  the
         test of very significant obstacles.

     73. That decision was the subject of further discussion in the decision
         of Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ as follows:

             "Since the grant of permission this Court has had occasion  to
             consider the meaning of the phrase "very significant obstacles
             to integration", not in fact in paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi)  but
             as it appears in paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules  and
             in section 117C (4) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
             Act  2002,  which  relate  to  the  deportation   of   foreign
             criminals. In  Kamara  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [2016] 4  WLR  152,  Sales  LJ
             said, at para. 14 of his judgment:

                  "In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
                  'integration' into the country to  which  it  is  proposed
                  that he be deported ... is a broad one. It is not confined
                  to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
                  living in the other country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to
                  treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss  and
                  it will usually be sufficient  for  a  court  or  tribunal
                  simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament  has
                  chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad
                  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to   whether   the
                  individual will be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms  of
                  understanding how  life  in  the  society  in  that  other
                  country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it,
                  so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
                  there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
                  society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety
                  of  human  relationships  to   give   substance   to   the
                  individual's private or family life."

             9.   That passage focuses more on the concept  of  integration
             than on what is meant by  "very  significant  obstacles".  The
             latter point was recently  addressed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
             (McCloskey J and UTJ Francis) in  Treebhawon  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC).  At  para.
             37 of its judgment the UT said:

                  "The other limb of the test, 'very significant obstacles',
                  erects a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere
                  hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere  upheaval
                  or inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be
                  insufficient in this context."

             I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss  on
             the words of the rule. It is fair enough to observe  that  the
             words "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold,  and
             I have no difficulty with the observation that the  test  will
             not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I  am  not
             sure  that  saying  that  "mere"  hardship  or  difficulty  or
             hurdles, even if multiplied, will not "generally" suffice adds
             anything of substance. The task of the Secretary of State,  or
             the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is  simply  to  assess  the
             obstacles to integration relied on, whether  characterised  as
             hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether
             they regard them as "very significant".

     74. Thus the FtTJ assessed the obstacles  relied  upon  and  considered
         whether she regarded them as "very significant."

     75. I accept the submission made by Mr Solomon  that  contrary  to  the
         grounds the judge did take into account the other relevant  factors
         including his age, length of previous residence in  Bangladesh  and
         that he had been educated to the level of an  MBA  (at  [70]).  The
         judge also took into account that he  retained  both  cultural  and
         language links to Bangladesh. Notwithstanding those  factors  which
         were identified as supportive  factors  in  integration,  the  FtTJ
         having identified the all of the relevant facts and for the reasons
         summarised at paragraphs [70 - 73] FtTJ found that even taking into
         account  those  supportive  factors,  on  the  particular   factual
         circumstances of this appellant's case, the  overall  circumstances
         taken together met the high threshold to demonstrate that they were
         very significant obstacles to his integration.

     76. Whilst Mr McVeety advanced the grounds on the basis  of  inadequacy
         of reasons, the FtTJ set out the reasons in detail and by reference
         to the evidence that was before the tribunal. Mr McVeety  submitted
         that he did not seek to challenge the reasons given  on  the  basis
         that they were either irrational or perverse. It follows  that  the
         reasons given at paragraphs  70-72,  which  relied  upon  the  fact
         finding and analysis of the evidence carried  out  in  the  earlier
         part of the decision, were based on findings which were  reasonably
         open to the FtTJ to make on the evidence before  her.  Consequently
         it has not been demonstrated the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for reaching the decision that she did under the Rules.

     77. As to ground 2, if the FtTJ did give adequate reasons for  reaching
         the conclusion that the appellant met the immigration rules then as
         Mr Solomon submitted, the FtTJ was entitled to apply  the  approach
         set out in  TZ  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at paragraph 34  and  having  found
         the requirements of the rules was met to  find  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove the appellant from the UK. On that basis
         the FtTJ was entitled to allow the appeal under Article  8  of  the
         ECHR.

     78. Even if the FtTJ was an error by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
         rules, on the factual findings made I accept the submission made by
         Mr Solomon that the FtTJ would have  been  entitled  to  allow  the
         appeal outside of the rules and  that  the  factual  assessment  as
         rationally open to the FtTJ to make, would have properly  addressed
         the proportionality of the decision under challenge.

     79. The grounds in this respect submit that the judge did not apply the
         section 117 public interest considerations. Any legal  misdirection
         would not render the decision in error if the findings of fact made
         by the judge provided a sound basis on a proper application of  the
         law to dispose of the appeal in the way that she did.

     80. When addressing the public interest  factors  section  117A(2)  (a)
         requires the tribunal to have regard to the  considerations  listed
         in section 117B. The FtTJ accepted that the appellant spoke English
         and contrary to the grounds the judge found  as  a  fact  that  the
         appellant had not relied on public funds since arrival  in  the  UK
         and that he had been financially independent having been  supported
         by  friends  in  the  UK  and  therefore  the  public  interest  in
         section117B(2) and (3) was not engaged. However  they  are  neutral
         factors and  do  not  detract  from  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control ( see the decision  in
         Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC at [57] per Lord Wilson).

     81. When assessing the strength of  the  public  interest  the  factual
         findings and assessment made by the  FtTJ  took  into  account  the
         issue of delay and found there to have been a significant period of
         delay by the respondent and found also that the delay had caused  a
         number of negative outcomes for the appellant.  The  FtTJ  set  out
         that assessment at paragraphs [50]- [56] and at [57] concluded that
         there had been significant delay on the respondents behalf; firstly
         the erroneous decision in  2013  and  the  "clear  and  unambiguous
         lengthy delay" following the  application  in  2015  which  is  not
         served until 2018 and then substantively refused in March 2019.

     82. The FtTJ found that the effects of the delay to be such  that  they
         had a significantly adverse effect upon the appellant. It  affected
         his mental health, and this was supported by the  medical  evidence
         (at[64]) and that the appellant was unable to qualify in his chosen
         field due to the "erroneous  decision  making".  It  also  led  the
         appellant having to  borrow  significant  sums  which  led  to  the
         appellant being in debt and being in fear of the  loan  sharks  (at
         [66]) and led to estrangement from the family. As the  judge  noted
         the evidence in relation to the debt  was  not  challenged  by  the
         respondent at the hearing (at[70]).

     83. These are the issues of  historical  injustice  relied  on  by  the
         appellant which the FtTJ accepted.  The  issue  of  delay  and  its
         effect upon the appellant was a matter which the judge was entitled
         to find as relevant  to  the  Article  8  assessment  (  see  Patel
         (historic injustice; NAA 2002 part 5A) [2020] UKUT 35 and that  the
         public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control
         may be given less weight than it ordinarily might under S117B(1).

     84. Ground 3 refers the public interest in utilising the  NHS.  However
         as set out earlier, this was a point that was not argued before the
         FtTJ and as Mr Solomon submits, the appellant had paid  immigration
         surcharge and also had pay for private treatment.

     85. It is now well established that it is necessary  to  guard  against
         the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are  in  truth
         no more than disagreement about the weight to be given to different
         factors, particularly if the judge who decided the appeal  had  the
         advantage of hearing oral evidence. The assessment of such a  claim
         is always a highly fact sensitive task. The FtT judge was  required
         to consider the evidence as a whole and she plainly did so,  giving
         adequate reasons for her decision.

     86. Even if the decision could be characterised as a generous  one,  it
         has not been demonstrated by the respondent that on the  particular
         factual circumstances of this appellant's case and on the  evidence
         before the FtTJ that the decision was either inadequately  reasoned
         or that  he  failed  to  apply  the  correct  legal  principles  in
         substance. In the light of the grounds of  challenge,  it  has  not
         been demonstrated that there was  any  inadequacy  in  the  reasons
         given by the FtTJ.

     87. For these reasons I consider that the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
         disclose any errors of law requiring the judge's decision to be set
         aside. The judge clearly had regard to all  the  evidence  and  was
         entitled to make the positive findings that she did.  Consequently,
         the FtTJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant had shown that
         there were "very significant obstacles to his integration" and that
         that his removal to Bangladesh would breach his human rights  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR. The  FtTJ  carried  out  a  full  assessment
         reaching conclusions on that evidence which were reasonably open to
         her to make.

     88. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did not  involve  the  making  of  an
         error on a point of law and that the decision should stand.




Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT to  allow  the
appeal shall stand. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or their family members.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated     3/8/2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

