
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: HU/05443/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2019                         |On 20th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                pinalben [g]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman, Solicitor instructed by London Imperial
                    Immigration Services Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose appeal (and that of  her  son
    as a second Appellant)  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rowlands in a decision dated 8th November 2018.  By  notice  dated  6th
    February 2019 the son's appeal was withdrawn.

 2. The judge noted that they had entered the United Kingdom on 15th August
    2010 with entry clearance and the judge noted that there  had  been  no
    change in the position since a previous decision of Judge James who had
    dismissed the appeal  of  the  first  Appellant's  husband.   The  only
    difference had been that the second Appellant had  moved  to  secondary
    school  and  apart  from  that  there  was   no   difference   in   the
    circumstances.  The judge took the view that  his  starting  point  was
    that he was bound by the Tribunal's previous findings  subject  to  any
    later reliable evidence as set down in Devaseelan and the family should
    "move to India sooner rather than later to avoid  confusion  for  these
    young children". He duly dismissed the appeal.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged and initially refused but granted by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy. He said that while he  considered
    the judge was entitled to rely on the decision of Judge James  who  had
    determined the appeal of the husband of the  first  Appellant  and  the
    father of the (former) second Appellant as  a  starting  point  in  the
    decision, the reality was that the judge had not set out the  reasoning
    in that decision nor  given  his  own  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellants were not entitled to succeed.  He considered that this might
    well be an arguable error of law.

 4. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.  Mr Clarke  for  the
    Home Office conceded that it was an error in law by the judge in saying
    he was bound by the previous findings but maintained  this  was  not  a
    material error.  For the Appellant Mr Rehman submitted that there was a
    material error in law because the child was  settled  here  and  proper
    findings needed to be made in respect of that.   I  was  asked  to  set
    aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    fresh hearing.

Conclusions

 5. The position here is that the child is a qualifying child in  terms  of
    Section 117D of the 2002 Act having lived in the United Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of seven years.  The judge carried out no analysis of
    the consequences of that fact.  There was no attempt  to  look  at  the
    best interests of the child as a  primary  consideration.   No  factual
    findings were made.  It is clear that being a  qualified  child  has  a
    considerable bearing on whether or not an appeal is to  be  allowed  or
    dismissed and of course there has been recent case  law  on  this  very
    issue in terms of KO (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53  and
    more recently JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]
    UKUT 00072 (IAC).  The judge did  not  enter  this  arena  and  by  not
    considering the best interests of the child allied to the fact that the
    child was a qualifying child made a material error in law. Although the
    child is now to make a fresh application (neither party addressed me on
    that) the outcome of this appeal is inextricably linked to the  outcome
    of whether the child has a right to remain in the United Kingdom.

 6. This matter will therefore have to be heard again and  accordingly  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its  entirety.   No
    findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the  nature
    and extent of the judicial fact-finding necessary for the  decision  to
    be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I set aside the decision.

 9. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.


JG Macdonald

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G  Macdonald                             Dated
 19th March 2019













