
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           mrs nazmoon nahar tanni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, Solicitor, Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 14 November 2018 Judge NMK Lawrence of the First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of
    Bangladesh, against the decision made by the respondent on  1  February
    2018 to refuse leave to remain.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the suitability requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)
    because she had used deception in two TOEIC tests she took in 2012; and
    that she could not succeed on s.117B(6) NIAA 2002 or Article 8  grounds
    outside the Rules because, although one of her two  children  (T),  had
    been in the UK for nine years, it was reasonable to expect T  to  leave
    the UK and there were no strong reasons for finding that returning T to
    Bangladesh would affect him adversely.

2.   The appellant's grounds challenged both limbs of the judge's decision.

3.   In relation to the suitability issue (which forms ground (1)),  it  was
    submitted that the judge erred in failing to consider as an  aspect  of
    the  appellant's  innocent  explanation,  the   significance   of   the
    documentary evidence showing that the appellant had sat and passed  the
    IELTS test in 2007 (when in  Bangladesh)  and  whilst  in  the  UK  had
    completed her bachelor degree from the London  Metropolitan  University
    before she sat the TOEIC test.  In addition, the judge was said to have
    failed to take into account that the appellant had never sought to  use
    the TOEIC certificate at all.  What the appellant had said in her  oral
    testimony regarding the purpose of taking this test (she stated it  was
    part of her husband's plan to migrate to  the  US),  should  have  been
    treated as an honest and credible explanation.

4.   In relation to the second aspect of the  appellant's  challenge  (which
    forms ground (2)), it was submitted that the judge failed to understand
    that the Home Office had already accepted that it  was  not  reasonable
    for the child T to leave the UK and that, in any event, the  judge  had
    misapplied the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

5.   I am not persuaded by ground (1).  The judge  was  clearly  aware  that
    the appellant had passed and obtained a good score in her IELTS and had
    completed a diploma course.  Whilst he does not expressly refer to  the
    ability to speak English as shown by  these  results,  it  was  plainly
    something he took account  of.   On  the  evidence  in  the  case,  the
    evidence  regarding  her  past  proficiency  in  English  was   not   a
    consideration that was capable of specifically affecting the  issue  of
    deception, since that turned on  the  explanation  she  had  given  for
    taking the two  TOEIC  tests  in  2012.   Here  the  judge  justifiably
    attached weight to two matters.  First in  her  witness  statement  the
    appellant made a simple denial of the allegation of  deception  coupled
    with an assertion that she took the tests personally, although she  did
    not need to.  Second, in her oral testimony the appellant was initially
    unable to give any reasons why she took the tests if she did  not  need
    to and had then for the first time proffered the reason that it was  to
    assist her intention to migrate to the USA.  When asked if that  answer
    showed it would have assisted her to take the test a second time in the
    hope of getting a high score, she denied it (paragraphs 8-9).  Further,
    in her oral evidence the appellant first said she had forgotten she had
    taken the TOEIC tests and then that she could not consider taking it  a
    second time.  As the judge noted, she had taken no steps to obtain  the
    voice recordings despite the respondent's statement  that  it  was  the
    same voice on both tests.

 6.  I consider the  judge's  assessment  of  the  issue  of  deception  was
    entirely within the range of reasonable responses.  He was entitled  to
    find that the respondent had discharged the burden of proof on  him  to
    establish the allegation of deception and that the appellant had failed
    to provide an innocent explanation.

7.   However, the appellant  must  succeed  on  ground  (2).   As  Mr  Kotas
    conceded, the judge inverted the test set out in MA (Pakistan) so  that
    it became, not strong reasons for refusing leave,  but  strong  reasons
    for granting leave (see paragraph 40).  Further and in any  event,  the
    judge entirely overlooked that the respondent as recently  as  February
    2018 had stated in a letter granting leave to her husband and T that it
    would not be reasonable to expect T to leave the UK.  The judge  wholly
    failed  to  consider  the  implication  of  these  decisions  for   his
    assessment of reasonableness.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  decision  of  the  judge  is
    vitiated by legal error and should be set aside.

9.   I turn to consider whether I am in a position to re-make  the  decision
    without further ado, bearing in mind that Mr Kotas submitted  I  should
    adjourn it to await test cases on a series of KO (Nigeria) [2018] [UKSC
    issues due to be heard by a presidential panel in February.  Were I  of
    the view that my task of re-making required  me  to  consider  all  the
    facts in the context of a general proportionality assessment,  I  would
    have agreed with Mr Kotas.

10.  However, the case falls in my  view  squarely  within  the  compass  of
    s.117B(6).  The child T has been in the UK for more  than  seven  years
    and the respondent has accepted, as recently as 1 February  2018,  that
    it is not reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

11.  Mr Kotas submitted that Lord Carnwath in KO (Nigeria) clearly  required
    that the s.117B(6) assessment had to be made in the context of the real
    world.  However, in talking about the  real  world  Lord  Carnwath  was
    addressing whether the test of reasonableness was or was not  made  out
    if regard  was  had  to  likely  realities  flowing  from  the  refusal
    decisions at issue.  Here the respondent has effectively conceded  that
    the reasonableness requirement is met.

12.  Even if satisfaction of the conditions set  out  in  s.117B(6)  is  not
    enough on its own to demonstrate that it would not be proportionate  to
    require  the  appellant  to  leave  the  UK,  I  cannot  see  that  the
    appellant's deception was of such an order as to reverse the balance of
    factors in her favour.  She did not use the  TOEIC  tests  to  seek  to
    obtain leave to remain.  But for concerns about her past  deception  in
    2012, it would appear she would have been granted extension of leave as
    a dependant of a Tier skilled worker.

13.  For the above reasons, I conclude that:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law;

     The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on Article  8
    grounds by reference to s.117B(6).


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

