
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05092/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 6 July 2021                       |On 5 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SAMI SALMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Holt instructed by TMC Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: Sami Salman (the appellant) and the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (the respondent).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bahrain who was born on 13 June 1966.

 3. The appellant claims that he arrived in the UK in 1982, when he was  16
    years of age.  On 27 June 1990, the appellant  was  granted  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain (ILR).  He claims to have lived in the  UK  ever  since
    but it is clear he also made a visit or visits  to  Ireland  at  times,
    claiming he last returned to the UK in 2018.

 4. The appellant had a brief relationship with an Irish citizen and, as  a
    result of that relationship, on 5 May 1989  the  appellant's  daughter,
    Diane ("D") was born in Ireland.  He was granted  custody  of  D  on  7
    April 1990 and returned to the UK with her where he was awarded custody
    of her by the court in July 1992.  D was subsequently registered  as  a
    British citizen.

 5. During this time, the appellant  had  a  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen, Grace Cunningham ("G").   They married in Bahrain in 2000.  On
    14 May 2010, the appellant's son, Rashid ("R") was born in the UK.

 6. At some point, the appellant's relationship with G broke down.  A  non-
    molestation order was made by the Bristol Family Court on 28 March 2019
    in relation to G prohibiting from contacting her.

 7. On 8 August 2019, at the Bristol Magistrates' Court the  appellant  was
    convicted of breaching that non-molestation order and also  of  sending
    threatening and abusive communications to his daughter, D  contrary  to
    s.4(1) and (4) of the  Protection  for  Harassment  Act  1997.   On  17
    September 2019, in relation to each offence the appellant was sentenced
    to six months' imprisonment to  run  consecutively.   As  part  of  his
    sentence, the Bristol Magistrates' Court also made a restraining  order
    against  him  valid  until  16  September  2022  preventing  him   from
    contacting G and D.

 8. On 18 October 2019, the appellant's appeal  against  those  convictions
    was dismissed by the Bristol Crown Court.

 9. On  29  October  2019,  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant under s.5(1) of the Immigration
    Act 1971 ("the IA 1971") on the based of those convictions and that his
    deportation was conducive to the public good under s.3(5)(a) of the  IA
    1971.

10. On 14 November 2019, the appellant made a human rights claim based upon
    his  private  and  family  life  in  the  UK  seeking  to  resist   his
    deportation.

11. On 23 March 2019, the Secretary of State rejected the appellant's human
    rights claim under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 30 October 2020, Judge I D  Boyes  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

13. First,  Judge  Boyes  rejected  the  appellant's  contention  that  the
    appellant was not liable to deportation because he was not  a  "foreign
    criminal" under the UK Borders Act 2007 (the "UKBA 2007")  due  to  the
    fact that he had not been sentenced  to  a  period  of  twelve  months'
    imprisonment for a single offence but rather, to consecutive  terms  of
    six months' imprisonment for two offences.  The  judge  concluded  that
    the Secretary of  State  had  not  applied  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions in  the  UKBA  2007  but  rather,  had  decided  to  make  a
    deportation order under s.5(1) by reference to s.3(5)(a) of the IA 1971
    on the basis that the appellant's deportation  was  "conducive  to  the
    public good".

14. Secondly, the judge then went on to apply the provisions in  s.117C  of
    the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  NIAA  2002").
    The judge found that the appellant did not fall within Exception  1  in
    s.117C(4) or Exception 2 in s.117C(5).

15. As regards the former,  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    "socially and culturally integrated into the UK" (s.117C(4)(b)) and had
    lived most of his adult life in the UK.  However, the  judge  concluded
    that there were not "very significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant's
    integration on return to Bahrain (s.117C(4)(c)).

16. As regards the latter, the judge  did  not  accept  that  there  was  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  between  the  appellant
    and his son, R and that, as a consequence, it could not be said that it
    would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant to be deported.

17. Thirdly, however, the judge went on to apply  the  test  in  s.117C(6),
    namely whether there were  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  so  as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest.  The judge found that there  were  such  circumstances
    and so  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  and  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to deport  the  appellant.   On  that  basis,  the  judge
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

18. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of
    grounds.

19. First, the judge had erred in law in  finding  that  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances" sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest
    under s.117C(6) given his findings that the appellant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of either Exception 1 or Exception 2.  The  judge  had
    made inconsistent findings, in reaching that  conclusion,  namely  that
    the appellant both continued to deny his wrongdoing but also concluding
    that he had shown genuine  remorse  for  his  offending.   Further,  in
    finding that the appellant was rehabilitated, the judge, in addition to
    reaching those inconsistent findings, was wrong to  take  into  account
    that the appellant had not committed any  further  offences  given  the
    short time since his release.

20. Secondly, the Secretary of State contended  that  the  judge  had  been
    wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  "socially  and   culturally
    integrated" for the purposes of Exception  1  (which  continued  to  be
    relevant in relation to the application of s.117C(6))  because  he  had
    failed to take into account the appellant's offending  and  had  merely
    looked at the position of his integration retrospectively  before  that
    point in time.

21. On 23 November 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (UTJ Martin)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

22. On 6 January 2021, the appellant filed a rule 24  response  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

    1. The "Serious Harm" Argument

23. Before turning to the Secretary of State's grounds, it will be  helpful
    to consider the point raised by the appellant in the rule  24  response
    which, at least there, contends that the respondent  had  no  power  to
    deport the appellant as he is not a "foreign criminal"  within  s.32(1)
    of the UKBA 2007 as he has not been sentenced to a period of "at  least
    twelve months'" imprisonment for a single  offence  (see  ss.32(2)  and
    38(1)(e)).

24. In his oral submissions, Mr Holt  accepted  that  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  the  UKBA  2007
    did not affect whether he was  liable  to  deportation.   That,  in  my
    judgment, is correct.

25. The Secretary of State made a decision to deport  the  appellant  under
    s.3(5)(a) of the IA 1971 on the basis that, the appellant not  being  a
    British citizen, "the Secretary of State deems his  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good".  On that basis, the Secretary  of  State
    had the power to make a deportation order under s.5(1) of the IA  1971.
    That much is plain from the respondent's decision letter  where  it  is
    stated:

         "We wrote to you on 29 October 2019 and notified you  that  because
         of your criminal convictions and behaviour in the UK the  Secretary
         of State has decided to make a Deportation Order against you  under
         Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971.   This  is  because  the
         Secretary of State deems your deportation to be  conducive  to  the
         public good".

26. The Secretary of  State  did  not  purport  to  apply  the  'automatic'
    deportation provisions in the UKBA 2007 on the basis that the appellant
    was a "foreign criminal" because he had been sentenced to a  period  of
    at least twelve months' imprisonment for a  single  offence.   Had  the
    'automatic' deportation provisions applied then by virtue of s.32(4):

         "For the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971
         ..., the deportation of a foreign  criminal  is  conducive  to  the
         public good".

27. The Secretary of State would, in those circumstances,  be  relieved  of
    having to make any decision about whether the individual's  deportation
    was conducive to the public good because it is simply deemed that it is
    conducive to the public good if he is a "foreign criminal".

28. It follows, therefore, that the point raised in the rule  24  response,
    which appears to mirror submissions made to Judge Boyes at the  hearing
    but rejected by him at [41]-[42], is legally misconceived.

29. However, the relevance of whether the appellant is a "foreign criminal"
    did arise, albeit in a different guise.   In  determining  whether  the
    appellant's deportation breached Art 8 of the ECHR, Part 5A of the NIAA
    2002 sets out factors relevant to the "public interest question"  under
    Art 8.2 (see 117A(2) and (3)).  As is well-known,  s.117B  sets  out  a
    number of public considerations applicable to all cases and s.117C sets
    out a number of additional considerations in "cases  involving  foreign
    criminals".  Whether the appellant was a "foreign criminal" as  defined
    in the NIAA 2002 determined whether, in particular, s.117C  applied  in
    deciding whether his deportation was proportionate under Art 8.2.   The
    definition of "foreign criminal" for the purposes of Part 5A is set out
    in s.117D(2) as follows:

         "(2) In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who -

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."

30. There, albeit only in part,  like  under  the  UKBA  2007,  the  phrase
    "foreign criminal"  is  defined  as  meaning  a  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of at  least  twelve  months'  imprisonment.   By
    virtue  of  s.117D(4)(b),  that  period  of  imprisonment   cannot   be
    established if it is only by virtue of being sentenced  to  consecutive
    sentences amounting to a  cumulative  total  at  least  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.   In  that,  it  reflects  the  definition  of   "foreign
    criminal" for the purposes of the 'automatic' deportation provisions in
    the UKBA 2007 in s.3(8)(b) of that Act.

31. However, in the NIAA 2002 a "foreign criminal" has a  wider  definition
    so as to include a person who has been convicted of an offence that has
    "caused serious harm" or where the offender is a "persistent offender".



32. In this appeal, therefore,  the  provisions  in  s.117C  -  which  were
    applied by the judge - were only applicable to the appellant if he is a
    "foreign criminal" as defined.  He could not be a "foreign criminal" on
    the basis of his sentence and it has not ever been suggested that he is
    a "persistent offender".   However,  the  Secretary  of  State  in  her
    decision letter concluded that the appellant had been "convicted of  an
    offence which has caused serious  harm"  and,  as  a  consequence,  she
    applied in her decision letter the provisions in the Immigration  Rules
    (paras 398, 399 and 399A) which mirror the provisions in s.117C.

33. Before the judge, the appellant did not contend that this conclusion by
    the Secretary of State was wrong or, indeed, raise with the  judge  the
    issue of whether s.117C could apply  as  the  appellant  had  not  been
    convicted of an offence which caused "serious harm".  As I have already
    pointed out, and as the  judge  dealt  with  in  paras  41-42  of   his
    decision, the argument about  whether  the  appellant  was  a  "foreign
    criminal" was misdirected towards the issue of whether he was liable to
    deportation at all.  No doubt,  as  a  result  of  this  focus  of  the
    submissions, the judge was not alerted to the issue of  whether  s.117C
    applied because the appellant was a "foreign criminal" because  he  had
    been convicted of an offence  that  had  caused  "serious  harm".   The
    appeal  seems  to  have  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  Part  5A,  in
    particular, s.117C applied to the Art 8  claim  relied  on  before  the
    judge.

    "Serious Harm"

34. The meaning of "serious harm" in the definition of a "foreign criminal"
    in Part 5A was considered by the Court of Appeal in R (Mahmood v UTIAC)
    v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 717.

35. In his judgment in Mahmood, Simon LJ (with whom Coulson and  Males  LJJ
    agreed) identified two  preliminary  points  concerning  the  scope  of
    s.117D(2) as follows:
         "35. First, the  three  categories  in  subsection  (2)(c)  have  a
         potential to overlap.  Plainly  an  offender  who  has  received  a
         sentence of more than  12  months  may  have  done  so  because  he
         committed  an  offence  which  caused  serious  harm.  Equally,  an
         offender who persistently offends is likely  to  receive  a  longer
         sentence (and more than 12 months) because  of  a  poor  antecedent
         history.
         36. Second, the  provision  must  be  given  its  ordinary  meaning
         informed  by  its  context.  The  three  categories  must  be  read
         together. This is more  than  simply  a  conventional  approach  to
         statutory interpretation.  It  is  plain,  for  example,  from  the
         structure of the provision that an offender who has been  sentenced
         to a term of less than 12 months for an offence may nevertheless be
         treated as a 'foreign criminal' if the offence caused serious harm;
         and that 'serious harm' will only be relevant when the sentence for
         an offence is less than 12 months. This throws light on what may be
         encompassed by an offence which causes serious harm.  While  it  is
         possible to think of  offences  which,  despite  causing  the  most
         serious harm, would  not  typically  attract  an  immediate  prison
         sentence of at least 12 months (causing death by  careless  driving
         is an example), in general paragraph (c)(ii) is not concerned  with
         the most serious kind of harm which comes before the Crown  Court."



36. Consequently, it is important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  offending
    covered by s.117D(2)(c)(iii) arises, by  definition  and  in  practice,
    only in a case where an offender has not been  sentenced  to  at  least
    twelve months imprisonment for a single offence.  It may, therefore, be
    reflective of the fact that offences do not  necessarily  involve  "the
    most serious kind of harm" in cases coming before the criminal courts.

37. At [39], Simon LJ identified that the harm must be  causatively  linked
    to a particular offence and cannot arise from  a  generic  effect  upon
    society connected to the type of offence in general:
         "39. So far as the  word  'caused'  is  concerned,  the  harm  must
         plainly be causatively linked to the offence. In  the  case  of  an
         offence of violence, injury will be caused to the immediate  victim
         and possibly others. However, what matters is the  harm  caused  by
         the particular offence. The prevalence of  (even  minor)  offending
         may cause serious harm to society, but that does not mean  that  an
         individual  offence  considered   in   isolation   has   done   so.
         Shoplifting, for example, may  be  a  significant  social  problem,
         causing serious economic harm and distress to the owner of a modest
         corner shop; and a thief who steals a single item of low value  may
         contribute to that harm, but it cannot realistically be  said  that
         such a thief caused serious harm himself, either to the owner or to
         society in general. Beyond  this,  we  are  doubtful  that  a  more
         general analysis of how  the  law  approaches  causation  in  other
         fields is helpful."

38. Then, at [41], Simon LJ concluded that the "harm" includes, but is  not
    limited  to,  physical  or  psychological  harm  to   an   identifiable
    individual, it includes also economic harm and a particular offence may
    cause relevant harm to society:

         "41. Mr Biggs argued on behalf of Mahmood that  the  harm  must  be
         physical or psychological harm to an identifiable  individual  that
         is identifiable  and  quantifiable.  We  see  no  good  reason  for
         interpreting the  provision  in  this  way.  The  criminal  law  is
         designed to prevent harm that may include psychological,  emotional
         or economic harm. Nor is there good reason to suppose  a  statutory
         intent to limit  the  harm  to  an  individual.  Some  crimes,  for
         example, supplying class A drugs, money laundering,  possession  of
         firearms, cybercrimes, perjury and perverting the course of  public
         justice may cause societal harm. In most cases the  nature  of  the
         harm will be apparent from the nature of the  offence  itself,  the
         sentencing remarks or from victim  statements.  However,  we  agree
         with Mr Biggs, at least to this extent: harm in this  context  does
         not include the potential for harm or an intention to do harm."

39. At [42], Simon LJ  dealt  with  the  issue  of  whether  the  harm  was
    "serious" and he recognised  that  was  not  a  precise  criterion  and
    depended upon evaluation of all the evidence:
         "42. The adjective 'serious' qualifies the extent of the harm;  but
         provides no precise criteria. It is  implicit  that  an  evaluative
         judgment has to be made in the light of the facts and circumstances
         of the offending. There can be no general and all-embracing test of
         seriousness. In some cases, it will be a straightforward evaluation
         and will not need specific evidence of the extent of the harm;  but
         in every case, it will be for the tribunal to evaluate  the  extent
         of the harm on the basis of the  evidence  that  is  available  and
         drawing common sense conclusions."

40. As regards proof, the burden of proof is on the Secretary of  State  to
    the civil standard (see [47] per Simon LJ).

41. At [56], Simon LJ concluded that the  ultimately  decision  whether  an
    offence has caused "serious harm" is for the FtT:

         "The views of the Secretary of State are a starting point  and  the
         reasoning of a decision letter may be  compelling;  but  ultimately
         the issues that arise under s.117D(2)(c)(ii) will be a  matter  for
         the FtT."

42. In relation to evidence, Simon LJ recognised (at [48]-[53])  the  range
    of evidence that would  (and  should)  be  considered  by  the  FtT  in
    reaching its finding:
         "48. Neither the direct victim of a crime (if there is one) nor the
         prosecuting authority is a party to the tribunal  proceedings.  The
         focus of the hearing is  whether  the  deportation  decision  is  a
         proportionate response to the criminality and the  legitimate  aims
         that the Secretary of State  seeks  to  achieve  by  deporting  the
         foreign national.
         49. The relevant criminal file (the contents  of  the  Crown  Court
         Digital Case System) is not produced or made available to the  FtT.
         The record of the conviction, which is rarely in dispute, stands as
         the authoritative  evidence  of  conviction.  Tribunals  are  often
         provided with the record of conviction or the sentence order of the
         criminal court, along with (where available)  the  remarks  of  the
         judge who passed sentence, which may  be  reproduced  in  the  Home
         Office decision letter. Under its procedure rules the FtT may admit
         such evidence whether or not the evidence would be admissible in  a
         civil trial in the United Kingdom (see Rule 14(2)(a) FtT Rules).
         50. While an appellant may give and call live evidence, prosecution
         witnesses do not usually give evidence before  the  FtT  about  the
         criminality. This will have been conclusively  established  by  the
         conviction that led to the decision to deport.
         51. Mr Biggs argued that the Secretary of State must prove the case
         against the offender by adducing specific items  of  evidence  that
         would include, if the  seriousness  of  the  harm  were  in  issue,
         evidence from the victim. We see no proper basis for this argument.
         In many cases, a victim statement will be put before the sentencing
         judge. This will describe the impact caused by the  offence  as  at
         the date of the statement. A victim statement adduced  in  criminal
         proceedings has the status of evidence which  a  defendant  has  an
         opportunity  to  challenge  before  sentence  is   passed   (R   v.
         Perkins [2013] 2 Cr. App. R. (S) 72). There is no justification for
         allowing a second such opportunity in proceedings before  the  FtT.
         In cases where the Secretary of State  relies  on  the  causing  of
         serious  harm  alone  for  treating  an  offender  as  a   'foreign
         criminal', we would expect the sentencing  remarks  (if  available)
         and the victim statement  (if  it  exists)  to  form  part  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence  before  the  tribunal.  However,  we
         recognise that in many  cases  a  victim  or  those  less  directly
         affected by a crime may be reluctant to make a statement as to  the
         harm endured by an offence, and no proper conclusions can be  drawn
         from the lack of such a statement.
         52. The suggestion that a victim  of  crime  should  have  to  give
         evidence of the effect of that crime before a  tribunal,  with  the
         prospect of cross-examination by or on behalf  of  the  perpetrator
         can be rejected outright: not least because of  the  potential  for
         causing additional harm to a victim.
         53. While an  offender  may  choose  to  give  evidence  about  the
         underlying criminality, the FtT will be aware that  this  will  not
         necessarily be the whole, or even a truthful, picture...."

43. In Wilson (NIAA Part  5A;  deportation  decisions)  [2020]  UKUT  00350
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on  s.117D(2)(c).   Having  set
    out at length passages from the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Mahmood
    and a number of earlier cases, the UT summarised the approach  at  [53]
    to the issue of whether an offence caused "serious harm" as follows:


         "53. The current case law on "caused serious harm" for the purposes
         of the expression "foreign criminal" in Part 5A of the 2002 Act can
         be summarised as follows (drawing predominately from  the  judgment
         of Simon LJ in R (Mahmood and others):-

         (1)  Whether P's offence is "an offence  that  has  caused  serious
             harm" within section 117D(2)(c)(ii) is a matter for the  judge
             to decide, in all the circumstances, whenever Part 5A falls to
             be applied.

         (2)  Provided that the judge has considered  all  relevant  factors
             bearing on that question; has not  had  regard  to  irrelevant
             factors; and has not reached a perverse decision,  there  will
             be  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  conclusion,   which,
             accordingly, cannot be disturbed on appeal.

         (3)      In determining what factors are  relevant  or  irrelevant,
             the following should be borne in mind:

             (a)  The Secretary of State's view of whether the offence  has
                  caused serious harm is a starting point;

             (b)  The sentencing remarks should be carefully considered, as
                  they will often contain valuable  information;  not  least
                  what may be said about the offence having caused  "serious
                  harm",  as   categorised   in   the   Sentencing   Council
                  Guidelines;

             (c)  A victim statement adduced in  the  criminal  proceedings
                  will be relevant;

             (d)  Whilst the Secretary of State bears the burden of showing
                  that the offence has caused serious  harm,  she  does  not
                  need to adduce evidence  from  the  victim  at  a  hearing
                  before the First-tier Tribunal;

             (e)  The appellant's own evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  on the issue  of  seriousness  will  usually  need  to  be
                  treated with caution;

             (f)  Serious harm can involve physical, emotional or  economic
                  harm and does not need to be limited to an individual;

             (g)  The mere potential for harm is irrelevant;

             (h)  The fact that a particular type of offence contributes to
                  a serious/widespread problem is not sufficient; there must
                  be some  evidence  that  the  actual  offence  has  caused
                  serious harm."


44. Turning to the present case, there is no doubt that there was  evidence
    before the judge capable of establishing that the appellant's  offences
    "caused serious harm" to his partner, G and also his adult daughter, D.
     The Memorandum of Entry in the  Register  of  the  Magistrates'  Court
    following the appellant's conviction of the two offences is set out  in
    the respondent's decision letter.

45. As regards the offence committed against his partner of  breaching  the
    non-molestation order, that records that on 31 March 2019 he "banged on
    the door and shouted at [G] to cancel the order" in breach of the  non-
    molestation order.   He  was  sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment
    consecutive to the offence for which he was also convicted in  relation
    to his daughter.  The Register records:

         "Reason: offence so serious because persistent nature of  offending
         which caused serious distress and psychological harm to the victim.
          The breach of the non-molestation order was deliberate and  almost
         immediately on imposition".

46.  As  regards  the  offence   of   sending   threatening   and   abusive
    communications to his adult daughter (D),  the  Register  records  that
    this occurred between 2 March 2019 and 15 April 2019 and  which  caused
    her to "fear that violence would have been used against her" and  which
    "you knew or ought to have known would cause fear of violence" to  her.
    He was sentenced to six months' imprisonment to run consecutively  with
    the other offence.  The reason is stated as follows:

         "Offence so serious because persistent nature  of  offending  which
         caused serious distress and psychological harm to the victim".

47.  In  addition,  of  course,  the  Magistrates'  Court  also  imposed  a
    restraining order preventing him from contacting either his partner  or
    daughter until 16 September 2022.

48. There is no doubt that this was the relevant record which the judge had
    before him as to the nature of the appellant's offending and which  was
    undoubtedly capable of sustaining a  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    caused "serious harm" in  relation  to  both  offences  and  so  was  a
    "foreign criminal" as defined in s.117D(2)(c)(ii) of the NIAA 2002.

49. Indeed, Mr Tan submitted that the judge  had,  in  fact,  made  such  a
    finding.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Tan relied upon what  the  judge
    had (at para 18) paraphrased the reasons given by the  magistrates  for
    imposing the custodial sentences including that the offences  were  "so
    serious because of the persistent nature of the offending which  caused
    serious distress and psychological harm to the victim".   Mr  Tan  also
    relied on what the judge said at para 57,  albeit  in  the  context  of
    proportionality, as follows:

         "The appellant has been convicted of two offences.  One of them  is
         a breach of a court order which  of  itself  is  both  serious  and
         concerning, secondly the offence  which  relates  to  his  daughter
         included threats of physical violence such that would cause her  to
         fear such violence would be used upon  her  and  against  her.   In
         their conclusion the magistrates  reached  the  decision  that  the
         offence was so serious that only  a  custodial  sentence  would  be
         justified, a decision which was subsequently upheld  by  the  Crown
         Court in Bristol". (my emphasis)

50. With respect to Mr Tan's submission, I do not accept that the judge has
    made a clear finding that, in effect,  s.117D(2)(c)(ii)  applied.   The
    judge did not specifically refer to that provision  and  indeed,  as  I
    have already indicated, the point was not taken  before  him  that  the
    application of s.117C of the 2002 Act was contingent  on  this  finding
    even though it had been the basis upon which the Secretary of State had
    applied the mirroring  provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
    decision letter.  The judge's attention was simply not  drawn  to  this
    issue at the hearing.  His words are  not,  in  my  judgment,  a  clear
    enough statement to sustain the submission that he has, in effect, made
    the required finding in order to be satisfied, and the burden was  upon
    the Secretary of State, that the appellant was a "foreign criminal" and
    so Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 applied to the appellant.

51. Further, as I have already said, I am in  no  doubt  that  the  reasons
    given  by  the  magistrates  were  capable  of  establishing  that  the
    appellant's offences caused "serious harm".  It may well be that such a
    conclusion would be likely on a full assessment of the facts.  However,
    in order to reach the conclusion that the judge did not err in  law  in
    applying s.117C at all, I must be satisfied that  it  would  have  been
    inevitable that he would have concluded that the  appellant's  offences
    caused  "serious  harm"  on  the  material  before  him.   Despite  the
    likelihood that he would, I am not persuaded that it was inevitable.

    Materiality if s.117C(6) Does Not Apply

52. Mr Holt submitted that the error by the judge was not material because,
    if s.117C did not apply, the judge would inevitably have found that the
    appellant's deportation was disproportionate because the high threshold
    in the test, which the judge in fact applied under s.117C(6)  of  "very
    compelling circumstances", would not  apply.   A  lower  threshold/test
    would be applicable: a fortiori he would  have  found  the  appellant's
    deportation to be disproportionate.

53. The applicable test if s.117C did not apply to the  appellant  was  not
    explored in depth before me.  The true point of relevance as to whether
    the appellant was a  "foreign  criminal"  was  not  identified  by  the
    appellant's representatives until the UT hearing.   Mr  Tan's  skeleton
    argument,  although  addressed  to  the  relevant  issue,  rested   the
    Secretary of State's position on the submission that the judge had,  in
    fact, made a finding that the appellant's offences had caused  "serious
    harm".

54. In order to determine the correct  approach  to  proportionality  in  a
    deportation case where s.117C (and the mirroring Immigration Rules)  do
    not apply, it is necessary to 'wind back the clock' to the approach set
    out in the case law prior to  July 2012  (when  the  Immigration  Rules
    first included provisions relating to Art 8 in deportation) and 28 July
    2014 (when Part 5A of the NIAA  2002  came  into  force  together  with
    mirroring changes to the  Immigration  Rules).   Likewise,  any  impact
    arising from the 'automatic' deportation provisions in the  UKBA  2007,
    must likewise be put to one side as  they  also  cannot  apply  to  the
    appellant.  Those provisions came into force earlier on 1  August  2008
    and, to the extent, the weigh to be given to the  public  interest   in
    deporting under those provisions was inevitably reflected  in  judicial
    reasoning even before  the  Art  8  provisions  came  into  force  (see
    SS(Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550, especially at [54] and [55] per
    Laws LJ).

55. The approach to proportionality  was,  definitively,  set  out  in  the
    speeches of Lord Bingham in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and  Huang
    v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  At [20] in Razgar, Lord Bingham said  that  the
    issue of proportionality:

         "must always involve the striking of a  fair  balance  between  the
         rights of the individual and the interests of the  community  which
         is inherent in the whole of the Convention".

56. This statement was approved by Lord Bingham (and the other  members  of
    the House of Lords) in Huang at [20].

57. Neither of those cases involved deportation.  They involved removal and
    therefore engaged, principally, the legitimate  aim  of  the  "economic
    well-being  of  the  country".  In  the  context  of  deportation,  the
    principal legitimate aims are the "prevention of  disorder  or  crime",
    the "protection of the rights and freedoms of others".

58. As a consequence, as the Supreme Court recognised in Hesham Ali  (Iraq)
    v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at [25] (per Lord Reed):

         "... the court has often  said  that  the  task  of  the  court  or
         Tribunal applying Article 8(2) consists in ascertaining whether the
         decision struck a fair  balance  between  the  relevant  interests,
         namely the appellant's right to respect for his private and  family
         life, on the one hand, and the prevention of disorder or crime,  on
         the other".

59. The approach of the Strasbourg  case  law  in  deportation  of  foreign
    offenders relying upon Art 8 has been identified in a number of leading
    authorities including Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50;  Uner  v
    Netherlands (2007) 45 EHRR 14, and Maslov v  Austria  [2009]  INLR  47.
    These cases were summarised by Lord Reed  in  Hesham  Ali  at  [26]  as
    follows:

         "26. In a well-known series of judgments the court has set out  the
         guiding principles which it applies when assessing  the  likelihood
         that the deportation of a  settled  migrant  would  interfere  with
         family life and, if so, its proportionality to the  legitimate  aim
         pursued. In Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50, para  48,  the
         court said that it would consider the nature and seriousness of the
         offence committed by the applicant; the length of  the  applicant's
         stay in the country from which he or she is  to  be  expelled;  the
         time elapsed since the offence was committed  and  the  applicant's
         conduct during  that  period;  the  nationalities  of  the  various
         persons concerned; the applicant's family situation,  such  as  the
         length  of  the  marriage,  and  other   factors   expressing   the
         effectiveness of a couple's family life; whether  the  spouse  knew
         about the offence at the time when he or she entered into a  family
         relationship; whether there are children of the  marriage,  and  if
         so, their age; and the seriousness of the  difficulties  which  the
         spouse is likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant
         is to be expelled. Two further factors were  mentioned  in  ?ner  v
         Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR 14, para 58: the best interests and well-
         being of  the  children,  in  particular  the  seriousness  of  the
         difficulties which any children of  the  applicant  are  likely  to
         encounter in the country to which the applicant is to be  expelled;
         and the solidity of the social, cultural and family ties  with  the
         host country and with the  country  of  destination.  In  Maslov  v
         Austria [2009] INLR 47, paras 72-75, the court added that  the  age
         of the person concerned can play a role when applying some of these
         criteria. For instance, when assessing the nature  and  seriousness
         of the offences, it has to be taken into account whether the person
         committed them  as  a  juvenile  or  as  an  adult.  Equally,  when
         assessing the length of the person's stay in the country from which
         he or she is to  be  expelled  and  the  solidity  of  the  social,
         cultural and  family  ties  with  the  host  country,  it  makes  a
         difference whether the person came to the country during his or her
         childhood or youth, or was even born there, or whether  he  or  she
         only came as an adult. Some of the factors listed  in  these  cases
         relate to the strength of the public interest in deportation:  that
         is to say, the extent  to  which  the  deportation  of  the  person
         concerned will promote the legitimate aim pursued. Others relate to
         the strength of the countervailing interests in private and  family
         life. They are not exhaustive."

60. Of course, when the Immigration Rules in July 2012 and s.117C  in  July
    2014 came into force, the public policy set out  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and latterly by the legislature,  became  a  relevant  factor  in
    determining the weight to be given to the "public  interest"  reflected
    in an individual's offending (see Hesham Ali at [50]).

61. Reflecting the  phraseology  that  was  introduced  by  s.117C(6)  (and
    mirrored in Immigration Rule changes at the same time),  Lord  Reed  in
    Hesham Ali at [50] said this:

         "50. In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out  its  task  on
         the basis of the facts as it finds  them  to  be  on  the  evidence
         before it, and the law as established  by  statute  and  case  law.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether deportation  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation  of  the  offender  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to Parliament's and  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessments of the strength of the general public interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders, as explained in paras  14,  37-38
         and 46 above,  and  also  consider  all  factors  relevant  to  the
         specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal will
         generally be whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation of  the  offender  in  the  case
         before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to  outweigh
         it. In general, only a claim which is very  strong  indeed  -  very
         compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."

62. However, the public interest  in  deportation  has  always  required  a
    Tribunal to assess the weight to be given to the appellant's  offending
    based upon its seriousness and any risk  of  future  offending  by  the
    individual, in other  words  it  was  for  the  Tribunal  to  give  due
    ("strong") weight to the public interest in deportation  (see,  e.g.  N
    (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 104 and OH (Serbia) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 694).  That approach has not changed  because  of  the  legislative
    intervention in Part 5A and, indeed, what is said in s.117C(1) and  (2)
    no  more  than  reflects  the  position  that  deportation  of  foreign
    offenders is "in the public interest" (s.117C(1)) and  as  set  out  in
    s.117C(2):

         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign national,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

63. That said, however, the specific exceptions set out  in  s.117C(4)  and
    s.117C(5) were not, in themselves, explicitly part of the legal regime,
    and would not now be part of the legal regime if Part 5A did not  apply
    to a particular individual.  Equally, the structured approach  in  Part
    5A which will, in all cases, determine the outcome of an  appeal  where
    Art 8 is engaged, will not apply (see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 662 at [38] and HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 at [27]).

64. Nevertheless, the phraseology in s.117C(6) that  there  must  be  "very
    compelling circumstances" reflects the case law that emerged after  the
    Immigration Rules changes introduced from 2012 -  initially,  requiring
    "exceptional   circumstances"    and    latterly    "very    compelling
    circumstances" (see, e.g. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  at
    [42]-[43]).   The  undeviating  view  in  the  case  law  is  that  the
    statutory provisions (and before them the Immigration Rules) do no more
    than  reflect  the  Strasbourg  Court's  approach  to  Art  8  and,  in
    particular, the issue of proportionality (see, NA  (Pakistan)  at  [38]
    and HA (Iraq) at [28]).

65. In HA (Iraq), the Court of Appeal saw not real 'gap'  in  substance  in
    Art 8 assessments made before and after the deportation provisions were
    introduced in the Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the NIAA  2002.   At
    [36]-[38], Underhill LJ (with whom Jackson and Popplewell  LJJ  agreed)
    said this:
         "36. I have not so far referred to  authorities  about  the  regime
         which preceded the coming into force of Part 5A  in  2014  and  the
         associated changes to the Rules. However, as this Court made  clear
         in Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the Home  Department [2019]
         EWCA Civ  2098, [2020]  1  WLR  1843,  ("Akinyemi  (no.  2)")  the
         underlying principles relevant to the assessment of the  weight  to
         be given to the public interest and article 8 have not been changed
         by the introduction of the new regime (see per the Senior President
         of Tribunals at para. 46). The purpose of the new provisions was to
         give statutory force, accompanied by some re-wording, to principles
         which had already been established in the case-law relating to  the
         Immigration Rules. That means that  cases  decided  under  the  old
         regime may still be authoritative. We have already seen  that  this
         Court in NA (Pakistan) referred to the important observations  of
         Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria) about the weight to be given to the public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. It also  referred
         on several occasions to the decision of this Court in MF (Nigeria)
         v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
         1192, [2014] 1 WLR 544.
         37. The most authoritative exposition of the principles  underlying
         the old regime can be found, two years after it had been superseded
         and even some months later than NA (Pakistan), in the decision  of
         the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799. It is authoritative
         on the points of principle  underlying  both  regimes  and  was  so
         treated in Akinyemi no. 2 (see paras. 46-50). That  being  so,  I
         should say that I can see nothing in the judgments of the  majority
         inconsistent  with  the  approach  taken  by  this  Court   in NA
         (Pakistan) as discussed above. At para. 26 of  his  judgment  Lord
         Reed summarises the effect of the Strasbourg case-law about foreign
         criminals, and at para. 33, like this Court in NA  (Pakistan),  he
         makes it clear that the factors referred to in those cases need  to
         be taken into account in the assessment of the  proportionality  of
         the deportation of foreign  offenders  (whether  or  not  they  are
         "settled migrants").
         38. Reference to the previous case-law is important for the purpose
         of a particular point made by the Appellants in these  appeals.  It
         will be seen that in para. 32 of its judgment in NA (Pakistan) this
         Court expresses the test under section 117C (6)  as  being  whether
         the  circumstances  relied  on  by  the  potential  deportee   "are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation"; and it uses the same formulation in paras. 33 and  34
         (see paras. 36-37 above). The Appellants contend that that  is  the
         only correct formulation, and that it is dangerous to refer  simply
         to "very compelling circumstances". It would, to say the least,  be
         surprising if it were  wrong  to  use  the  very  language  of  the
         statute; but in any event  the  position  becomes  clear  when  the
         development of  the  case-law  is  understood.  This  Court  in NA
         (Pakistan) took the language of "sufficiently compelling" from the
         decision in MF (Nigeria). Paragraph 398 of the pre-2014 Rules  had
         used the phrase "exceptional circumstances". At  para.  42  of  its
         judgment in MF the Court said that that did not mean that a test of
         exceptionality  was  to  be  applied  (a  point  repeated   in NA
         (Pakistan) - see para. 36 above) and continued:
              "Rather ..., in approaching the question of  whether  removal
              is a proportionate interference with an individual's  Article
              8 rights, the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
              deportation and something very  compelling (which  will  be
              'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest in
              removal [emphasis supplied]."
         At para. 46 it  expressed  the  same  point  slightly  differently,
         referring to "circumstances which are sufficiently compelling (and
         therefore  exceptional)  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
         deportation [again,  emphasis  supplied]".  The  effect  is  clear:
         circumstances will have to  be  very  compelling  in  order  to  be
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the strong public  interest  in
         deportation. That remains the case under section 117C (6)."

66. That was, of course, said about the Art 8/deportation regimes in  place
    before  and  after  Part  5A  came  into  force.    It   is,   however,
    representative of a continuing thread that, whilst  the  emphasis  upon
    legislative policy may be reflected in the NIAA 2002 and indeed  before
    it the UKBA  2007,  the  proportionality  assessment  has  remained  in
    substance that  identified  by  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  the  "very
    compelling  circumstances"  test  reflects  it.   In  my  judgment,  in
    substance,  the  approach  in   s.117C(6)   reflects   the   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence (see MF (Nigeria) at [39]).

67. Consequently, I am not persuaded that the ultimate test in s.117C(6) is
    essentially different from the approach that  would  be  applied  if  a
    judge  were  determining  the  proportionality   of   an   individual's
    deportation without the benefit of Part 5A.

68. That said, however, the decision would not be made  via  the  route  of
    determining whether Exception 1 or Exception 2 applied and if they  did
    not, whether there were  "very  compelling  circumstances"  which  were
    "over and above" those described in  Exceptions  1  and  2.   There  is
    certainly, in my judgment, a danger that that structured approach might
    lead a judge not properly  to  weigh  up  the  competing  factors,  the
    appellant's individual circumstances against the  public  interest,  as
    recognised in the Strasbourg case law and in the  domestic  authorities
    such as Razgar, Huang and Hesham Ali.  Certainly, in a case where  Part
    5A does not apply, a judge  should  avoid  recourse  to  the  structure
    imposed  by  s.117C  in  reaching  a   decision   on   the   issue   of
    proportionality.  Likewise, the legislative  imprimatur  given  to  the
    public interest in deportation will not apply even if the  weight  that
    would be given to the public interest  may  remain  "strong"  depending
    upon the seriousness of the offending (including  any  risk  of  future
    offending).

69. In those circumstances, despite  what  I  have  said  about  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" test, I  am  persuaded  that  the  structured
    approach applied by the judge (and not applicable if Part  5A  was  not
    applicable) and the absence of  legislative  imprimatur  given  to  the
    public interest (if Part 5A and the UKBA 2007 did not apply), may  have
    had an effect on the judge's assessment of proportionality.  I do  not,
    therefore, accept Mr Holt's submission that, if s.117C(6) did not apply
    to the appellant, the judge would  inevitably  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion.

70. In any event, for the reasons I shall shortly give,  I  have  concluded
    that the judge's finding  in  relation  to  s.117C(6)  is,  in  itself,
    unsustainable and so therefore is his decision overall.

    2. The "Very Compelling Circumstances" Argument

71. Mr Tan submitted that the judge, having  found  that  Exception  1  and
    Exception 2 in ss.117C(4) and (5) did not apply, had  given  inadequate
    reasons to  sustain  his  finding  that  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above those exceptions to outweigh  the  public
    interest.  In particular, Mr Tan submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    inconsistent findings relating to the appellant's remorse and in taking
    into account his 'rehabilitation' including that he had  not  committed
    any offences since he had been released in March 2020.

72. Mr Holt submitted that the judge's reasoning at paras  56-60,  together
    with 64-68 had to be read with his earlier findings in paras 56-60.  Mr
    Holt submitted that there was no inconsistency  in  the  judge  finding
    that the appellant was genuinely remorseful despite also  finding  that
    he was maintaining some denial of the offences.  He  further  submitted
    that, in any event, any error here was immaterial as  the  judge  would
    have found the appellant's deportation to be disproportionate  even  if
    he had not taken into account any remorse by the appellant.

73. The judge accepted that the appellant could not succeed under Exception
    1 as there were not "very significant obstacles" to his integration  in
    Bahrain and he could not succeed  under  Exception  2  as  he  had  not
    established a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship"  with  his
    son (see paras 45-47  and  49-50).   The  judge  also  found  that  the
    appellant could not establish that  his  relationship  with  his  adult
    daughter, D was "any way compelling as [the] relationship is  prevented
    and  prohibited  by  virtue  of  a  restraining  order   imposed   upon
    conviction" (see para 56).  At paras 59-60, Judge Boyes said this:

         "59. The appellant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
             since 1990.  A period of some 30 years.  He has  not  offended
             other than those offences in 2019 and has, I  accept,  been  a
             positive, honest and genuine member of British society for the
             period of time he has been in the United Kingdom.  He has been
             gainfully employed in his chosen profession.

         60.  The Home Office maintains that there  is  a  very  significant
             public interest in deporting him on account of the seriousness
             of his  offending.   I  think  one  must  examine  the  actual
             offences  a  little  more  closely  before   one   reaches   a
             conclusion, as of right, that  there  is  a  very  significant
             public interest.  It is of note that both cases were  resolved
             at the Magistrates' Court.  The appellant has neither offended
             prior to that  conviction  nor  has  he  offended  since  that
             conviction.   Despite  threats  of  the  same  no  person  was
             actually physically harmed in the offending and the  appellant
             has shown, in my view, genuine insight  and  remorse  for  his
             behaviour in committing the offences as he did".

74. Having then quoted from the case law, including Razgar and Hesham  Ali,
    the judge continued at paras 64-68 as follows:

         "64. Taking all the above  into  consideration  I  have  reached  a
             conclusion that deporting a man who has lived lawfully in  the
             UK, who has lived a near  blameless  life  of  hard  work  and
             compliance with British values and  British  society  and  for
             whom his only transgression was but a brief period in his life
             when no doubt there were significant stresses,  high  emotions
             and raw feelings is not, in my view, proportionate.

         65.  The appellant has shown genuine remorse.  He has not  offended
             since the index offence.  Protective measures are in place  to
             prevent repeat offending.  He  is  engaging  with  the  Family
             Court with regard to his Son and has  shown,  albeit  limited,
             some insight into his behaviour.

         66.  To end the opportunity of him gaining contact with his Son, to
             end his life in the UK on account  of  his  limited  offending
             does not,  in  my  view,  seem  proportionate  or  a  rational
             exercise.

         67.  I can therefore answer  the  final  two  RAZGAR  questions  as
             follows; if so is such interference necessary in a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and  freedoms  of  others?
             No it is not as the appellant's behaviour when placed  against
             all other aspects of his life does not  engage  principles  of
             national security, public safety or economics.

             And,  if  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?  I have concluded
             the actions of the respondent are  not  proportionate  and  as
             such are unlawful.  If the action is lawful it cannot remain.

         68.  It follows that as the action proposed to be taken by the Home
             Office is not proportionate in terms of an interference in the
             appellant's Article 8 rights, it cannot be sustained  and  the
             appellant succeeds under Article 8 ECHR".

75. Of course, as Mr Holt submitted, these findings also have to take  into
    account the judge's  earlier  conclusions.   These  included  that  the
    appellant was "socially and culturally integrated in the UK", but  also
    that there were not "very significant obstacles to his  integration  to
    life in Bahrain".  The judge also had to take  into  account  that  the
    appellant had no genuine and subsisting relationship with his son  nor,
    indeed, could rely upon  his  relationship  with  his  adult  daughter.
    Likewise, the judge found that it was in the best interests of his  son
    R to remain in the UK with his mother and that it would not  be  unduly
    harsh for his son to remain in the UK if the appellant was deported.

76. There is, in my view, merit in Mr Tan's submission that the  judge  has
    failed to give adequate reasons for why the test in s.117C(6) was  met.
    In particular, the judge has given little weight to the public interest
    evidenced by the appellant's offending.  In part, this may  arise  from
    the fact that the judge failed (albeit in relation to the applicability
    of Part 5A of  the  2002  Act)  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    offending had caused "serious harm" to his  former  partner  and  adult
    daughter.  But it also stems from the judge's view that  the  appellant
    had shown remorse and had not offended since the index offence.  As  Mr
    Tan submitted, that latter finding was made in circumstances where  the
    appellant had only been out of prison for a short period (around  seven
    months) by the time of the hearing in October 2020.   But  the  judge's
    finding in relation to remorse (and any concomitant rehabilitation)  is
    also problematic.

77. Rehabilitation may be a factor in assessing what weight should be given
    to the public interest in that it  casts  light  upon  the  risk  of  a
    particular individual re-offending.

78. In Jallow v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 788 at [26]-[28], Lewis LJ (with  whom
    King and Baker LJJ agreed), citing Danso v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 596 and
    HA (Iraq) v SSHD, said this:
         "26. Other factors may also  bear  on  the  weight  of  the  public
         interest in the deportation of a particular offender:  see Ali at
         paragraph 38, and Akinyemi at paragraph 39. Those factors include
         what has been described as rehabilitation. That, in turn, has  been
         used   to   encompasses   a   number   of   different   situations.
         Rehabilitation may be used to describe steps taken  to  reduce  the
         risk of the particular  offender  re-offending.  That  may  involve
         consideration of matters such as courses undertaken  in  prison  to
         reduce the risk of re-offending or  the  offender's  conduct  since
         release, or any relevant assessment of the risk of the offender re-
         offending. The fact that an offender presents a  low  risk  of  re-
         offending may be a factor in assessing the strength of  the  public
         interest  in  deporting  that  particular  offender.  In  practice,
         however, such factors will not generally carry much weight for  the
         reasons identified by Moore-Bick LJ in Danso v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596. There, a prisoner had
         undergone courses in prison designed  to  address  aspects  of  his
         offending and there  were  reports  indicating  that  the  risk  of
         further re-offending was low. At paragraph 20 Moore-Bick  LJ,  with
         whom Underhill and Christopher Clarke LJJ agreed, said:
              "20. [Counsel for the appellant] submitted that the  tribunal
              should have placed much greater  weight  on  the  appellant's
              rehabilitation  and  the  fact  that  he  did  not   pose   a
              significant risk of re-offending. He suggested that  far  too
              little importance is attached to factors of that  kind,  with
              the  result  that  those  who  commit  offences  have  little
              incentive to co-operate  with  the  authorities  and  make  a
              positive effort to change their ways. I  have  some  sympathy
              with that argument and I should  not  wish  to  diminish  the
              importance of rehabilitation. It may be that in a  few  cases
              it will amount to an important factor, but the fact  is  that
              there is nothing unusual about the appellant's case. Most sex
              offenders  who  are  sentenced  to   substantial   terms   of
              imprisonment are offered courses designed to help them  avoid
              re-offending in future and in many cases the risk of doing so
              is reduced. It must be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the
              protection of the public from harm by way of future offending
              is only one of the factors that makes  it  conducive  to  the
              public good to deport criminals. Other  factors  include  the
              need to mark the public's revulsion at the offender's conduct
              and the need to deter others from acting in  a  similar  way.
              Fortunately, rehabilitation of  the  kind  exhibited  by  the
              appellant in this case is not uncommon and cannot in my  view
              contribute greatly to the existence of  the  very  compelling
              circumstances required to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
              deportation."
         27. That approach is endorsed by Underhill LJ at paragraph  141  of
         his judgment in HA (Iraq) where, having reviewed the case law, he
         said:
              "141. What those authorities seem to me to establish is  that
              the  fact  that  a  potential  deportee  has  shown  positive
              evidence of rehabilitation, and thus of a reduced risk of re-
              offending,   cannot   be   excluded    from    the    overall
              proportionality exercise. The authorities say so, and it must
              be right in principle in view of the holistic nature of  that
              exercise. Where a tribunal is able to make an assessment that
              the foreign criminal is unlikely  to  re-offend, that  is  a
              factor which can  carry  some  weight  in  the  balance  when
              considering very compelling circumstances. The  weight  which
              it will bear will vary from case to case, but it will  rarely
              be of great weight bearing in mind  that,  as  Moore-Bick  LJ
              says in Danso, the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
              criminals is not based only on the need to protect the public
              from further offending by the foreign  criminal  in  question
              but also on wider policy  considerations  of  deterrence  and
              public concern. I would add that tribunals will  properly  be
              cautious about their ability to make findings on the risk  of
              re-offending, and will usually be unable to do  so  with  any
              confidence based on no more than the  undertaking  of  prison
              courses or mere assertions of reform by the offender  or  the
              absence of subsequent offending for what will typically be  a
              relatively short period."
         28. The reason underlying the approach to the treatment of personal
         rehabilitation has,  on  occasions,  been  said  to  be  that  such
         rehabilitation will  "normally  do  no  more  than  show  that  the
         individual has returned to the place where society...  expects  him
         to be" (per Hamblen LJ as he then was in Binbuga  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home  Department [2019]  EWCA  551, [2019]  Imm  AR
         1026 at paragraph 84). With respect, however,  I  agree  with  the
         observations of Underhill LJ at paragraph 142 of his judgment in HA
         (Iraq) that that:
              "does not properly reflect the reason why  rehabilitation  is
              in principle relevant in this context, which is that it  goes
              to reduce (one element) in the weight of the public  interest
              in deportation which forms one side  of  the  proportionality
              balance. It is not generally to do with  being  given  credit
              for being a law-abiding citizen; as  the  UT  says,  that  is
              expected of everybody, but the fact that that that is  so  is
              not a good reason for denying to an appellant such weight  as
              his rehabilitation would otherwise carry.""

    (At [30] Lewis LJ  also  recognised  that  "positive  contributions  to
    society" may be a relevant factor in assessing proportionality.)

79. In order to take rehabilitation into account as Lewis LJ  envisaged  at
    [26]-[28] in Jallow,  the  judge  needed  to  make  a  clear  (and  not
    inconsistent) finding on the appellant's attitude to his offending:  he
    did not.

80. At para 60 and then again at para 65,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant has shown "genuine insight and remorse"  for  his  offending.
    However, at para 40 the judge made a finding which is,  quite  plainly,
    contrary to that.  There he said this:

         "The appellant is entitled to hold whatever view he so chooses  but
         in doing so he must accept the consequences of the manner in  which
         he expresses himself and for the fact that a refusal to accept  the
         blindingly obvious or for example his conviction does nothing  than
         underline factors which weigh heavily against  the  appellant.   It
         cannot sensibly be that the appellant  is  calm,  collected  and  a
         changed man when his continued denials of wrongdoing, his  repeated
         claims as to being a victim and blame  of  others  belie  the  very
         things he claims are present".

81. I do not accept Mr Holt's submission that there is no inconsistency  in
    these two findings.  The  finding  in  para  40  is  plainly  that  the
    appellant has not genuinely come to terms with his offending and  shown
    remorse.  The judge's findings at paras 60 and 65 is  plainly  that  he
    has shown genuine insight and remorse.  Both cannot be the case.   This
    inconsistent finding is a clear error of  law  on  an  issue  that  was
    material to the  judge's  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    appellant's deportation.

82. I accept that the fact that the appellant had not committed any further
    offences since being released from prison was a  relevant  factor  but,
    given the short period of time since his release, that could not  be  a
    factor of any great weight.

83. In my judgment, therefore,  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the test in s.117C(6)  such  that  the  public  interest  was
    outweighed was, itself, legally flawed and cannot be sustained.

84. That then leaves the final point raised in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds concerning the judge's finding in para 44 that  the  appellant,
    for the  purposes  of  Exception  1  in  s.117C(4)  was  "socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK".  That was a finding that, of  course,
    did not lead the judge to find that Exception  1  applied  because  the
    requirement in s.117C(4)(c) was not met, namely there  were  not  "very
    significant obstacles" to the  appellant's  integration  on  return  to
    Bahrain.  At para 44 the judge said this:

         "I accept that the appellant is socially and culturally  integrated
         in the UK.  He has worked in the UK for almost  all  of  his  adult
         life and has lived in the UK for almost the same  amount  of  time.
         The appellant speaks English and considers himself settled  in  the
         UK.  His lack of offending prior  to  the  index  offence  strongly
         supports his claim as to proper integration".

85. It is not clear  whether  the  judge  considered  (at  [44])  that  the
    appellant met the  requirement  in  s.117C(4)(a)  of  being  "lawfully"
    resident in the UK for most of his life.

86. Mr Tan submits that the judge's finding fails to take into account  the
    appellant's offending as potentially affecting his prior integration in
    the UK.  Mr Tan submitted that  the  commission  of  criminal  offences
    could result  in  an  individual  no  longer  being  properly  seen  as
    integrated in the UK and the judge  had  simply  not  taken  that  into
    account.  Mr Tan relied upon the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  CI
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027.  In that case, Leggatt LJ  (with
    whom Sir Ernest Ryder, SPT and Hickinbottom LJ  agreed)  said  this  at
    [61]-[62]:
         "61. Criminal offending and  time  spent  in  prison  are  also  in
         principle relevant in so far  as  they  indicate  that  the  person
         concerned lacks (legitimate) social and cultural ties  in  the  UK.
         Thus, a person who  leads  a  criminal  lifestyle,  has  no  lawful
         employment and consorts with criminals or pro-criminal  groups  can
         be expected, by reason of those circumstances, to have fewer social
         relationships and areas of activity that are capable of  attracting
         the protection of "private life". Periods of imprisonment represent
         time spent excluded from society  during  which  the  prisoner  has
         little opportunity to develop social and cultural  ties  and  which
         may weaken or sever previously established ties and make it  harder
         to re-establish them or develop new ties (for example,  by  finding
         employment) upon release.  In  such  ways  criminal  offending  and
         consequent imprisonment may affect whether a person is socially and
         culturally integrated in the UK.
         62. Clearly, however, the impact of offending and imprisonment upon
         a person's integration in this country will depend not only on  the
         nature and frequency of the offending,  the  length  of  time  over
         which it takes place and the length of time spent  in  prison,  but
         also on whether and how deeply  the  individual  was  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the UK to begin with. In  that  regard,  a
         person who has lived all or almost all his life in the UK, has been
         educated here, speaks no language other than (British) English  and
         has no familiarity with any other society  or  culture  will  start
         with much deeper roots in this country than someone who  has  moved
         here at a later age. It is hard to see how criminal  offending  and
         imprisonment could ordinarily, by themselves and unless  associated
         with  the  breakdown  of  relationships,  destroy  the  social  and
         cultural integration of someone whose entire  social  identity  has
         been formed in the UK. No doubt it is  for  this  reason  that  the
         current guidance ("Criminality: Article 8 ECHR  cases")  that  Home
         Office  staff  are  required  to  use  in  deciding   whether   the
         deportation of a foreign criminal would breach  article  8  advises
         that:
               "If the person has been resident in the UK from a very  early
               age it is unlikely that offending alone would mean  a  person
               is not socially and culturally integrated.""

87. As the court recognised, periods of  time  in  prison  can  affect  the
    integration of an individual in UK society, in particular it  may  lead
    to the breakdown of relationships, etc. which  sustain  the  conclusion
    that they were socially integrated before imprisonment.

88. Here, the judge  in  para  44  of  his  determination  found  that  the
    appellant was at least socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK
    prior to his imprisonment in 2019-2020.  At that point,  the  appellant
    had lived in the UK for some 29 years.  He  was  granted  ILR  in  June
    1990, and it  was  through  a  previous  relationship  that  his  adult
    daughter, D was born on 5 May 1989; the relationship  was  brief.   His
    relationship with G, resulted them in them being married  in  2000  and
    their son R was born in May 2010.  That relationship, obviously,  broke
    down and  resulted  in  the  offending  which  is  the  basis  for  the
    appellant's deportation.  The judge, however, plainly took into account
    that the appellant had been in the UK for 30 years and that he had been
    gainfully employed and what the judge described as a "positive,  honest
    and  genuine  member  of  British  society".   The   judge's   finding,
    therefore, in relation to the appellant's integration into the  UK  was
    not based solely upon his relationships with his partner or children in
    the UK.  It was based upon the totality of his life in the UK over some
    30 years and that he had ILR in the UK since  1990.   Mr  Tan  did  not
    suggest that the judge was not entitled to find that the appellant  was
    integrated into UK society prior to his offending.

89. Given the circumstances of the offences and that they were focused in a
    relatively short period of time, and that the  appellant  was  in  fact
    likely to have only served six months' imprisonment (being half of  his
    total sentence), even  if  the  judge  had  taken  those  matters  into
    account, I am satisfied that he would inevitably have reached the  same
    conclusion as he did in para 44 of his determination that the appellant
    was "socially and culturally integrated in the UK" for the purposes  of
    s.117C(4)(c).  I do not, therefore, accept Mr Tan's submission that the
    judge materially erred in law in reaching his  finding  in  respect  of
    s.117C(4)(c).

    3. Conclusion

90. Where then does that leave this appeal?  First, the judge erred in  law
    by not deciding whether  s.117C  should  actually  be  applied  to  the
    appellant's case on the basis that his  offences  had  caused  "serious
    harm".  Secondly, in  applying  s.117C,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    reaching his finding that there were  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 so as to outweigh the public interest
    reflected in the appellant's offending.  Thirdly,  however,  the  judge
    did not materially err in  law  in  finding  that  the  requirement  in
    s.117C(4)(c) was satisfied.

91. Taking these matters together, therefore, the judge materially erred in
    law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR and that
    decision cannot stand and must be re-made.

Decision

92. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

93. The decision in respect of Art 8 must be  re-made.   In  re-making  the
    decision, the following findings are preserved:

      a) If Part 5A applies to the appeal, Exception 1 in s.117C(4) does not
         apply, although the finding that  the  appellant  is  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the UK is preserved;

      b) If Part 5A applies to the appeal, Exception 2 does  not  apply  for
         the reasons given by the judge, namely that the appellant  has  not
         established a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his
         son R and it would not be unduly harsh for R to remain in the UK if
         the appellant were deported.

    Otherwise, none of the judge's findings are preserved.

    On re-making the decision, it will be necessary to determine (either by
    concession or judicial decision) whether Part 5A applies to the  appeal
    on the basis that the appellant is a  "foreign  criminal"  because  his
    offences have caused "serious harm".

94. Given the extent and nature of fact-finding required, including any up-
    to-date evidence properly relied upon, applying para 7.2 of the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement a proper disposal of this appeal  is  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to re-make the decision under Art 8
    subject to the preserved findings set out  above.   The  appeal  to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge I D Boyes.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                26 July 2021

