
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/05282/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 24th September 2018                                             On 5th
October 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MR MD ASAD MIAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr M Bhviyan, Counsel, instructed by Haque and
                    Hausman Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Although it is the Secretary of State who is appealing, for
      convenience I will hereinafter refer to the parties as in the First
      tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 1st January 1988.

   3. He came to the United Kingdom on 16 November 2010 with leave as a
      student. He was granted a series of further leaves.

   4. On 13 September 2015 he underwent a religious ceremony of marriage
      which was registered civilly on 21 March 2016. His wife, Mrs Taslima
      Begum, is a British national originally from Bangladesh. They now have
      a baby who is British.

   5. He made an application on 7 April 2016 for leave to remain on the
      basis of his family and private life. This was refused on 17 March
      2017. His application was considered under appendix FM of the
      immigration rules and refused on the basis of suitability. In
      applications he made on 9 November 2011 and 15 April 2013 for further
      leaves as a student he had submitted a TOEIC certificate from
      educational testing service (ETS). Checks suggested the certificate
      had been obtained through personating. A second basis for refusal
      related to the financial requirements and the evidential proofs. It
      was accepted he was in the genuine subsisting relationship with his
      wife but the respondent did not see any insurmountable obstacles to
      family life continuing in Bangladesh.

   6. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingham at Taylor
      House on 2 May 2018. Both parties were represented. His appeal was
      allowed in a decision promulgated on 24 May 2018.

   7. The respondent has been granted permission to appeal that decision. It
      was contended that to allow the appeal was inconsistent with the
      judge's comments at paragraph 71 to 73. Paragraph 71 ends:

          `... The consequences of the decision would not cause him to
         encounter very substantial difficulties or exceptional
         circumstances or unjustified harshness for him '.


      Paragraph 72 reads:


          `for these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's article 8
         rights outside the rules or under EC HR jurisprudence is not made
         out. The decision would not cause the UK to act in breach of its
         obligations under the EC HR. '.


      Finally, at paragraph 73 the judge states:


         `Based on my assessment of the facts, I am satisfied that the
         appellant's removal would be a proportionate and a justified
         measure against the respondent's legitimate aims of protecting the
         societies economic interest through immigration control.'


       In the final paragraph, Para 74, the judge states:


         'The appellant's appeal ground under Article 8 ECHR fails for those
         reasons'.


      Then, in apparent contradiction of this, under the heading `Decision'
      the judge states:


         `the appellant's appeal under the rules is allowed. The appellant's
         appeal under EC HR ground is allowed'.


      The grounds suggest that this was a slip of the pen.


   8. Alternatively, the grounds contend that to allow the appeal was
      irrational given the finding that the appellant had failed to satisfy
      the judge as to his account.


   9. It was also pointed out that the appellant's representative had
      conceded the appellant could not meet the immigration rules and so the
      judge's allowance of the appeal under the rules, if not by mistake,
      was perverse.

   The Upper Tribunal

  10. Miss Isherwood relied upon the grounds advanced. She acknowledged that
      the challenge was directed towards the decision relating to the taking
      of the test.


  11. Mr Raza started by acknowledging that the judge had found the
      respondent had discharge the initial legal burden about the taking of
      the test. However the judge found the appellant then adequately
      explained matters. Paragraph 37 sets out how the judge came to that
      decision.

Consideration

  12. The test was taken at Ashton College, Birmingham with the reading
      parts taken on 1 October 2011 and the speaking and writing parts on 19
      October 2011. The respondent had produced a screen-print indicating
      the test for 19 October 2011 had been scored at 160 on the writing and
      170 on the speaking. However, the results subsequently were declared
      invalid. Statistics for the college for that date indicate 70% of the
      results were declared invalid with the balance questionable. 121 tests
      were taken that day. The respondent provided the information from the
      Lookup tool plus the generic statements from Ms Collings, Mr
      Millington and the report from Prof French. There was also a statement
      from a member of the respondent staff explaining the core aspects of
      these reports.


  13. SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -
      Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) found the
      Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined with her evidence
      particular to the appellants, sufficed to discharge the evidential
      burden of proving that the TOEIC certificates had been procured by
      dishonesty. The respondent produced computerised spreadsheet entries
      derived from the "Look up Tool". Para13 explains this further :

         On the face of the documents ETS devised a dichotomy of "invalid"
         and "questionable" TOEIC test results. The Home Office, in turn,
         has developed a system whereby upon receipt of the ETS testing
         analysis outcomes these are matched to the person who has the name,
         date of birth and nationality of the certificate holder. This is
         known as the "Lookup Tool".

  14. This is repeated in the decision of R (on the application of Nawaz) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS: review
      standard/evidential basis) [2017] UKUT 00288 (IAC). There, the Upper
      Tribunal held that evidence obtained by use of the Look-up Tool, and
      subject to the human verification procedure, is an adequate basis for
      the Secretary of State's deception finding in these cases, in the
      light of Flynn & another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 [24 - 27], and the
      evidence of both Dr Harrison and Professor French.

  15. In the same way, the ability to describe the location of the test
      centre and the fee paid may be of limited value. There are cases where
      the person has attended at the test centre and stood beside the proxy
      test taker. In the circumstance such evidence is of limited probative
      value though each case will turn on its facts.


  16. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingham indicates an
      awareness of the switching burden of proof. At paragraph 23 the
      submission of the presenting officer to the judge stated the correct
      position and the judge at paragraph 36 found the respondent had
      discharged the initial evidential burden.

  17. Having done so, the judge then had to consider whether the appellant
      could counter this. At para 37 the judge found the appellant's
      explanation as to why he would sit an examination in Birmingham when
      he was living in London was credible. The judge gave reasons. The
      judge pointed out a train journey between the two locations is about
      two hours which is the same time it could take to travel across
      London. The judge also accepted the appellant's explanation as to why
      he has selected the particular college. The judge also pointed out
      that the college had not been prosecuted.

  18. The appellant told the judge that he has studied English in his home
      country to degree level. As was explained in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing)
      [2016] UKUT 00450(IAC) a person competent in English may still cheat
      -para 57:

         ...there is a range of reasons why persons proficient in English
         may engage in TOEIC fraud. These include, inexhaustively, lack of
         confidence, fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and
         contempt for the immigration system.


  19. The judge referred to the appellant giving his evidence in English.
      The judge accepted the appellant had a good command of English. The
      judge balances this comment by stating that the testing issue was
      seven years earlier and in the meantime the appellant would have
      improved his ability in English.


  20. The judge referred to the frailties inherent in the generic evidence
      produced by the respondent and found that the appellant had provided a
      fluid account.

  21. It is clear from the decision that the judge appreciated the caselaw
      relevant to this type of case. The judge was aware of the initial
      legal burden upon the respondent and found that this was established.
      Thereafter it was a matter for the judge to look at all the evidence
      to see if the appellant's account meant the results could be relied
      upon. The judge found this was the case and gave reasons. It is clear
      from reading the decision that the judge did not simply determine this
      on the bases at the time of hearing the appellant appeared proficient
      in English. The judge indicated awareness that with the passage of
      time is English was likely to have improved. Thereafter, the
      assessment was a matter for the judge. Consequently, I can find no
      material error of law in the approach taken by the judge.

  22. The appellant has a limited right of appeal, namely, it is confined to
      human rights issues (Section 84(1) (c) of the Nationality, Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002. If a protected human right is engaged then when
      considering the final stage of the Razgar approach the judge is
      looking matters through the prism of any relevant immigration rule
      (see Mostafa (article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112.) They are
      required to have regard to the provisions of section 117 B.

  23. The judge records at paragraph 19 the appellant's representative
      acknowledges the rules were not met. However, consideration of the
      rules was still relevant in relation to the proportionality of the
      decision. At paragraph 55 the judge states that the appeal fails on
      the rules. The appeal is not actually under the rules and the judge is
      mistaken here. However the judge then goes on to consider matters
      outside the rules and section 117 B. The judge was satisfied as to the
      appellant's financial independence and that there was accommodation
      for the family. The judge had regard to the circumstances into which
      they entered their relationship. The judge acknowledged the fact his
      spouse and child have British nationality.

  24. When the decision is read as a whole paragraph 70 to 74 is
      inconsistent with the rest of the decision. It is my conclusion that
      when the decision is read as a whole this aspect was written in error.
      The judge clearly intended to allow the appeal outside the results.






   Decision.


   No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Lingham. Consequently, that decision allowing the
   appeal shall stand




   Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal
Date 26th September 2018

