
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06271/2016
                                                               HU/06282/2016
                                                               HU/06277/2016
                                                             & HU/06285/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2018                    |On 30 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   M N M J
                                                       First Named Appellant
                                     And

                                  F S H M H
                                                      Second Named Appellant
                                     And

                                     U n
                                                       Third Named Appellant
                                     And

                                     A n
                                                      Fourth Named Appellant
                         (anonymity direction Made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Sri  Lanka  and  the  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife and the  third  and  fourth  Appellants
    their  minor  children.  They  appealed  against  a  decision  of   the
    Respondent refusing their applications for leave to  remain  under  the
    Human Rights Act. That appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro who, in a decision promulgated on  16  February  2018,
    dismissed their appeals.

 2. They sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially  refused  but
    following a renewed application was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman on 15 August 2018. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  All the original grounds turn on the judge's treatment of the
         report of an independent social worker which was before her, mainly
         about the two children. Umar, the elder, is 9 and was born very
         shortly after his mother arrived here in October 2008; so, he is a
         qualifying child.


         2.   The judge recognized this at 47, and noted the effect of Azimi-
         Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
         [2013] UKUT(IAC) 00197 that there may in such a case be "...ties
         that it would be inappropriate to disrupt without compelling
         reasons". However at 54 she said "I do not find this to be a case
         where the children's best interests point overwhelmingly in favour
         of remaining in the United Kingdom..." and at 71-72 referred to the
         'compelling circumstances' test set in Treebhawon & others (section
         117B(6)) [2017] UKUT 674.


         3.   Difficult as this area of immigration law has been allowed to
         become, MT and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot)
         Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88(IAC), discussing MA (Pakistan) & others
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and other authorities, provides useful guidance
         at 20: providing a parent is not liable to deportation, and has a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with a qualifying
         child, who could not reasonably be expected to leave this country
         with them, the public interest does not require the parent's
         removal.


         4.   Arguably, where that question is the main or only issue, all
         that judges need do is to decide as a question of fact whether the
         qualifying child could reasonably be expected to leave, without
         turning to whether there are 'compelling circumstances'."


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset both representatives  acknowledged  that  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Freeman's reference to MT and ET should have been to paragraph 17
    rather than 20. Paragraph 17 of that decision states: -

         "17. Having made that finding, Judge Martin did not  consider  that
         it required the appeals to  be  allowed.  She  noted  that  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  had
         been interpreted by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and Others
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.
         That provision states that the public interest does not  require  a
         person's  removal  where  the  person  (who  is   not   liable   to
         deportation) has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to leave the United Kingdom. In MA, the Court  of  Appeal
         held that in determining what was  reasonable,  the  issue  is  not
         solely to be looked at from the child's perspective but requires  a
         balancing exercise between what was in the public interest and what
         was in the interests of the child."

 5. Mr Wells put forward four arguments. Firstly, that the Judge had  erred
    in consideration of her analysis of the expert  report  prepared  by  a
    senior social worker. He contended that Judge O'Garro  failed  to  give
    clear reasons why the conclusions to the report  were  being  rejected.
    This was plainly relevant with respect to the effect on the children of
    removal in terms of  their  development  and  psychological  wellbeing.
    Further that at paragraph 48 of her  decision  the  Judge  has  clearly
    misunderstood the report in terms of the psychological  wellbeing  with
    reference to the expert opinion on the psychological impact of  removal
    and integration into an alien culture.  The  Judge  has  addressed  the
    third and fourth Appellants' current psychological  wellbeing  and  has
    consequently erred in her approach. This not simply a disagreement with
    Judge O'Garro's findings but a substantive  challenge  to  the  way  in
    which she disregarded this evidence without engaging  effectively  with
    the conclusions drawn.

 6. Secondly, the approach  in  relation  to  the  third  Appellant's  best
    interests is flawed. The child has been in the United Kingdom for seven
    years and this would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
    proportionality exercise for two related reasons: firstly, because  its
    relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the  child's  best
    interests; and secondlt, because it establishes  as  a  starting  point
    that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the
    contrary. The Judge has erred in failing to approach the  consideration
    of the weight of importance  to  be  given  to  the  third  Appellant's
    residence.

 7. Thirdly, the Judge has again erred in finding  that  in  light  of  the
    expert evidence the Appellant's circumstances did  not  amount  to  the
    kind of special and compelling circumstances to override  the  guidance
    as outlined in Section  117  B  (5).  It  was  argued  in  the  grounds
    initially following the Judge's decision that she had erred in  finding
    Section 117 B (5) was determinative and that the Judge failed  to  have
    regard to all the relevant factors in giving appropriate weight to  the
    expert report in the assessment of proportionality.

 8. Finally, the Judge has recorded that the first  and  second  Appellants
    each gave evidence through a Tamil interpreter and that  there  was  no
    evidence that they spoke English. This is factually  incorrect  as  the
    Appellants both gave evidence in English without an interpreter and the
    expert  report  by  the  senior  social  worker  also  noted  that  the
    Appellants spoke English. This, together with the finding in  paragraph
    51 that the third Appellant could speak Tamil, with  all  the  evidence
    including the expert report contradicting this  finding  suggests  that
    Judge approached the hearing and the evidence  without  the  "customary
    anxious scrutiny".

 9. Mr Tarlow urged me to accept that the Judge had made findings that were
    open to be made on the evidence as detailed at paragraph 45 and  onward
    in her decision. He said that paragraph 50 of the Judge's decision  was
    "key". It states: -

         "50. At age nine and five, I find  the  children  are  still  young
         enough to adjust to life in  Sri  Lanka,  adapt  to  the  education
         system there and learn more of their  culture.  Neither  child  has
         reached a critical age in their education nor do I find  that  they
         will be unable to adapt to the education system in Sri Lanka".

10. I was asked to accept that the Judge had taken the public interest into
    account alongside the interests of the children and it was open for her
    to come to a conclusion that the family unit should remain together and
    be returned as such to their country of  origin.  Whilst  the  decision
    might not be one that all Judges might have come to it nonetheless  was
    open to be made on the evidence and consequently  the  decision  itself
    contains no material error.

11. I find that the Judge has materially erred  for  all  the  reasons  put
    forward in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  The  approach  to
    the expert  evidence  fails  to  provide  adequate  reasoning  for  its
    rejection. It is also the position that the  Judge  has  conflated  the
    interests of the third and fourth Appellants. The third  Appellant  and
    the  fourth  Appellants'  positions  should   have   been   looked   at
    individually and certainly the age of the third Appellant (nine  years)
    is of great significance and should have been considered as such  under
    both Section 55  of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    and Article 8. The Judge has failed to give reasons for  rejecting  the
    social worker's opinion regarding the impact of removal  on  the  third
    Appellant. This was an Appellant who very shortly will be able to  make
    application for British citizenship and in light of  my  findings,  and
    for the reasons identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman in  granting
    permission to appeal, the Judge has materially erred.

12. Both parties asked me to remit this appeal  were  I  to  come  to  this
    conclusion. I consider in the circumstances that  further  evidence  is
    necessary regarding the up to date  position  of  all  the  Appellants.
    Therefore, I intend to follow that course.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge O'Garro.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                 Date:     22  October
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



