
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06414/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                mashood ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   Mr Ahmed appeals against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Widdup (the judge)  to  dismiss  his  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was given by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  on  12th
    October 2018.  In granting permission Judge Landes identified that  the
    judge, arguably, had failed  to  properly  analyse  medical  and  other
    evidence in relation to the appellant's circumstances in Pakistan.   In
    particular there was evidence in relation to the extent  to  which  his
    father cared for him and was going to travel to the UK in  the  future.
    The evidence, as summarised in the decision, may have been inconsistent
    with other parts of  the  evidence  but  may  have  been  not  properly
    understood by the judge and not properly reasoned.  It was also said by
    Judge Landes in relation to ground 4, that there  was  said  to  be  no
    evidence that the father did in fact want to come  to  the  UK.   Judge
    Landes was critical of grounds 1 and 2 which attacked  the  Immigration
    Judge for giving the wrong date, referring  to  the  date  of  decision
    rather than the date of the hearing as being the crucial  date.   Judge
    Landes considered that there were arguable grounds  for  attacking  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and he granted  permission  on  all
    grounds subject to taking the view that in relation to grounds 1 and 2,
    he did not consider these had merit.

Background

2.   The appellant, who was born in Pakistan on 25 January 1991, applied  to
    come to the UK on 10 December 2016 to  settle  (family  reunion)  under
    Part 11 of the Immigration  Rules.  His  intention,  according  to  the
    application for entry clearance, was  to  join  his  mother  [TB],  his
    mother, who is described in his application as the "sponsor".  At  that
    time she lived in Feltham having been given  refugee  status  following
    her arrived into the UK in  2012.   It  seems  she  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival in July 2012 which was granted in 2013.  He is an Ahmadi Muslim
    and he has been in the UK, as I understand it, since 2013. She  claimed
    to have been given indefinite leave to remain in the UK. It seems  that
    the appellant's father remained in Pakistan living with the  appellant.
    The appellant's application to join her mother in the UK was refused by
    the ECO on 3rd March 2017.  The  appellant  appealed  on  human  rights
    grounds on 19  May  2017.  The  decision  was  reviewed  by  the  Entry
    Clearance  Manager  (ECM).  Mr  Shilliday,  who  also  represented  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, indicated to the  judge  that
    the appellant's father had never applied for entry  clearance  and  did
    not know whether he would apply for entry clearance.  The  sponsor,  at
    the time of the hearing and I assume presently, lives with her  brother
    who gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  The evidence  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  evidence  in   relation   to   the
    appellant's medical health which was set out from approximately page 97
    of the bundle of documents which was provided.  The documents suggested
    that the appellant may have been suffering from a neurological disease,
    was unable to walk or concentrate  when  learning  and  he  needed  the
    support of his family  to  maintain  his  daily  routine.  However  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal suggested that  he  could  walk
    "but not briskly" and his condition was improving.  There  was  further
    evidence of a neurological deficit of some description, but perhaps  of
    an unspecific type, one doctor describing him as  suffering  from  some
    defects in his "locomotive  system"  since  birth  who  had  difficulty
    performing normal household activities.  Having reviewed the basis  for
    the appellant's claim that his right to a private or family life  under
    article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  would  be
    infringed if he were not allowed to join his  mother  in  the  UK,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal.





The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

3.   Before the Upper Tribunal, in  his  helpful  submissions  Mr  Shilliday
    summarised his attack on the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  He stated
    that the date of  the  decision  was  not  the  correct  date  for  the
    consideration of the facts. They should have  been  considered  at  the
    date of the hearing.  He said there was an inadequacy of reasoning  and
    the judge had reached conclusions which were not open  to  him  on  the
    evidence that was before him.  The findings of fact were also skewed by
    a failure of analysis.  He referred me to paragraph 36  of  SS  (Congo)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 387 which Mr Tufan, who  appears  for  the  respondent,
    helpfully provided to the Tribunal.   Paragraph  36  of  that  decision
    states that:

         "... (in) cases involving someone outside the United  Kingdom,  who
         wishes to come to the UK  to  resume  family  life,  provided  that
         family  life   was   established   in   ordinary   and   legitimate
         circumstances at some time in the past, rather than precariously in
         the knowledge that it is in breach of UK immigration controls,  the
         European Court jurisprudence addressing the  latter  type  of  case
         which was the foundation of the approach in Nagre would not  always
         be readily applicable as an analogy.  A person who is a refugee  in
         the United Kingdom may have had a family life overseas  which  they
         had to abandon when they fled. A British  citizen  may  have  lived
         abroad for years without thought of return and  established  family
         life there, but the circumstances change, and they may wish to come
         to the UK and bring their spouse with them."

4.   It is right at this juncture also to refer  to  paragraph  40  of  that
    decision, where the Court of Appeal pointed  out  the  wide  margin  of
    appreciation  is  allowed  to  individual  states  in  determining  the
    conditions to be satisfied before  leave  to  enter  is  granted.  This
    contrasts with applications for leave to remain by persons who  are  in
    the UK already, where different considerations may apply. In particular
    the tribunal or court will need to look at the extent to  which  family
    or private life has been established in the UK. It is also right, as Mr
    Shilliday pointed out, to indicate that a distinction  appeared  to  be
    drawn between those cases involving the new  Immigration  Rules,  those
    were introduced  in  2012,  and  the  earlier  Rules,  which  were  not
    necessarily human rights' compliant.

Discussion

5.   Two paragraphs in the current Immigration Rules were considered by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and subsequently by the Entry Clearance Manager
    when determining this application under the Immigration Rules -  352  D
    and 319V.  It was accepted by Mr  Shilliday,  both  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and before the Upper Tribunal, that his client did not qualify
    under either of those Rules.  However, I  observe  the  that  paragraph
    319V (at Phelan's Immigration Law Handbook at 992) only facilitates  an
    application by a relative of a refugee in the UK in circumstances where
    there  are,  for   example,   the   "most   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances". Mr Shilliday suggested that test might be  too  high  a
    test to surmount and was not necessarily compliant with Article 8(1) of
    the European Convention on Human Rights, I suggested that might  be  an
    argument which would need to be taken before a higher court possibly on
    an attack on the basis that provision is not  human  rights  compliant.
    The Immigration Rules provide the benchmark against which  the  current
    application was rightly judged, without which it would not be  possible
    for the ECO to fairly determine the application.  The  acceptance  that
    the appellant did not satisfy either of the Immigration Rules  was,  in
    my view, a significant matter which the Immigration Judge was  entitled
    to take into account, therefore.

6.   Turning to the  decision  itself,  in  summary  the  Immigration  Judge
    considered all the evidence that was before him which he summarised  at
    paragraphs 12-24 and I consider reached conclusions that were  open  to
    him. Referring to the grounds of appeal, ground 1  alleges  a  material
    "misdirection of law". In so far as the judge referred to the "date  of
    the decision" as being the date when he should look at the evidence, as
    he appeared to suggest in paragraph 42 of his decision, he was wrong to
    do so. However, it is clear that he  did  consider  all  the  evidence,
    including evidence pertaining to the date of the hearing, in so far  as
    there was any material change. This included both  oral  evidence  from
    the sponsor and her brother  and  an  affidavit  from  the  appellant's
    father. I am satisfied  that  he  fully  considered  that  evidence  in
    reaching his decision.  Ground 2 criticises the judge  for  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting the  father's  evidence.  I  remind
    myself that the ground, along with ground 1 considered earlier in  this
    paragraph, were described by Judge Landes  as  having  little  apparent
    merit. The judge was entitled to attach little weight to the  affidavit
    sworn by the appellant's father.  The affidavit was, in his view, not a
    reliable document. Ground 3  addresses  the  alleged  failure  to  give
    adequate reasons. In  relation  to  the  medical  evidence,  which  was
    crucial to the appellant's case, the judge concluded that there was  no
    evidence of symptoms or as to the effect of the various  problems  from
    which the appellant was suffering.   He  did  not  regard  the  medical
    evidence as being adequate, stating that "I attach little weight to one
    of the letters" (that from Dr Hussain of 22 July 2018) and he  did  not
    find  the  mother's  evidence  particularly  helpful  either.   He  was
    prepared to accept that the appellant had  mobility  problems,  but  he
    found that in parts the sponsor's evidence was lacking in  credibility.
    Judge Landes criticised the judge for concluding that the appellant was
    adequately looked after in Pakistan or giving  inadequate  reasons  for
    concluding (at paragraph 56) to the contrary. He is also criticised for
    not taking proper account of  the  appellant's  uncle's  evidence.  The
    appellant's uncle is only recorded as having said  that  the  appellant
    could live with them him, although  he  was  in  receipt  of  benefits.
    However, he also took  account  of  the  fact  when  Mr  Tahir  visited
    Pakistan he found  the  appellant  to  be  in  "very  good  condition".
    Therefore, there is little in this ground either. The final  ground  on
    which the appellant takes issue with the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    (ground 4) states that the appellant was being cared for by his father.
    It is argued before the First-tier Tribunal that  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's father was caring for his  son  was  wrong  and  the  judge
    should have concluded that the existing arrangements  "cannot  possibly
    continue". Judge Landes thought there was "evidence that the father did
    want to come to the UK". In my view the judge was entitled to  conclude
    that the appellant was adequately  catered  by  his  father  living  in
    Pakistan and if the father was to make an application to come to the UK
    he could do  so.  No  doubt  at  that  stage  the  situation  could  be
    reappraised. Medical evidence could be produced at that time.

Conclusions

7.   The judge carried out a balancing exercise in paragraphs 66 and 67.  He
    took into account the  appellant's  mobility  problems,  his  level  of
    dependency on both parents and the extent  of  financial  support  (the
    evidence suggested that the appellant's mother sent money from time-to-
    time to assist her son, not that he was wholly financially dependent on
    her). Clearly the judge considered it desirable for their separation to
    come to an end, but the appellant is, and was, an adult.  However,  but
    there were other factors to  be  taken  into  account  and  these  were
    considered at paragraph 67, where it was stated  that  it  was  unclear
    what the intentions of the  father  were.  If  the  appellant's  father
    intended remaining in Pakistan, there was no reason  why  the  existing
    arrangements should not continue.

8.   The judge did not consider he had  been  presented  with  a  clear  and
    consistent account of the appellant's  father's  circumstances  by  the
    mother and son, and as far as the appellant's  mobility  problems  were
    concerned, he is able to walk, and had a life outside  the  home.  But,
    according to paragraph 67 of the  decision,  there  were  other  family
    members in Pakistan and therefore he was not socially isolated  at  the
    time of the hearing. The  judge  also  took  into  account  the  public
    interest factors in Section 117B of the 2002  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, including the public interest  applicable  in  all
    cases of ensuring the maintenance of effective immigration controls and
    the desirability ensuring that those admitted to the UK are less  of  a
    burden on taxpayers. The fact that the appellant would  depend  on  NHS
    treatment for his mobility problems, had never lived in the UK and  had
    a number of family members  abroad  were  all  factors  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into  account  when  deciding  whether  there  was  an
    unlawful interference with the appellant's protected human rights.

Decision

9.    In  all  the  circumstances,  I  have  decided  that  that  the  judge
    considered the evidence before him and reached  sound  conclusions.  If
    there was an error in relation to the statement in  paragraph  42  that
    the date of the decision was the date at which evidence was considered,
    I am satisfied that this was not a material error. I am satisfied judge
    actually considered the  evidence  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Although other judges might have reached a different  conclusion,  this
    was one that the judge was entitled to come  to  on  that  evidence.  I
    therefore dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14 January, 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
