
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06166/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 26 APRIL 2019                     |On 27 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, instructed by Whitefield solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 19 February 2019, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, HS, was born in 1965 and is a male  citizen  of
         India.  He first came to the attention of the authorities  in  2011
         when he was arrested.  He was due to return to India  in  September
         2011  but  shortly  before  his  removal  removal  directions  were
         cancelled after the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
         remain.   The  appellant  is  married  to  a  British  woman.   The
         appellant's application to remain on the basis of his marriage  was
         refused but he was granted discretionary leave to remain  until  25
         November 2014.  On 30 April 2012, the appellant  was  convicted  at
         the Crown Court Manchester of two counts of concealing, disguising,
         converting, transferring or removing  criminal  property.   He  was
         sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment.  He was served with a notice of
         automatic deportation and made representations to the Secretary  of
         State in respect of his human rights (Article 8 ECHR).  His  appeal
         to the First-tier Tribunal in 2014 was allowed.  That decision  was
         reversed on appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the  appellant  became
         appeals rights exhausted on 28  April  2015.   The  appellant  made
         further representations in respect of a fresh claim in October 2015
         which were rejected by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  appellant
         succeeded in a judicial review of that decision to the extent  that
         a further refusal decision was issued to which the appellant had  a
         right of appeal.  That decision is dated  26  February  2018.   The
         appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
         (Judge Chambers) which, in a decision promulgated on 13 July  2018,
         dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   At the time of the previous litigation in the  First-tier  and
         Upper Tribunals the appellant's wife was pregnant with their child.
          That child (H) born in April 2015 and is a British citizen.

         3.   I find that the First-tier decision should be set aside.   And
         I have reached that decision for the following reasons.  Since  the
         appellant is the father of a "qualifying child" for the purposes of
         the 2002 Act (as amended) the appeal fell to  be  considered  under
         the provisions of Section 117C(5) of that Act:

             'Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.'

         4.   The judge refers to Section 117C(5)  (Exception  2)  at  [27].
         However, he does no more  at  [28]  than  observe  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal, deciding an earlier appeal before the child H  was  born,
         concluded that it would "not be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to
         return to India without his wife  and  child."   Considerations  at
         that stage did not focus on the child which had not been  born  but
         on the "possible deprivation of the standard of health  care  which
         [the appellant's wife] might receive when compared to the  UK."   I
         find that the  judge  should  have  considered  the  provisions  of
         Section 117C(5) and in particular whether or not it would be unduly
         harsh for the child and partner to be separated from the appellant.
          I acknowledge that Judge  Chambers  has  considered  the  evidence
         concerning the child and which he has quite properly not discounted
         at [31].  He notes that "the  risks  to  the  child  are  variously
         identified as  being  considerable,  significant  and  detrimental.
         They are not fanciful."  However, having set  out  the  test  under
         Section 117C(5), the judge did not seek to apply it.   Instead,  at
         [32] he first considers that the appellant's partner would  have  a
         choice whether or not she joined the appellant in India (taking the
         child H with her).  It seems to have been  the  existence  of  this
         choice which has led the judge to conclude that "the exceptions  to
         deportation do not apply."  I agree with Mr Malik, who appeared for
         the appellant, that the  judge  has  not  properly  considered  the
         statutory provisions.   The  question  before  the  judge  was  not
         whether or not the partner and child would go  with  the  appellant
         but whether it would be unduly harsh if they were to remain in  the
         United Kingdom and be separated from him.

         5.   The judge compounded his error at [32]  by  referring  to  the
         absence of "very compelling circumstances rendering the appellant's
         removal a breach of Article 8 ECHR."  As I  have  noted,  the  test
         which the judge had to apply is contained in Section 117C(5);  that
         is not a test of  "very  compelling  circumstances"  but  of  undue
         harshness.  It is unclear from the judge's decision whether or  not
         he considered the removal of the  appellant  by  deportation  would
         have unduly harsh  consequences  for  the  partner  and  child  who
         remained in the United Kingdom.

         6.   I agree also with Mr Malik that it is not  clear  whether  the
         judge at [31] - [32] has considered  as  part  of  the  "all  other
         relevant considerations"  the  appellant's  criminal  offending.  I
         consider that it  is  likely  he  did  so.   If  he  did,  then  he
         contravened the principles articulated in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC
         53 which provide that the level of a  parent's  criminal  offending
         has no place in the assessment of children's best interests.

         7.   I make no comment about the remaining grounds  of  appeal.   I
         have found that the decision needs to be set aside for the  reasons
         I have given above.  The decision  will  be  remade  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal following a resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 13
         July 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
         The decision will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a
         resumed hearing at Manchester Civil  Justice  Centre  before  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Lane on a date to be fixed."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Manchester on 26 April 2019, I heard evidence
    from the appellant and from his wife. Remarkably, the  resumed  hearing
    took place on the same day scheduled for the appellant's wife to attend
    maternity hospital in order to give birth to her  second  child.  As  I
    understand it, immediately after the hearing had finished, she left the
    court in order to attend the hospital. I have  received  no  indication
    that the birth did not go well and I assume, as at the date of  writing
    this decision, the appellant and his wife are now the  parents  of  two
    children.

 3. Both witnesses adopted their written  evidence  is  their  evidence  in
    chief. There was no cross examination.

 4. As identified at the initial hearing, the test in this appeal  is  that
    set out at section117C (5) (see above at [3]). Mr Bates,  who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State, did not submit that  the  appellant's  wife
    and the children should be expected to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  to
    continue their family life in India upon the  appellant's  deportation.
    The focus, as Mr Malik who appeared for  the  appellant,  stressed  was
    whether the separation of the appellant from his family  by  reason  of
    his deportation will have consequences which would be unduly harsh  for
    the wife and child. He submitted that I had to assess the circumstances
    as at the date of the resumed hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Those
    circumstances included the fact that on that day the  appellant's  wife
    would be giving birth to her second child.

 5. There was before both the First-tier Tribunal and  me  expert  evidence
    from a consultant psychiatrist, Dr  Hussein  and  also  an  independent
    social work report from Mr Musendo.  Dr  Hussein  considered  that  the
    appellant's wife would be under stress if she were to have care  for  a
    young child in the absence of the appellant (who has hitherto been  the
    primary carer, his wife working 30 hours per  week  part-time)  and  in
    circumstances  where  relations  with  her  own   Pakistani   Christian
    community had in damaged by her marrying  the  appellant,  a  Sikh.  Mr
    Bates submitted that the report was written in general terms  and  was,
    by the nature of the circumstances facing the family at  present  time,
    dependent upon speculation as to what might happen in the  future.  The
    same is true of the social work report.  Mr  Musendo  attempts  in  his
    report to predict whether the child, currently still very young,  would
    be likely  to  develop  behavioural  problems  if  separated  from  the
    appellant. The appellant's wife had become  distressed  when  providing
    evidence to Mr Musendo claiming that she would be unable to  cope  with
    the trauma of separation.

 6. I have attached weight to the expert reports but I  consider  there  is
    some  force  in  Mr  Bates's  submission  that  both  reports  rely  on
    speculation as to the likely effect of the deportation  upon  the  wife
    and child. The social work report records the subjective opinion of the
    appellant's wife as to how she would be unable to cope in  the  absence
    of the appellant. Understandably,  the  expert  was  concerned  by  the
    distress of the appellant's wife as manifested before him at  interview
    but I agree with Mr Bates that there is little hard  evidence  to  show
    that she would suffer as a result of the deportation consequences which
    may properly be described as unduly harsh. It is, perhaps, not  helpful
    to speak of the 'normal' harshness which will arise in virtually  every
    case where a parent is separated from a child  and  spouse,  but  I  am
    reminded that the test is one of undue  harshness  rather  than  simply
    harshness. In every case where family members bonded by  ties  of  deep
    affection are suddenly separated by the severing or alteration of those
    ties there will be harsh consequences for  the  individuals  concerned.
    Ultimately, whilst the reports record the evident distress communicated
    to the experts by the  appellant's  wife  when  interviewed,  there  is
    little hard evidence which would show with any particularity how  harsh
    the consequences will be for wife and the child.

 7. I acknowledge that I must determine the  appeal  by  reference  to  the
    family's circumstances as at the date of the  resumed  hearing.  Having
    said that, at the time of that hearing the appellant's  wife  had  only
    one child although I accept that on that day the appellant's wife would
    naturally have been in a state of some considerable stress  given  that
    she was just about to give birth. However, I do not  consider  that  it
    would be appropriate for me to give very significant weight to the fact
    that the resumed hearing took place at a time of heightened stress  for
    both adult family members. The test of undue harshness  cannot,  in  my
    opinion, be focused upon such a specific point in time; it is necessary
    to apply the test by reference both to present circumstances and  those
    which are likely to pertain in the immediate future. It  is  necessary,
    therefore, to apply the test having in mind that the  appellant's  wife
    would be left behind in the United Kingdom with a  toddler  and  a  new
    baby if the appellant is deported.

 8. I note from the previous decision of the Upper Tribunal in January 2015
    that the judge found that 'the absence of a husband  will  be  hard  on
    [the appellant's wife] but in the context of the above  factors,  I  do
    not consider that would be unduly harsh for [her] to give birth in  the
    absence of a  husband  or  that  this  would  result  in  very  serious
    hardship' [29]. Amongst the factors  considered  by  the  Tribunal  was
    evidence that the appellant's wife's relations  with  her  parents  had
    recently improved. At the time of  that  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  the
    appellant's wife was about to give birth some three months  later.  The
    Tribunal concluded that it would not be unduly harsh on the appellant's
    wife for the appellant to be deported. I am aware that I must  consider
    the circumstances now and that I am not bound by conclusions reached on
    different circumstances by  an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  in  an  earlier
    appeal.

 9. However, I have not ignored the fact  that  the  circumstances  of  the
    family before me today do not differ greatly  from  those  existing  in
    2015. I have no doubt at all that the appellant's wife will become very
    distressed if separated from her husband. However, there is little hard
    evidence to show that she would be compelled by the  separation  either
    to harm herself or that she would become incapable of  caring  for  her
    children. I am aware that the appellant's wife works but it  cannot  be
    said that the need for her to carry on in that employment  rather  than
    to become primary care of the child can itself  render  the  separation
    unduly harsh upon her. I accept that she would have to carry the burden
    of looking after the child without  receiving  much  support  from  her
    family whether or not the relations have remained as they were in 2015.
    I find, however, that she is physically and psychologically capable  of
    taking on care for the child as a sole parent; there is no evidence  to
    suggest otherwise. As regards the effect of the  deportation  upon  the
    elder child, as I have noted above, the youth of the child has hampered
    the attempts of the social worker and a psychiatrist to offer any  firm
    view as to the likely long-term effects of separation. It is  necessary
    to decide this appeal on the basis of  the  evidence;  it  is  for  the
    Tribunal to apply the objective test of undue harshness  and  to  avoid
    being excessively  influenced  by  the  evident  and  genuine  distress
    expressed by the appellant's wife. Looking beyond that distress, I find
    that, if she  had  to  do  so,  the  wife  would  cope  physically  and
    emotionally both with the separation and with the care of her children.
    Accordingly, I find that Exception 2 is not made out  on  the  evidence
    before me and the appellant's appeal against the refusal of  his  human
    rights claim  arising  from  the  decision  to  deport  him  should  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
26 February 2018 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

