
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/06044/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th October 2017                      |On 08th November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             mrs marzana fardusy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Samad (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16th June  1986.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance as the post-flight family  member
    of someone with limited leave to enter or remain as a  refugee  or  the
    beneficiary of humanitarian protection and the Appellant's  application
    was considered under paragraph 319L of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal and dated 24th August 2015
    (re-issued on 1st February 2016).

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Juss sitting at Birmingham on 17th February 2017.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 18th February 2017 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds pursuant to Article 8.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 6th March 2017.   Those  grounds  contended  there  was  a  material
    misdirection in law on the basis:-

      i) That it was unclear how the document such as the BRP and  financial
         documents assisted in establishing that the relationship  with  the
         Appellant was genuine and subsisting.

     ii) That the judge wrongly applied Appendix  FM  because  this  was  an
         entry clearance appeal to which Appendix FM did not apply.

    iii) The reference to MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2013] EWC Civ 1192 whereby  the  judge  said  that  the
         Immigration Rules provide a complete code was wrong in law.

 4. Permission was granted to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mahmood.  In granting permission Judge Mahmood commented
    that he had some sympathy for the  Appellant  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had served an incorrect decision  on  the  Appellant
    but the confusion referred to by the  Secretary  of  State  was  caused
    entirely due to this and the failure  thereafter  not  to  rectify  the
    problem until late into the proceedings.  However he did consider  that
    the judge's decision in respect of the test  he  applied  was  arguably
    erroneous but whilst the Appellant's documents  did  appear  to  assist
    with showing that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  (and
    so that ground did not immediately appear to him to be arguable) he did
    not restrict the ground upon which the Respondent may argue the appeal.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State but for the purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    proceedings the Secretary  of  State  is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Respondent and Mrs Fardusy as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears  by
    her instructed legal representative Mr Samad.   Mr  Samad  is  familiar
    with this matter having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Harrison advises me that he seeks to do no more than to rely on  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  These effectively run to three paragraphs.  I  have
    given them full, due and proper consideration.   Mr  Samad  starts  his
    submission by taking me to paragraph  15  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision pointing out the judge was not looking at paragraph FM
    of the Immigration Rules only the legal test to be applied and that  if
    I give due consideration to the whole decision  it  is  his  submission
    that the judge has applied the relevant facts and given reasons  as  to
    why there would have been a breach of Article 8.  As to the submissions
    with regard to the genuine and subsisting relationship he submits  that
    full reasons have been given with regard to this including  details  of
    the Sponsor and that this has been addressed fully by the judge who has
    given due and proper consideration to the documents produced within the
    Appellant's bundle.  Finally he submits that the Appellant has met  the
    English language requirement, that he has no convictions and he  refers
    me to the documents produced within the Appellant's bundle.  He submits
    that there has been no explanation given by the Secretary of  State  as
    to why he has failed to properly address the position of the continuing
    and subsisting relationship and it does not sit well with the Secretary
    of State to try and rely in the Grounds of Appeal on  Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  He submits that any decision reached  by  the  judge  is
    clearly proportionate and that the judge has had full consideration  to
    all aspects.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

 7. Mr Harrison said the only issue with regard to Section 117B is that  it
    is a mandatory requirement and  acknowledges  that  there  has  been  a
    misdirection made by the Entry Clearance Officer.  He does no more than
    leave the matter for my determination.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The submissions made by the Secretary of State as far as there are  any
    errors of law in the documents do not assist  the  Appellant  regarding
    the judge reaching his  decision  and  that  there  has  been  a  wrong
    application of Appendix FM.  Neither of those grounds are  sustainable.
    The judge has given  full  and  proper  consideration  to  the  correct
    finding that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship, something
    that is in fact acknowledged at paragraph 5 of the grant of  permission
    by Judge Mahmood.  Secondly this is not a  case  where  the  judge  has
    misapplied Appendix FM.  He has merely stated the legal  test  and  has
    gone on in detail thereafter to make  findings  applying  the  relevant
    jurisprudence set out at paragraph 15 of his decision.

11. That is a reasoned decision and one that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach.   He  had  also  considered  quite  properly   the   aspect   of
    proportionality reaching that decision has made findings  that  he  was
    entitled to.  Effectively all the submissions of the Secretary of State
    do is amount to  disagreement  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  That decision does not disclose any material error  of
    law and the Secretary of State's appeal is consequently  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 07 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




