
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06085/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2017                          |On 18th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  mr s k k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Knorr, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 4th February  2016
    to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    his private  and  family  life.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bartlett
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The Appellant's  application  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for Permission to Appeal  was  refused.  A  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam on 15th September 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge erred in concluding that there was no family life between the
    Appellant and his brother.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    23rd October 2000 with a student visa.   His  application  for  further
    leave to remain as a student was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  4th
    September 2002 and a subsequent application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and leave to remain were refused in 2003.  The Appellant made an
    application for leave to remain as a student in September 2005  but  it
    appears that that was refused on 11th January 2012.  On  7th  September
    2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    family and private life and the refusal  of  that  application  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 3. The Appellant claims that he met his wife in Ghana in 1997 and that she
    visited him in the UK once a year between  2003  until  2008  when  she
    remained in the UK.  They married in the UK in 2009  when  neither  had
    leave to remain and they have since had two children who at the date of
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal were aged 4 and 2.  It was  also
    the Appellant's case that he has a close relationship with his  brother
    T with whom he resided in Ghana prior to both  coming  to  the  UK  and
    residing in their parents.  T  now  lives  with  his  parents  and  the
    Appellant claims that he visits his parents' home two to three times  a
    week to help out with his brother who has mental health issues.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the Appellant's appeal and that  of
    his brother on the same day. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  T's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  I was  informed  by  the  parties  that  the
    Secretary of  State  had  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision but permission had been refused by the First-tier Tribunal and
    by the Upper Tribunal.  At the hearing before me  Mr  Tarlow  indicated
    that it was not intended to challenge that decision  any  further.   He
    also indicated that, if an error of law was  found,  the  Secretary  of
    State would consent to the decision  in  T's  successful  appeal  being
    considered in the remaking of the Appellant's appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

 5. The Grounds of Appeal put forward four grounds challenging the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal as amplified at the hearing.

 6. The first ground contends that the judge erred in finding that there is
    no family life between the Appellant and his brother.  Ms Knorr  relied
    on paragraph 18 of Huang [2007] 2 AC 167 and submitted that  the  judge
    erred in focusing heavily on whether the practical support provided  by
    the Appellant could be provided by others and did not focus  enough  on
    the emotional relationship  and  the  background  to  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his brother.  In her submission the nature of
    the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his  brother  is  not  in
    dispute and if that relationship is looked  at  in  the  context  of  a
    normal relationship between two adult siblings the question is  whether
    that amounts to more than  normal  emotional  ties.   She  referred  to
    paragraph 13 of the grounds and to  T's  witness  statement  indicating
    that he has no friends and that he treats his brother  as  his  friend.
    She submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 29 of the  decision  in
    saying that she did not accept that T is "dependent on the Appellant to
    the extent required to create a family life for the purposes of Article
    8 ECHR".  Ms Knorr submitted that the judge took the wrong approach  to
    the assessment of family life and that the reasons  for  not  accepting
    that the family life between the Appellant and  his  brother  were  not
    sustainable.  In her submission the judge  took  into  account  factors
    that were not relevant to  the  quality  of  the  current  relationship
    between T and the Appellant. She  submitted  that  factors  taken  into
    account in the assessment of family life were matters that would go  to
    proportionality rather than to the assessment of family life.   In  her
    submission the judge failed to give  sufficient  consideration  to  the
    history of this relationship and failed to take into account  that  the
    brother has been dependent on the Appellant for  23  years;  that  they
    lived together in Ghana after the Appellant came to the  UK;  that  the
    Appellant looked after T for six years in Ghana and delayed  coming  to
    the UK on a student visa until T was able to come, and that  they  both
    came in October 2000.

 7. Ms Knorr pointed out that the Appellant lived with his  parents  and  T
    until he moved back to live with his own family.  In her submission the
    Appellant is one of four people in T's life, he  has  had  a  long-term
    relationship with him and that  that  history  had  not  been  properly
    considered.  She submitted that the judge's conclusion at paragraph  30
    that she did not accept that, if the Appellant and the family  returned
    to Ghana, this "would have a devastating affect" on T.   She  submitted
    that this is contrary to the evidence at C290 of the Appellant's bundle
    contained in a medical report in relation  to  T  which  sets  out  his
    diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia and obsessive  compulsive  disorder
    and states at 9.1 "Family plays a significant role in supporting [T}.

 8. Ms Knorr submitted that both of the Appellant's  parents  have  British
    citizenship as does his younger brother J  who  attends  university  in
    Middlesex.  She submitted that the evidence shows that the Appellant is
    a significant source of emotional and social support for T who talks to
    his brother or his parents  when  he  is  feeling  low  in  mood.   She
    submitted that the  evidence  shows  that  the  Appellant  is  able  to
    motivate T and get him out of the house to attend social occasions like
    parties or going to church and help him to adapt to  social  situations
    by role playing and  conversations.   She    referred  to  the  medical
    report which concludes that T is able to function in his current  state
    only with the significant support he receives from family  members  who
    live in the UK.  In her submission this matter was not fully considered
    the judge.  She also submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into
    account  her  own  finding  in  the  Appellant's  brother's  appeal  at
    paragraph 19 that the Appellant's brother's behaviour was "difficult to
    manage".  In her submission the Appellant's brother  has  a  cocoon  of
    support and each family member plays a different role and even then the
    family struggle to manage him.  Therefore in her submission  there  was
    no basis for the judge's finding that other family members  could  fill
    the gap left by the Appellant.  She submitted that the  witnesses  were
    not asked about this in oral evidence.  She submitted  that  any  error
    was material because  the  judge  failed  to  properly  appreciate  the
    importance of that  relationship  and  that  would  have  infected  the
    proportionality assessment.

 9. Ms Knorr accepted that factors set out in the decision could  be  taken
    into account, but submitted that without a  full  appreciation  of  the
    true nature of the relationship a proper balancing exercise  could  not
    be undertaken.

10. Ms Knorr submitted that there was no basis for the judge's  alternative
    finding at paragraph 32 that the Appellant could visit the UK if he was
    removed because the prospect of him being granted a visa  (even  if  he
    could afford it) was very slim in light of his background  in  the  UK.
    She pointed out also that  as  a  refugee  T  could  not  visit  Ghana.
    Therefore in her submission removing the  Appellant  would  lead  to  a
    permanent separation between the Appellant and  his  brother  and  this
    would have a significant impact on both of them.   She  submitted  that
    the situation of the other brother J was  different  because  he  is  a
    British citizen and is studying abroad and will return and the evidence
    in T's appeal was that  he  counted  the  days  until  J  returned  and
    therefore this was a not a fair comparison.

Discussion and conclusions

11. In undertaking the assessment as  to  whether  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother amounts to a family life under Article 8 the judge acknowledged
    that these were two adult siblings who  are  dependent  on  each  other
    [29]. At paragraph 29 the judge accepted that  T  suffers  from  severe
    paranoid schizophrenia and OCD and that he is receiving  treatment  and
    that he lives with his parents in the family home. The judge found that
    T's parents provide the majority of his day-to-day care and support and
    acknowledged that T has a good relationship  with  the  Appellant.  The
    judge acknowledged that the Appellant  supports  T  with  his  personal
    hygiene encouraging him to attend appointments and encouraging  him  to
    carry out activities such as laundry.  The judge recognised that  these
    tasks require a considerable amount of persuasion  over  a  substantial
    period of time because of the issues T faces.  The judge accepted  that
    T and the Appellant's wife have a good relationship  and  that  he  can
    communicate  with  her.  The  judge  found  that  T  is  a   vulnerable
    individual, he has never had friends and is reliant on  family  in  way
    that other adults are not.

12. Ms Knorr did not point to any significant piece of evidence omitted  by
    the judge in consideration of this issue.   The  judge  considered  all
    relevant factors and all relevant evidence before concluding  that  she
    did not accept that T is dependent  on  the  Appellant  to  the  extent
    required to create a family life for the purposes of  Article  8  [29].
    The judge referred to the Appellant's visiting his parents' home two or
    three times a week and accepted that he carries out "a valued  role  to
    [T]".

13. I do not accept Ms Knorr's submission that, in considering whether  the
    nature of the relationship between the Appellant and T is  such  as  to
    amount to family life under Article 8, the  judge  was  precluded  from
    considering T's overall circumstances in  terms  of  his  support  from
    other family members as  these  are  relevant  considerations  in  that
    assessment.  The judge  did  consider  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    evidence in relation to the role played by the parents.  The judge also
    considered the role played by J who is currently studying for a medical
    degree outside of the UK.  This was all relevant evidence and  relevant
    factors that the judge was entitled to consider in deciding whether the
    relationship between the Appellant and T amounts to family life  within
    Article 8.  I do not accept Ms Knorr's submission that the judge failed
    to take into account the background to this  relationship.   The  judge
    noted all of the oral evidence.  The  judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
    background to the relationship between the Appellant and  his  brother.
    Ms Knorr did not point to any evidence ignored by  the  judge  and  she
    failed to establish  that  the  judge's  conclusions  on  the  evidence
    reached the threshold of perversity.

14. In any event the judge made alternative findings at paragraph 32  where
    she assessed proportionality in the event that there was a family  life
    between the Appellant and his brother.  The judge took into account the
    fact  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  in  accordance  with   the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge considered proportionality and looked  at
    the Appellant's assertion that he believed that he had lawful leave  to
    remain in the UK.  The judge rejected that evidence saying that if  the
    Appellant believed that he had lawful leave to remain in  the  UK  then
    there was no reason to make other applications. In my  view  the  judge
    undertook a proper  assessment  of  proportionality  at  paragraph  32.
    Again it is not clear what it could be said the judge  failed  to  take
    into account in undertaking that proportionality assessment.

15. Accordingly in my view the  judge  reached  findings  open  to  her  in
    relation to the issue of family life between the Appellant and T and in
    the alternative findings.  The judge considered all relevant factors in
    assessing proportionality whether or not the  Appellant's  relationship
    amounted to family life or private life.

16. It is contended in the second ground of appeal that the judge erred  in
    her approach to the issue of the Appellant's status in the UK.  In  the
    Grounds of Appeal and at the hearing before me  Ms  Knorr  acknowledged
    that it did not appear that the Appellant had any period of leave under
    Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.   She  relied  on  Lord  Reed's
    statement in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  that;  "One  can,  for  example,
    envisage circumstances in which people  might  be  under  a  reasonable
    misapprehension as to the ability to maintain a family life in  the  UK
    and in which a less stringent approach might therefore be  appropriate"
    [53].

17. The judge considered the evidence before her in relation to this issue.
     The judge said at paragraph 32:

         "The Appellant's position is that he did not  receive  the  refusal
         letter in 2012 and for many years he thought he had leave to remain
         in the United Kingdom.  Over  the  years  the  Appellant  has  made
         numerous applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom and
         all of these have been refused.  I do not accept that the Appellant
         genuinely believed that he had lawful leave to remain in the United
         Kingdom,  if  he  did  there  was  no  reason  to  make  the  other
         applications".

18. Ms Knorr contended that the judge did not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    this finding.  She submitted that, in assessing this matter, the  judge
    failed to deal with the Appellant's evidence as to why he made numerous
    applications and failed to take account the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    gave up the job that he had held for ten years in 2015 upon receipt  of
    the Section 120 notice at which point he realised that he did not  have
    permission to work in the UK.  However the judge does not need to  deal
    with  every  element  of  the  evidence.   The  judge  considered   the
    Appellant's explanation as to why he  made  numerous  applications  but
    decided that the making of these applications were an  indication  that
    the Appellant knew that he did not have leave to  remain  or  continued
    extant leave to remain in the UK. In my view this was a conclusion  she
    was entitled  to  reach  on  the  evidence  before  her  and  she  gave
    sufficient reason for reaching this conclusion.

19. It is contended in the third ground of appeal that the judge failed  to
    take into account relevant considerations  in  terms  of  some  of  her
    conclusions as to the evidence.  It is  contended  that  there  was  no
    reason for rejecting the Appellant's evidence that  it  was  culturally
    inappropriate for him to care for his 90 year old grandmother in  Ghana
    and there was no evidence to suggest that his wife  would  be  able  to
    take on this role.  It is contended that there was no evidential  basis
    for the assertion that the church in the UK would continue  to  support
    the Appellant on return to Ghana.   It  is  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to take account of the fact  that  the  Appellant's  grandmother
    lives in a one bedroomed house in a village 30 miles from  the  nearest
    city and the Appellant would  not  be  able  to  find  a  job  in  that
    situation.  It is further asserted that the judge erred in finding that
    the Appellant could find a job in three to six  months  without  taking
    into account the Appellant's evidence that finding work in such a short
    period required a support network that was  not  available  to  him  in
    Ghana.

20. However at paragraph 23 the judge found that she did  not  accept  that
    the Appellant's parents would stop supporting him simply because he had
    to leave the UK.  The Appellant's mother has  already  been  supporting
    the Appellant from her NHS pension and in my view, in  the  absence  of
    evidence to the contrary, there was no reason for the judge to ask  why
    his mother or the church would  not  continue  to  support  him  if  he
    returned to Ghana.  The judge found, as she was entitled to,  that  the
    Appellant's grandmother lives in Ghana in accommodation  she  owns  and
    that the Appellant and his family would be able to  stay  with  her  at
    least initially and could care for her that the  Appellant  and/or  his
    wife could care for his grandmother during such period.   This  was  in
    the context of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  been  educated  to
    university level, has  work  experience  in  the  UK  and  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant will be able to find employment in Ghana.
     These conclusions were open to the judge on the evidence  before  her.
    This ground has not been made out.

21. It is contended in the fourth ground of appeal that the judge failed to
    make  proper  assessment  under  Section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is  contended  that,  because  the
    Appellant worked for fourteen years in the UK until  2010  including  a
    period of ten years at an insurance  company  working  his  way  up  to
    become an account executive, he  is  confident  that  he  could  obtain
    employment in the UK if his immigration matters were to be resolved and
    it is asserted that he would be financially independent then.  However,
    in assessing Section 117B the judge must, as directed by the wording of
    Section 117B, take into account current circumstances.  The  judge  was
    therefore entitled to  find  that  the  Appellant  is  not  financially
    independent as he is dependent upon his family and  church  [26].   The
    judge accepted that  the  Appellant  can  speak  English  and  assessed
    whether the Appellant's wife and  children  are  qualifying  spouse  or
    children. The judge took into account that the Appellant and  his  wife
    decided to marry when the Appellant was in the UK without any leave and
    his wife was in the UK as a visitor.  These were all  conclusions  open
    to the judge on the evidence before her in her  assessment  of  Section
    117B.  No error has been disclosed in the judge's approach  to  Section
    117B.

22. In conclusion, for the reasons set out above, I  find  that  the  judge
    looked at all material factors in reaching her conclusions.  The  judge
    was entitled to take into account in assessing the relationship between
    the Appellant and his brother that his brother lives with  his  parents
    and that the key relationship and the majority of work is undertaken by
    his parents.  The finding that the  Appellant  has  not  established  a
    family life with his brother within the terms of Article 8 was open  to
    the judge on the specific evidence.  I accept  Mr  Tarlow's  submission
    that this challenge amounts  to  a  disagreement  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal finding.  Whilst the judge  acknowledged  the  important  role
    played by the Appellant in his relationship with  his  brother  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that this was not sufficient to amount to
    family life.

23. In all of the circumstances and on the basis of  the  reasons  set  out
    above I find that the Grounds of Appeal have not been  made  out.   The
    judge made a sustainable decision open to  her  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence.  There is no material error of law in the  judge's  decision.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


