
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06019/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 5th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  Selam [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy instructed by DWFM Beckman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Eritrea, applied for  entry  clearance  to
    enter the UK to join the Sponsor who has been recognised as a  refugee.
    The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) refused the application in a decision
    dated 5th April 2017.  The application was refused  because  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the  parties  are  actually
    married or that the marriage took place  prior  to  the  Sponsor  being
    granted asylum.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 18th May 2018.  The  Appellant  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted on 12th July  2018  by
    Judge Hollingworth.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted at the hearing that the Appellant's
    representative Ms McCarthy  had  accepted  that  the  parties  are  not
    married in accordance with Eritrean laws or in the Sudan  because  they
    were not allowed to marry there.  The case was  therefore  put  on  the
    basis that the Appellant is the partner of the Sponsor on the basis  of
    a relationship akin to marriage over a period of over two  years.   The
    ECO accepted that the Sponsor named the Appellant  in  his  application
    form.  This was noted by the judge.  The judge noted that  the  parties
    claimed that they first met in Eritrea in 2006 and next met in Sudan in
    2008 and entered into a  customary  marriage  ceremony  followed  by  a
    blessing ceremony the first of which is said to have taken place on 3rd
    August 2008 and the second on 10th August  2008.   The  judge  attached
    little weight to a letter from the administrator of  the  church  where
    the blessing was said to have taken place on the basis that he did  not
    accept that the administrator could recall the ceremony after  9  years
    without reference to any written record  [12].   The  judge  considered
    that  it  was  damaging  to  the  Appellant's  credibility   that   the
    photographs  produced  were  not  wedding   photographs.    The   judge
    considered other matters and concluded that there was  no  evidence  of
    cohabitation over the claimed  period  of  2008  to  2012.   The  judge
    concluded that the Respondent's refusal to grant  the  Appellant  entry
    clearance was not a breach of her human rights or that of the Sponsor.

 3. There are two Grounds of Appeal.  The first ground  contends  that  the
    judge failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence  and  misrecorded  other
    evidence. The second ground of appeal is that the judge failed to  give
    reasons for rejecting the  credibility  of  the  witness  and  that  he
    misrecorded the witness's evidence.

Error of Law

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke conceded  that  there  are  material
    errors in the judge's decision.  He conceded that  it  is  quite  clear
    that not all of the evidence was taken into  account  and  he  accepted
    that there were clear mistakes of fact.  I agree  with  the  concession
    made by Mr Clarke.  There are a number of  issues  of  concern  in  the
    decision.

 5. The judge failed to take into account the  evidence  in  the  Sponsor's
    witness statement that the marriage covenant had been  lost,  and  that
    the couple had contacted the church who had conducted the marriage  for
    evidence of the marriage.  I also note that there is no  indication  in
    the document at page 24 of the Appellant's bundle that  the  author  is
    recalling the dates from memory.  Accordingly the judge made a  mistake
    of fact where he said at paragraph 12 that the  author  of  the  letter
    remembered the two dates without reference to a written record.  It  is
    not clear from the evidence that this is what was done.

 6. I also accept that the judge has misrecorded the contents of the letter
    from the Church administrator at page 24 of the Appellant's bundle.  At
    paragraph 13 the judge stated that the letter said that the couple  had
    to 'flee the Sudan due to their circumstances',  the  judge  considered
    that this was inconsistent with the Appellant's evidence elsewhere that
    she had left Sudan with the family she was working for.   In  fact  the
    letter from the Church administrator says that the couple were  regular
    members at the church in Khartoum "until  they  were  forced  to  leave
    Sudan due to  their  circumstances".   The  difference  in  wording  as
    recorded  by  the  judge  is  capable  of  other  interpretations   and
    accordingly this is a material mistake of fact.

 7. It  is  further  contended  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  further
    misrecorded the evidence in relation to  the  photographs  produced.  I
    accept that the judge appears  to  have  made  a  mistake  of  fact  in
    relation to the photographs.  At paragraphs 15 and 16  the  judge  drew
    adverse conclusions from the fact that some of the photographs produced
    were taken under the same tree and one in front of a bush and that  the
    photographs at page 45 were taken in a  studio.   The  judge  concluded
    that these photographs were "staged" and must have been  expensive  and
    that;

         "This does not sit well with the claim that they couple were living
         in limited circumstances and could not afford  photographs  of  the
         wedding ceremony.  Weddings are memorable  events.   If  one  could
         afford to take photographs in a park they have access to a  camera.
         If one could afford to take photographs in  a  studio  surely  they
         have access to funds to take photographs at the 'wedding  ceremony'
         I do not find limited circumstances to explain the lack of  wedding
         photographs" [15].

    However that fails to have regard to the evidence  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement at paragraph 39 that the photographs were taken after
    the ceremony although the photographs capturing the officiating of  the
    relationship were lost and that they were wearing  traditional  clothes
    for the ceremony (paragraphs 39 to 41 of the Appellant's statement).  I
    accept that the judge appears to have misunderstood  that  it  was  the
    Appellant's case that the photographs at page  45  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle were photographs taken after the wedding ceremony.

 8. I  also  accept  that  the  judge  appears  to  have  misunderstood  or
    misrecorded the evidence from the witness, Mr [A].  It is  recorded  at
    paragraph 20 that Mr [A] said that he saw  the  couple  in  church  and
    outside of church on week days.  He had a  stall  in  the  market  from
    Mondays to Fridays.  The judge said "however the Sponsor told  me  that
    the Appellant worked as a maid in a family and only came to him at  the
    weekends.  Therefore Mr [A] could not have seen the couple crossing the
    road or walking past his stall during the week days." The judge went on
    to conclude that Mr [A] gave false evidence and  considered  that  this
    undermined the credibility of the Appellant and Sponsor  [22].  However
    the judge appears to have failed to take into account the evidence from
    the Sponsor's witness statement where at paragraph 20 he said that  the
    Appellant lived at her employer's house during the week and "she  would
    come home to me on the weekends.  I would see her during the week  when
    she would shop or go to the market ..."  I accept  that  this  apparent
    mistake appears to have fed into the finding at paragraph 22  that  the
    witness gave false evidence.

 9. These  are  a  number  of  material  mistakes  which  impacted  on  the
    assessment of the evidence and of the credibility of the Appellant  and
    Sponsor. These mistakes undermine the judge's findings in  relation  to
    this appeal. I therefore set  aside  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in their entirety as I consider that the errors made  go
    to the heart of the issues to be determined in this case.

10. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements I  take  into  account
    that the effect of the  errors  identified  has  been  to  deprive  the
    Appellant of the opportunity for her case to be considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal and that the  nature  or  extent  of  the  judicial  fact
    finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made
    is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule  2  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, it  is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The parties requested that Ms McCarthy's minute of  the  adjourned  and
    resumed hearings in the First-tier Tribunal should be  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who will deal with the case upon remittal.  I
    agreed with that request.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside in its entirety.

The appeal is to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the matter has been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal the issue of  the
fee award is to be determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  hears
the appeal.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
