
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/06204/2015
                                                               HU/07540/2015
                                                               HU/07542/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2016                  |On 10 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               MRS HAFSAT [S]
                                   [A M S]
                                  [A A M S]
                       (Anonymity DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Hafsat [S] in person - but see below
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellants' appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis hereinafter "the Judge") dismissing
their appeals which had  been  brought  on  human  rights  grounds,  against
decisions of the respondent made on 8 September 2015 refusing to grant them
leave to remain.  The appeals had been brought in reliance  upon  Article 8
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    By way of factual background, the first appellant, an  adult,  is  the
mother of the two remaining appellants both of whom  are  minors.  They  are
all nationals of Nigeria although the second and third appellants were  both
born in the United Kingdom and have lived all their lives here.  The  first
appellant was born in Nigeria on 30 July 1984.  She is, it does not appear
to be disputed, of Yoruba ethnicity.  She is married to a Nigerian  national
but, again it does not seem to be disputed, the relationship is  now  at  an
end.  Her husband had originally come to the UK as a  student  and  she  had
then entered the UK on 28 May 2007 in possession of a  valid  visit  visa.
She had subsequently obtained an extension of leave as a  student  dependant
until 30 April 2009.  Her leave expired at that point and she has not left
the UK since.  She has made various applications for further leave  and  two
asylum  claims  but  all  of  those  have  been  unsuccessful.   The  second
appellant was born in the UK on 18 March 2008 and the third appellant  was
born here 3 March 2011.  However, the husband of the first appellant  (the
father of the two remaining appellants) has returned to Nigeria.   According
to the evidence of the first appellant, he no longer has  any  contact  with
her nor with the two child appellants.

3.    The application which has led to this appeal was  largely  based  upon
the situation  of  the  second  appellant.   It  was  pointed  out  in  that
application that she was, by the time it was lodged, aged  seven  years  and
she was said to be "settled in the UK school system".  It  was  also  stated
that the third appellant had started school.  The thrust of the  application
was that, in the circumstances, it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
family to return to Nigeria.  Reference  was  made  to  section 55  of  the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  As indicated,  though,  the
applications were all refused.   It  is  clear  from  the  detailed  written
refusal of 8 September 2015 that, although various other  provisions  were
considered, the respondent saw the key issue as  being  whether  or  not  it
would be reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the UK.   It  is
clear from the respondent's analysis as contained in  the  refusal  document
that whilst he considered the suitability and  eligibility  requirements  of
Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules to be met, he did not  consider  that
the requirements of paragraph EX.1 were met.  That was because although the
first appellant did have a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
with a child (the second appellant) and whilst the child was under  the  age
of 18, in the UK and a person who had lived in the UK  continuously  for  at
least the seven years immediately preceding the date of the application,  it
would be reasonable to expect her to  leave  the  UK.   Thus,  the  specific
requirement set out at paragraph EX.1(a)(ii) was not satisfied.  It is also
clear from the respondent's analysis that whilst that meant the first  named
appellant did not satisfy the relevant Rules, the two child  appellants  did
not do so because of their mother's failure to do  so  (see  requirement  E-
LTRC.1.6.).

4.    The appeal was considered by way of an oral hearing which  took  place
on 28 June 2016.  The appellants did not have legal representation but the
respondent was represented by a Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Judge
dismissed the appeals.  He accepted that the second appellant  had  been  in
the UK for more than seven years.  He observed that the first appellant  had
not submitted  any  evidence  regarding  the  education  of  the  two  child
appellants in the UK.  He accepted that the family was  estranged  from  the
husband.  He said that the first appellant had given "no  reliable  evidence
as to why she cannot find employment  in  Nigeria  and  support  her  family
there".  He noted that there was nothing  to  suggest  that  the  two  child
appellants would not receive an education in Nigeria and would not  be  able
to obtain treatment for any medical needs they might have.  Based upon  that
analysis he dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and also under
Article 8 outside the Rules.

5.    The above was not the end of the matter because an application,  as  I
understand it supported by  an  organisation  called  The  Northern  Refugee
Centre, was made for permission  to  appeal.  Indeed  that  application  was
granted.  The salient part of the grant reads as follows:

         "2.      The grounds  assert  that  the Judge  erred  starkly,  in
         failing to consider at all, or even refer to the best interests  of
         the children, both of whom were born in and have only lived in  the
         United Kingdom.  Further that the Judge erred in failing to explore
         matters central to the disposal  of  the  appeal,  namely  why  the
         family were unrepresented at the appeal, what further documentation
         had been provided to the Home Office by the appellants in  support
         of the application, lost by the Home Office in a  flood;  and  the
         content  of  previous  decisions,  including  appellate   decisions
         concerning the family.  It is contended also that as the appellants
         were unrepresented and human rights were in issue, the Judge had a
         duty to put relevant questions, to assist them to put  their  case;
         and that in this case, the Judge appears to  have  asked  no  such
         questions.

         3. The assertions are evident on the face of the decision.

         4. All grounds are arguable.

         5. An arguable error of law is shown."

6.     I  held  a  hearing  on  23 December 2016  so  that,   initially,
consideration could be given to the question of whether  or  not  the Judge
had erred in law such that his decision ought to be set  aside.   Directions
made provision for any necessary remaking of the decision to  be  undertaken
at the same hearing.  The first named appellant was in attendance.  She  had
now sought assistance from Joycon Legal Solicitors but Ms N Sheikh, of that
organisation, had frankly informed me that she had no recent  experience  of
representation and no proper knowledge of immigration law so  was  not  best
fitted to provide representation.   In  these  circumstances  I  decided  to
proceed, with consent of all of the parties, on the  basis  that  she  could
offer limited assistance as a McKenzie Friend.

7.    Having listened to the parties I decided  to  set  aside  the Judge's
decision.  That  was  because  of  my  view  that,  in  the  context  of  an
unrepresented  litigant,  the Judge  had  failed  to  enquire   into   the
difficulties the family might experience upon relocation to Nigeria  insofar
as that difficulty might impinge upon the question of the reasonableness  of
return  for  the  second  appellant  within  the  context  of  Appendix FM.
The Judge's approach, in looking at what had been said in  particular  from
paragraphs 17-25 of the determination, had been to  simply  rely  upon  the
first appellant's apparent failure to provide certain documentary  or  other
corroborative evidence rather  than  to  genuinely  enquire  into  what  the
overall position might be. Further, at paragraph 23  of  his  determination
the Judge had stated that  the  first  appellant  had  given  "no  reliable
evidence as to why she cannot find employment in  Nigeria  and  support  her
family there" without stating what evidence she had provided and why it  was
considered that such evidence was not reliable.  Since the  appeal  appeared
to turn upon the question of reasonableness in the  context  of  the  second
appellant's return, such was a pivotal consideration which  merited  further
exploration.

8.    Having set the decision aside matters proceeded to  remaking.   As  to
that, I heard oral evidence from the first  named  appellant.   In  summary,
she  said  that  her  husband  had  returned  to  Nigeria  in   2012.    The
relationship had got into  difficulties  prior  to  that.   Her  father  has
passed away and her mother and her siblings  live  in  the  Benin Republic.
She had some distant family on her father's side  in  Nigeria  but  did  not
have any contact with them.  She had had a disagreement with them  when  she
had decided to marry her husband as opposed to another person  they  thought
she should marry.  She has no friends in Nigeria and is not in contact  with
anyone in that country.  She had last worked in Nigeria as a cleaner.   That
was about 12 years ago.  She speaks English and  Yoruba.   She  did  attend
school in  Nigeria  and  after  taking  some  resits  obtained  "a  school's
certificate".  She did not  obtain  any  further  qualifications.   Her  two
children are both fit and well.

9.    As to remaking, Mrs Petterson urged me to do  so  by  dismissing  the
appeal.  She  suggested  that  the  first  appellant  had  been  very  vague
regarding family members she might have in Nigeria.  It was not enough  that
the two children had been born in the UK or that the first  appellant  might
prefer  it  if  they  were  all  able  to  remain  here.   There  might   be
difficulties for the first appellant in restarting her life in  Nigeria  but
that did not mean there would be anything unreasonable  about  return.   The
requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met and there was no reason,
in those circumstances, to look to Article 8 outside the rules.

10.   In remaking the decision, I  have,  in  fact,  decided  to  allow  the
appeal of all three appellants.  That is because I  am  satisfied  that  the
relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules as contained in Appendix FM
are met.

11.    As  is  clear  from  the  respondent's  analysis  in   refusing   the
applications, that the crux here is paragraph EX.1(a)(ii) and,  hence,  the
reasonableness of expecting the  second  appellant  (the  eldest  child)  to
leave the UK.  If the first appellant were to succeed on  that  basis  (that
she has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child whom  it
would not be reasonable to expect to leave the UK) then the appeals  of  the
child  appellants  also  succeed  because   in   those   circumstances   the
requirement in E-LTRC.1.6 would be met in respect of them.

12.   The ability of the first  appellant  to  adequately  provide  for  the
second appellant in Nigeria is obviously a  matter  of  relevance  regarding
the reasonableness issue within the Rules.  Although Mrs Peterson suggested
that her evidence was vague at some points, I found the first  appellant  to
be, in broad terms, a straightforward witness.  She did  not,  for  example,
seek to hide the fact that her children were both in good health.   She  did
not give oral evidence which was internally inconsistent.  She  appeared  to
answer the questions put to her as  fully  as  she  was  capable  of  doing.
Accordingly, I accept that she has  had  only  limited  education  and  very
limited employment experience in Nigeria as she claims.  I  accept  that  if
she is to return to that country she will not be able to access  any  family
support nor will she have the support of any  friends.   Thus,  it  will  be
difficult  for  her  to  be  able  to  obtain  employment  which  will   pay
sufficiently well for her to be able to find a  home  for  herself  and  her
children and to make appropriate and  satisfactory  commercial  arrangements
for child care whilst she is at work.  Had I thought she would  have  family
support I might very well have reach a different conclusion as to  this  but
I find, on the material before me, that there  is  little  prospect  of  her
being able to achieve all of that.

13.   So, since life will be difficult for the first appellant  it  follows,
given that the father of the two children is no longer on  the  scene,  that
that difficulty will have a  significant  knock-on  effect  for  the  second
appellant and is highly relevant to the question of  the  reasonableness  of
requiring her to leave the UK.  I add to that the fact that that  child  has
been in the UK for all of her life and had, therefore, resided  here  for  a
period in excess of seven years at the time  the  application  was  made  (a
matter recognised as being important within the  Rules)  and  that  she  has
also been attending  a  school  in  the  UK.   In  my  judgment  she  is  of
sufficient age for the somewhat sharp edged change from life in  the  UK  to
life in Nigeria to be troubling and difficult for her.  Putting all of  that
together I conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect that child  to
leave the UK.  That, having regard to what has  been  said  above,  has  the
consequence of meaning that the first appellant's appeal does succeed  under
the Immigration Rules with the consequent knock-on effect that the  appeals
also succeed in relation to the two child appellants.

14.   In remaking the decision, therefore, I allow the appeals of all  three
appellants.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

In remaking the decision  I  allow  the  appeals  of  all  three  appellants
against the respondent's decisions of 8 September 2015.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity directions since none have ever been sought.


Signed:                           Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee awards.


Signed:                           Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


