
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2017                           |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                SANTOSH SHAHI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 15 October 1983. His father
   is a former Gurkha who was granted indefinite leave to enter the UK on 17
   September 2009 on the basis of his service in the British Army and has
   been in the UK since 7 June 2010 along with his wife (the appellant's
   mother). The appellant has one brother, who now resides in the UK.


2. On 1 July 2015 the appellant applied for leave to enter the UK with a
   view to settlement as the adult dependent of his father. On 6 August 2015
   the application was refused by the respondent. The appellant appealed to
   the First-tier Tribunal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that refusing him entry to
   the UK would breach Article 8 ECHR. The appeal was heard by Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal Rowlands. In a decision promulgated on 20 February
   2017, the appeal was dismissed. The appellant is now appealing, with
   permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


3. As this was an appeal under Article 8 ECHR the task of the judge was to
   consider, firstly, if there was family life between the appellant and his
   family in the UK the interference with which was of sufficient gravity to
   engage the operation of Article 8(1) ECHR; and secondly, if (and only if)
   the answer to the first question was yes, whether refusing entry
   clearance to the appellant would be a disproportionate interference with
   his and his family's rights under Article 8 ECHR.


4. The judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that although the appellant
   has a family life with his parents in the UK, the interference with that
   family life arising from refusing him entry clearance would not have
   consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of
   Article 8. It was therefore not necessary to proceed to the second
   question, which concerns whether refusing entry to the appellant was
   disproportionate. The judge's reasoning for concluding Article 8 was not
   engaged is set out in paragraphs 18 and  20, where it is stated:


         18. The appellant appears to be a single man from documents
         provided. He claims to be unemployed but, of course, there is no
         way of proving this. I am extremely concerned about the suggestion
         that he is wholly reliant on the sponsor for his income. I do not
         believe that I am being told the truth about his circumstances. The
         appellant has qualifications which would suit him in trying to get
         work. There is no evidence of the difficulties complained of. He
         lives in rent free, family owned accommodation and I do not accept,
         as the sponsor claimed, that the land has been sold. I believe the
         appellant to be self-sufficient and independent and that any monies
         sent over by the sponsor may assist but are not the only source.


         19.....


         20. Clearly there is family life between the parents and their
         grown up children. However, for it to engage article 8 I have to be
         satisfied that it exists over and above that which normally exists
         between adult children and parents and in the case of his brother
         adult siblings. That is, of course, why the sponsor has referred to
         their culture and the emotions expressed by the appellant when they
         talk or communicate or even visit. I have looked at the text
         messages provided. Some of them are in a language that I do not
         understand and should have been translated and others reflect
         relatively mundane issues.... I do not accept that cultural issues
         should matter but normal relationships. The truth is they have not
         lived together as a family for many years and their relationship is
         not over and above similar others. I do not accept that refusal of
         his leave to enter interferes with their family life such as to
         engage article 8 at all [sic] the appeal fails at the first Razgar
         hurdle.



5. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge's approach to assessing
   whether Article 8 was engaged was inconsistent with Court of Appeal case
   law which provides that the assessment of whether family life exists
   between adult children and parents depends on all of the facts. The
   grounds argue that important facts were not considered or were improperly
   discounted, such as:


     a) That the unchallenged evidence of the sponsor was that Nepalese
        culture is such that parents are responsible for their children
        until they are married.


     b) There were frequent telephone conversations (as opposed to just
        texts) between the family.


     c) The appellant lives in his father's home, is unemployed and
        receives regular money transfers.


     d) The only reason the family have lived apart is the historic
        injustice which prevented the family settled in the UK when these
        appellant's father was discharged from the army.


6. Before me, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge's assessment of whether
   Article 8 was engaged lacked the fact sensitive review required by the
   case law. In particular, he argued that the judge erred by failing to
   take into account cultural factors, even though these were raised by the
   sponsor.


7. Mr Ahmed submitted that other relevant considerations were also omitted
   from the judges assessment. He maintained that the judge failed to have
   regard to the sponsor's recent visit to Nepal, the appellant's evidence
   about being handed money on that occasion, and his evidence about being
   unemployed.


8. Mr Kandola argued that the grounds are no more than a disagreement with
   the judge's conclusion. He argued that even if cultural issues are
   relevant, failing to consider them was not material given the judge's
   findings about the appellant not being dependent on the sponsor. He
   maintained that the judge considered all of the evidence and gave clear
   reasons for his decision. It was a matter for the judge whether or not to
   accept he was told the truth about the appellant's claimed financial
   dependency and circumstances in Nepal, and the judge was entitled to find
   that he was not.

Consideration

   9. The issue of whether family life exists between adult children and a
      parent who is a former Ghurka is one that has been subject to
      considerable analysis by the Court of Appeal, most recently in Rai v
      Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320. The case law makes clear
      that there is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or
      absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8 and the
      assessment of whether there is family life is fact specific and will
      depend on consideration of all the relevant facts in the particular
      case.

  10. In Rai, the Court of Appeal commented on some of the factors relevant
      to considering whether Article 8(1) is engaged. In particular, at
      paragraph 42, Lindblom LJ stated:


         Those circumstances of the appellant and his family, all of them
         uncontentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the fact that he
         and his parents would have applied at the same time for leave to
         enter the United Kingdom and would have come to the United Kingdom
         together as a family unit had they been able to afford to do so, do
         not appear to have been grappled with by the Upper Tribunal judge
         under article 8(1). In my view they should have been. They went to
         the heart of the matter: the question of whether, even though the
         appellant's parents had chosen to leave Nepal to settle in the
         United Kingdom when they did, his family life with them subsisted
         then, and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper Tribunal's
         decision. This was the critical question under article 8(1). Even
         on the most benevolent reading of his determination, I do not think
         one can say that the Upper Tribunal judge properly addressed it.
         (emphasis added)

  11. Although Judge Rowland considered many of the factors relevant to the
      issue of whether Article 8 was engaged (including in particular
      whether the appellant was financially and emotionally dependent on the
      sponsor) it is apparent from the decision, when read as a whole, that
      the judge did not make any findings on or give consideration to the
      issues highlighted in paragraph 42 of Rai, namely: (a) the
      circumstances of the appellant and his parents at the time his parents
      left Nepal to settle in the UK and (b) whether the appellant and his
      parents would have come to the UK as a family unit had they been able
      to. Rai makes clear (at paragraph 42) that these are important
      factors. Failure to consider them was a material error of law.


  12. Rai was promulgated after the decision of Judge Rowland and therefore
      the judge cannot be faulted for failing to follow it. Nonetheless, as
      the decision, for the reasons set out above, is inconsistent with Rai,
      it cannot stand.


  13. A further error arises from the judge not taking into account the
      evidence before him about the culture in Nepal in relation to adult
      children. It was made clear in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha
      policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) that cultural factors are a relevant
      part of the factual matrix to be considered. At paragraph [68] of
      Ghising it is stated:


         68. We have found that the Appellant depends upon his parents for
         financial, practical and emotional support and guidance. They
         depend upon him as their only child still living at home. Mr L.
         Ghising's evidence was that it is the custom among Nepalese people
         for the youngest son to remain living with his parents, even after
         marriage, to care for them when they become elderly. This evidence
         was not challenged by the Respondent. (emphasis added)

  14. As I have found there to be a material error of law the decision will
      need to be set aside. Given the extent of judicial fact finding which
      is likely to be necessary for the decision to be re-made and having
      regard to Paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements for the Immigration
      and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal
      I consider this an appeal which is appropriate to remit to the First-
      tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

  15. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law and is set aside.


  16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.


|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  15 January 2018      |




