
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06820/2017
                                                               HU/06821/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 January 2019                 |On 8 February 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     AB
                                     MB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These appeals are brought against a decision by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Hands dismissing appeals on human rights grounds
       against the refusal of entry clearance.

    2. The appellants are a brother and sister and are nationals of Sierra
       Leone.  The first appellant was born in 2002 and the second was born
       in 2005.  They applied for entry clearance to join their father, who
       is settled in the UK and is the sponsor of the application.

    3. Following the making of the application DNA tests showed that the
       sponsor is not the biological father of the appellants.  The sponsor
       has always regarded the appellants as his children.  His evidence is
       that the appellants' mother died several years ago after abandoning
       the children.  It is also claimed that the children are ostracised in
       Sierra Leone because the sponsor is gay.

    4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal expressed doubts or reservations
       about whether the appellants' mother was dead, about who was caring
       for the appellants, and about the extent of the sponsor's contact
       with and support for the appellants.  The judge expressed the issue
       she had to decide as whether the appellants were now living in such
       compassionate and compelling circumstances that they should be
       allowed to join the sponsor in the UK in recognition of their right
       to live in a family with him.  The judge was not satisfied that the
       sponsor was maintaining regular contact with the children as he
       claimed, or that the appellants were suffering abuse because of the
       sponsor's sexuality.  The judge found that the best interests of the
       appellants were served by remaining in Sierra Leone where they were
       familiar with their surroundings, their school and their friends.
       The appellants had not established exceptional or compassionate
       circumstances to show the refusal decision was a disproportionate
       interference in the family and private life of the appellants and the
       sponsor.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted because it was arguable, in
       particular, that the judge made factual errors in relation to the
       evidence and did not make clear findings on certain matters.



Submissions

    6. For the appellants, Mr Devlin relied upon the grounds set out in the
       application for permission to appeal.  In particular, paragraph 3 of
       the grounds set out certain matters on which careful findings of fact
       were required.  The judge made a number of points about discrepancies
       in the evidence and the effect of these in undermining the weight to
       be given to the evidence but did not give conclusions or make
       findings of fact, looking in particular at paragraphs 11 to 17 of the
       decision.  It was not appropriate to infer findings of fact where
       there were crucial issues on the best interests of the children.

    7. Mr Devlin then referred to the second ground, at paragraph 4 of the
       application, in which it was contended that the judge made a number
       of errors of fact which affected her assessment of the evidence.  As
       a result of this the judge's findings on family life were unsafe.

    8. The third ground, according to Mr Devlin, was concerned with the
       public interest aspect of the proportionality assessment.  According
       to the judge, at paragraph 13 of the decision, there was no provision
       in the Immigration Rules to consider a sponsor requesting family
       reunion for a child who was subject to a de facto adoption.  Such an
       application therefore fell to be refused under the Rules.  This
       statement about the Immigration Rules was incorrect.  Paragraph 6 of
       the Immigration Rules included in the definition of "a parent" the
       adoptive parent of a child subject to a de facto adoption.  This
       point was covered in AA (Somalia) [2014] 1WLR 43, where it was
       pointed out by Lord Carnwath, at paragraph 25, that the definition of
       a de facto adoption in paragraph 309A of the Immigration Rules would
       not cover the situation of a refugee who was an adoptive parent
       seeking family reunion.  Among the requirements of paragraph 309A is
       one which requires the adoptive parent to have been living abroad
       with the child for 12 months immediately preceding the application
       for entry clearance.  Further concern about this issue in relation to
       the application of Article 8 was expressed by Lord Glennie in M &
       Anor [2016] CSOH 51 at paragraph 34.  On this matter Mr Devlin
       submitted that the Immigration Rules were not compliant with Article
       8.  It could not therefore be a negative factor in the balancing
       exercise that the appellants did not meet the Immigration Rules.  A
       vigorous approach should be taken to the balancing exercise in these
       circumstances.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not carry
       out the balancing exercise properly.

    9. For the respondent, Mr Govan acknowledged that there were some issues
       with the decision.  There was the point that adopted children could
       be taken into account under the Immigration Rules relating to family
       reunion.  There were also some issues over factual errors.  The
       question was whether these issues were material and whether they made
       the decision unsafe.

   10. In relation to the first ground, the alleged failure to make key
       findings, Mr Govan submitted that paragraphs 16 and 17 of the
       decision should be read together.  The judge did not accept that the
       appellants' mother was dead.  The judge made findings at paragraphs
       22-24 about the lack of evidence of who was caring for the children.
       There was enough here for the judge to find that the children's
       circumstances were not as it was alleged they were.  At paragraph 25
       the judge considered whether the children were being ostracised and
       found the evidence relating to this would not affect the outcome of
       the appeal in either direction.

   11. Mr Govan continued that at paragraph 22 the judge found there was no
       evidence of contact between the sponsor and the appellants.  At
       paragraph 23 the judge found that a letter from IKK about the
       children's circumstances was based on information provided by the
       sponsor.  At paragraph 25 the judge considered the best interests of
       the children.  The decision gave appropriate consideration to the
       source of evidence and looked at the circumstances in which the
       children were living.

   12. Mr Govan continued by referring to the contention that the judge had
       disregarded evidence of contact between the sponsor and the
       appellants.  Mr Govan submitted that it was open to the judge to put
       little weight on letters produced as evidence of contact.  The point
       was that the circumstances in which the children were living were not
       established.  The findings made by the judge were open to her.  While
       there might be errors in the decision it did not follow that the
       decision overall was unsafe.

   13. Mr Govan acknowledged that paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules
       allowed for a de facto adoption.  The appellants, however, could not
       meet the requirements of paragraph 309A.  Notwithstanding the
       comments of Lord Carnwath on paragraph 309A, the relevant provisions
       of the Rules still stood.  The question was whether paragraph 309A
       led to a disproportionate approach.  The present appeal, however,
       turned on its facts.  The judge considered the relationship between
       the sponsor and the appellants and the best interests of the
       appellants.  This was a relatively simple exercise and there was no
       error of law.

   14. Mr Devlin responded for the appellants.  On the question of whether
       their mother was dead, he asked me to compare paragraphs 16 and 17 of
       the judge's decision.  At paragraph 16 the judge postulated the
       mother was dead but at paragraph 17 the judge doubted the veracity of
       the claim the mother was dead.  There was at least a tension here.

   15. Mr Devlin further submitted that the judge failed to make clear
       findings on whether the appellants were being ostracised because of
       the sponsor's sexuality.  Mr Govan said this did not affect the
       outcome either way but it did affect the judge's findings at
       paragraph 25 on the best interests of the appellants.  The judge
       further erred at paragraph 22 when considering the evidence of
       contact between the appellants and the sponsor.  The judge stated
       that all the evidence of this was from the sponsor and there was no
       independent evidence.  However, letters such as the letter from IKK
       were independent evidence.  This was a material error which might
       have led to a different outcome.  Mr Devlin asked for the appeal to
       be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   16. I reserved my decision on the issue of whether the Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal erred in law and her decision should be set aside.



Discussion

   17. In my consideration of this appeal I will begin by looking at whether
       the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made adequate findings of fact
       and whether these were affected by any mistakes in apprehending the
       evidence.  I will then consider the proportionality assessment
       carried out by the judge under Article 8.

   18. It is contended that the judge failed to make proper findings on four
       issues.  These were whether the appellants' mother was dead; who was
       currently caring for the children; whether that person could
       reasonably be expected to continue to provide care for the children;
       and whether the children were being ostracised from their local
       community because of the sponsor's sexuality.

   19. Mr Devlin submitted that at paragraph 16 the judge postulated that
       the appellants' mother was dead and at paragraph 17 questioned the
       veracity of the evidence of her death.  On my reading, at paragraph
       16 the judge was considering the evidence about who was caring for
       the appellants in the period from 2010 to 2016.  The judge identified
       a number of inconsistencies in this evidence.  She found, however,
       that it was more likely than not that the appellant's mother cared
       for them "until her death", which occurred in April 2011, according
       to a death certificate before the judge.  Essentially this finding
       was about who was caring for the children up until April 2011, when
       the evidence indicated they were placed in an orphanage for a short
       period.  It was not a finding about whether or not the appellants'
       mother was alive at the date of the hearing.  This is apparent from
       paragraph 17, where the judge identifies significant discrepancies in
       the evidence about the year in which the appellants' mother
       supposedly died.  The judge concludes that she doubts the veracity of
       the information she has been given about the death of the appellants'
       mother and the circumstances in which the appellants were said to be
       living.  In these appeals it was for the appellants to show that
       their mother is no longer alive and this they signally failed to do.

   20. Indeed, the judge could not be expected to make findings on matters
       on which she had not been provided with credible and reliable
       evidence.  It was for the appellants, and for the sponsor as a
       witness on their behalf, to show the circumstances in which they were
       living and who was caring for them.  Where the judge for good reason
       rejected the sponsor's evidence, then it was not possible for the
       judge to make findings on the children's circumstances.  It is not
       appropriate to criticise the judge for this - the fault lies with
       those who sought to mislead her in their evidence.

   21. On the issue of whether the appellants are ostracised, again the
       judge did not have reliable evidence on which to make a finding.  The
       best she is able to do, when considering the best interests of the
       appellants at paragraph 25, is to say that the sponsor's evidence was
       that they found it difficult to make friends but not that they did
       not make friends or had no friends.  The judge did not err in
       expressing a limited finding in this way.

   22. It is contended that the judge misapprehended parts of the evidence.
       As a result she concluded there was no independent evidence of
       contact between the appellants and the sponsor, when in fact there
       was; that information contained in correspondence from third parties,
       including information about the ill-treatment of the children by the
       local community, was derived from the sponsor when it was not; and
       that one of these third parties, IKK, failed to corroborate the
       evidence that the appellants' current carer was MB, when in fact he
       did.

   23. It appears that where the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal addressed
       this correspondence from third parties, at paragraph 23 of her
       decision, she did so very briefly.  The correspondence in question
       seems to be a letter dated 26th October 2016 from IKK, a letter dated
       22nd October 2016 from TG, and an email dated 21st May 2011 from MT.
       At this point in her decision when the judge reached this
       correspondence she had already found significant inconsistencies in
       the evidence of the sponsor, who was the only witness to give
       evidence orally at the hearing.

   24. The judge also had before her an affidavit dated 10th November 2016
       from MB, supposedly the current carer of the appellants, and a letter
       from FB, on which the judge stated at paragraph 16 that she placed
       very little weight.  The affidavit from MB stated that she was the
       guardian of the appellants but had asked the sponsor to find an
       alternative guardian as she intended to leave Sierra Leone.  The
       affidavit also stated that the appellants' mother was dead.  Because
       of inconsistencies in other evidence relating to the alleged death of
       the appellants' mother, the judge was not satisfied this was true.

   25. The letter of 26th October 2016 from IKK named the appellants' carer
       as MB but the judge mistakenly stated that the letter did not name
       their carer.  This mistake was not made in the specific context of
       identifying who was caring for the children but more widely in
       relation to attempting to ascertain information about their welfare
       and the circumstances in which they were living.  The point the judge
       was making was that the letter in question was silent on these
       important matters.  The judge was considering how well the appellants
       were being cared for, rather than by whom. I therefore agree with Mr
       Govan that the judge's mistake on this point is not material to the
       outcome of the appeal.

   26. The broader point being made by the judge in relation to the three
       pieces of correspondence under consideration at paragraph 23 was that
       they were written by friends of the sponsor to support the sponsor's
       evidence.  The sponsor's oral and written evidence was found by the
       judge to lack credibility because of a number of inconsistencies and
       omissions which she clearly identified.  The sponsor's evidence could
       not be saved by the three pieces of correspondence even had none of
       them been partially misconstrued at paragraph 23.  By this point in
       the decision the sponsor's own evidence had already been rejected as
       lacking in credibility.

   27. There may have been at least an implicit suggestion on behalf of the
       appellants that if the judge had had proper regard to this
       correspondence she might not have rejected the sponsor's evidence in
       the way that she did.  I agree with Mr Govan, however, that the
       findings made by the judge in relation to the sponsor's evidence
       would not have been materially affected by anything in this
       correspondence which the judge might have failed to properly
       apprehend.  The sponsor's evidence was found by the judge, with good
       reason, to be so inadequate that there is nothing in these letters
       which would have outweighed its deficiencies.  I should add, in
       addition, that in this context the judge was entitled to place
       little, if any, weight on the email from MT about the treatment of
       the appellants by the local community.

   28. The final issue for me to consider is the judge's proportionality
       assessment.  The judge was incorrect, of course, to assume that an
       adoptive parent in a de facto adoption could not be a parent under
       the Immigration Rules.  The judge was correct, albeit for the wrong
       reasons, to conclude that the appellants could not succeed under the
       Immigration Rules on the basis they were joining an adoptive parent.
       The judge does not appear to have been referred to the judicial
       decisions relating to this to which I was referred by Mr Devlin.  Mr
       Devlin argued that the judge wrongly assumed that the appellants'
       failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules was a
       negative factor in the balancing exercise under Article 8.  That this
       should be treated as a negative factor seems to have been implicit in
       the submission on behalf of the respondent, recorded at paragraph 7
       of the decision, but it does not form an explicit element in the
       judge's reasoning.

   29. Instead the judge states at paragraph 20 that under Article 8 she
       will consider whether the appellants "are now living in such
       compassionate and compelling circumstances that they should be
       allowed to join the sponsor in the United Kingdom in recognition of
       their right to live in a family with him" [my emphasis].  It is
       difficult to find fault with this formulation.  The reason the
       appellants did not succeed under Article 8 was not because the judge
       did not carry out the balancing exercise properly but because the
       evidence of the appellants' circumstances was so inadequate.  The
       judge did not err in law in her approach to the assessment of
       proportionality under Article 8.

   30. Furthermore, the judge stated that any contact between the appellants
       and the sponsor could continue, as could the relationship they may
       have shared in the same manner as it had in the twelve years since
       the sponsor left Sierra Leone.



Conclusions

   31. The making of the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       did not make an error on a point of law.

   32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeals shall
       stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  In view of the
ages of the appellants I continue this direction in the following terms.
Unless a court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings
shall identify either directly or indirectly the appellants or any member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the appellants and the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction may lead to contempt of
court proceedings.


M E Deans   30th January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
