
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06752/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th April 2019                            |On 14th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              mr Anish Maharjan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Atreya, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on  26th  October  1989.   The
    Appellant had first entered the United Kingdom  on  26th  October  2009
    with entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   Subsequent
    applications were made until the Appellant applied for further leave to
    remain on 5th February 2015 which was refused on 27th April 2015.

 2. On 4th May 2016 the Appellant made a human rights application for leave
    to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his  family  and  private  life.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 23rd May 2017.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Baldwin sitting at Hatton Cross on 22nd January 2019.  In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 29th January 2019 the Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 4. On 29th January 2019 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.   On  26th  March  2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grimmett granted permission to appeal.  The judge  noted  that
    the grounds contended that the judge had  failed  to  consider  whether
    there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner living together in Nepal and failed to explain how it would  be
    unjustifiably harsh if they were to be separated while he sought  leave
    from Nepal.  Judge Grimmett concluded that it was  arguable  that  both
    points could be argued on the  basis  that  it  was  unclear  from  the
    decision why the judge had reached the conclusions that he had done.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Mr Maharjan is referred to herein as the  Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The Appellant appears by his
    instructed Counsel, Ms Atreya.  Ms Atreya is very  familiar  with  this
    matter.  She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Tarlow does little more than rely on the Grounds of Appeal.   It  is
    however pointed out to me both by Ms Atreya and by Mr Tarlow that there
    is a witness  statement  from  Miss  Nicole  Rodriguez.   This  witness
    statement is sought to be admitted in evidence by Ms Atreya pursuant to
    Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  Mr Tarlow does  not
    seek to  challenge  it.   That  witness  statement  advises  that  Miss
    Rodriguez was granted indefinite leave to remain on 5th March 2019  and
    that she continues to work in two jobs, one for the NHS as a healthcare
    assistant with Central Middlesex Hospital and as a carer for which  she
    is paid on a monthly basis.  Evidence of her finances are adduced.   Mr
    Tarlow acknowledges that this strengthens the Appellant's position.

 7. Ms Atreya  indicates  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  carefully
    considered the oral testimony which had been produced  along  with  the
    written testimony and that  this  consisted  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and four witnesses.  She  submits  that  the  judge  had  the
    correct approach in mind when carrying out the balancing  exercise  and
    refers me to paragraphs 18 to 22, 26  and  27  of  the  decision.   She
    submits that the judge has indicated why it would be unduly  harsh  for
    the Appellant to be expected to return  and  asks  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on the grounds that it shows no material error of law.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of law

10. The judge's findings are set out in some detail in paragraphs 22 to 27.
     Prior to that at paragraphs 18 to 22 the judge has set out  the  legal
    tests that need to be considered and thereinafter has gone on  to  make
    reasoned findings, including a finding with regard to the  relationship
    between the Appellant and Miss Rodriguez.  He has gone on to state that
    the case is very finely  balanced  as  to  whether  or  not  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to be overcome with regard  to  the  Appellant
    having to return to Nepal to make an application and has given due  and
    full consideration to  the  position  in  which  Miss  Rodriguez  finds
    herself in.  The judge has  considered  the  factors  fully  and  drawn
    conclusions that it would be unduly harsh to expect Miss  Rodriguez  to
    go and live in  Nepal,  setting  out  that  it  would  be  particularly
    traumatic for Miss Rodriguez as she had been seriously depressed by the
    breakdown of her two previous relationships.

11. Judge Baldwin acknowledged that this was a case where different  judges
    might take a different view, but it was his considered opinion that  it
    would be unreasonable and disproportionate to expect the Appellant  now
    to return to Nepal and  unreasonable  both  for  him,  Miss  Rodriguez'
    family (to whom he is very close) and to Miss Rodriguez in  particular.
    Of course this decision was reached before Miss Rodriguez  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  That is only one factor.

12. What is important is the approach adopted by  the  judge.   This  is  a
    judge who  has  given  full  and  thorough  reasons  for  reaching  his
    decision.  He has analysed the position of both the Appellant and  Miss
    Rodriguez and he has given reasons for his findings.   Providing  those
    reasons are ones which are sustainable it is not for another  judge  to
    go behind those findings.  All the findings made  are  ones  which  the
    judge was perfectly entitled to make and he has given his  reasons  for
    them.

13. In such circumstances I find that there is no material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
