
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06934/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard on 19 January 2021                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                              |
|At a remote hearing via Skype                 |On 3 February 2021            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                  Mayur [P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Introduction

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Fowell, sent on 27 August  2019,  dismissing
         his appeal on Article 8, ECHR grounds.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1987.  His  immigration
         status is not in dispute: although he arrived lawfully as a visitor
         in 2003, he remained as an unlawful overstayer.  He  made  a  human
         rights application on 23 October 2018 based upon  his  relationship
         with a British citizen partner, who I shall refer to as R.   R  was
         born in India and arrived in the  UK  as  a  spouse  of  a  British
         citizen in 2005.  She divorced her  spouse  in  2018  but  obtained
         British citizenship in 2012.   R  has  been  in  employment  for  a
         lengthy period in the UK and owns her own property.

      3. The relationship between the appellant and R began in 2016  with  a
         religious  marriage  taking  place  on   22   August   2016.    The
         relationship has been accepted to be genuine  and  subsisting,  and
         was not challenged by the SSHD at the FTT hearing.

FTT's findings

      4. The FTT heard evidence from the  appellant  and  R  and  considered
         psychiatric reports diagnosing the appellant with  PTSD.   The  FTT
         accepted that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with R  but  rejected  the  claim  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that:

          i) he had lost all family ties in India;

         ii) he experienced traumatic events in India in 2002 from which he
             continued to suffer;

        iii) R needed to remain in the UK for IVF purposes such  that  this
             constituted an 'insurmountable obstacle'  to  family  life  in
             India;

         iv) the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  met
             when the requisite 'specified evidence' was not submitted.

      5. The FTT concluded that there  was  an  absence  of  'insurmountable
         obstacles' and the requirements of the Immigration Rules could  not
         be met, before addressing  the  impact  of  the  interference  upon
         family life pursuant to Article 8.  In relation to Article  8,  the
         FTT addressed the relevant public interest considerations  together
         with R (Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  and  the  principle  in
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, before concluding  that  it  would
         not be a disproportionate breach  of  family  life  to  remove  the
         appellant in circumstances where family life could be exercised  in
         India.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal in  grounds  drafted
         by Mr Ahmed.  At a previous hearing on 6 November 2020,  which  was
         adjourned due to a lack of court time, Mr Ahmed 'recalibrated'  the
         grounds  without  any  objection   from   the   respondent's   then
         representative.  Mr Ahmed relied upon four grounds of appeal, which
         can be summarised as follows.

                   1) In  determining  whether  the  requirements  in  EX.1
                      Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  were  met,  the
                      FTT failed to take into account relevant evidence  to
                      the  effect  that  relocation  would  entail  serious
                      hardship for both the appellant and R.




                   2) The FTT erred in law its approach  to  the  financial
                      requirements of the Immigration Rules.

                   3) The FTT erred in law in its approach to the Chikwamba
                      principle.




                   4) In determining the issue of proportionality, the  FTT
                      failed to consider the reasonableness of expecting  R
                      to relocate in accordance with  the  guidance  in  GM
                      (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.

      7. FTT Judge Keane granted permission to appeal in a decision dated 17
         January 2020.  He observed that the FTT may  not  have  arrived  at
         findings of fact in respect of R's personal circumstances.  He made
         no observations regarding any of the other grounds  of  appeal  but
         granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

      8. The respondent relied upon a rule 24 Notice and skeleton  argument.
         The appellant relied upon the grounds of appeal, amended grounds of
         appeal and a skeleton argument.

      9. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mr Ahmed alerted me to  a
         refused adjournment application dated 15 January 2021.   I  invited
         him to renew the application orally but he made it  clear  that  he
         was content to continue with the hearing.  He made oral submissions
         reflecting the written submissions concerning the four  grounds  of
         appeal.  Mrs Pettersen invited me to dismiss  the  appeal  for  the
         reasons set out in the respondent's skeleton argument.

     10. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision.  I
         now give that decision with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Ground 1 - 'insurmountable obstacles'

     11. I am satisfied that  the  FTT  gave  tolerably  clear  reasons  for
         finding that there  would  not  be  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to
         family life in India.  The appellant relied upon four main  factors
         in support of his submission regarding 'insurmountable  obstacles':
         (i) he had no ties left in India; (ii) he feared  return  to  India
         because of his experiences in 2002; (iii) R had  commenced  IVF  in
         the UK; (iv) R did not have Indian nationality.  The FTT  addressed
         each of these in turn and made findings of fact  entirely  open  to
         it.

     12. The grounds do no more than disagree with the  FTT's  rejection  of
         the appellant's claim that he had no family contacts left in India.

     13. The FTT comprehensively set out  the  relevant  detail  within  two
         psychiatric reports (prepared in 2015 and 2019) relied upon by  the
         appellant, at [6] and [7].   The  FTT  gave  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting  the  psychiatrists'  conclusions  that   the   appellant
         suffered from PTSD as a consequence of the 2002 riots in India: the
         medical records from the  GP  had  not  been  disclosed;  this  was
         particularly concerning because the claim was not raised  for  many
         years  despite  numerous  previous  applications;   the   treatment
         prescribed was consistent with depression for reasons  relation  to
         uncertain immigration status; the appellant  did  not  provide  any
         detail of the riots or his  involvement  in  them  in  his  witness
         statement and the account and diagnosis rested entirely on what  he
         told the psychiatrist.  Significantly, the  FTT  acknowledged  that
         the psychiatrists' reports might be sufficient in an asylum  appeal
         where the lower standard of proof applied.  The FTT was entitled to
         find for the reasons provided that the appellant did  not  displace
         the balance of probabilities standard.

     14. The FTT was well-aware of R's personal circumstances and had  those
         in mind when considering whether the obstacles she faced  would  be
         'insurmountable'.  The FTT summarised R's evidence at [12] to  15],
         noted  the  submissions  to  this  effect  at  [19]  and  [20]  and
         specifically addressed the two  specific  matters  relied  upon  on
         behalf of the appellant at [27] to [29]: IVF treatment  in  the  UK
         and lack of Indian nationality.  I turn to those two issues now.

     15. I accept the SSHD's submission that the FTT was  entitled  to  find
         that there was a paucity of evidence as to the claim that R  needed
         to be in the  UK  to  undergo  IVF  in  circumstances  wherein  the
         treatment itself had not commenced but  in  any  event  could  take
         place in India.

     16. The  contention  that  Indian  nationality  does  not  permit  dual
         nationality does not engage with the FTT's finding that R has  been
         able to visit India for  lengthy  periods.   I  accept  the  SSHD's
         submissions on this issue.  It is clear that R was  born  in  India
         and resided there for a lengthy period. Even assuming that when she
         gained  British  citizenship  in  2012,   she   lost   her   Indian
         citizenship, she still visited India in 2016 and  2018  and  saw  a
         gynaecologist there in  relation  to  IVF  treatment.   The  burden
         rested upon the appellant to establish that R would not be able  to
         reside in India as the appellant's spouse.  There was a requirement
         on the part of the appellant to lead evidence on this issue and not
         to rely upon mere assertion before the FTT - see GM (Sri Lanka)  at
         [30].

     17. I accept, as the grounds contend, that it is difficult to  see  the
         relevance of the requirements on the 'minimum  income  requirement'
         not being met upon 'insurmountable obstacles'.  However,  when  the
         decision  is  read  as  a  whole,  the  FTT  fully  addressed   the
         appellant's case on 'insurmountable obstacles' and the inclusion of
         [30] and [31] prior to the conclusion at [32] was meant to  explain
         why the FTT concluded that the Immigration Rules could not be  met:
         (i) no 'insurmountable obstacles' for the purposes of EX.1 and (ii)
         the financial requirements could not be met.

     18. It is regrettable that the FTT referred to the  potential  for  IVF
         treatment and the appellant's subjective  fear  on  return  as  not
         amounting  to  "an  exceptional  circumstance   on   the   evidence
         presented" at [31].  However the FTT's factual  findings  on  these
         two matters were entirely open to it for the reasons set out above.
           In addition, the FTT could have approached this issue in  a  more
         structured manner as recommended in Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925
         at [36] and [37].  Nevertheless, the findings of fact  underpinning
         the issue of  'insurmountable  obstacles'  was  open  to  the  FTT.
         Given those findings, on no legitimate view could the obstacles  to
         family life in India be properly be said to be 'insurmountable' and
         the  other  errors  identified  within  Mr  Ahmed's  skeleton   are
         therefore immaterial.

Ground 2 - financial requirements

     19. It is clear from the FTT's recording of R's oral evidence  at  [14]
         and [15] and the SSHD's representative's submissions at  [17]  that
         the appellant's ability to meet the financial requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules at the date of decision and date of  hearing  was
         disputed, and the contrary submission in the grounds of  appeal  is
         without any merit.

     20. The  assertion  in  the  grounds  that  the  'specified'  documents
         relevant to the date of application were submitted is difficult  to
         follow.   It  is  clear  from  R's  own  evidence  that  her   work
         circumstances changed because she left the job she had at the  date
         of the application.  When considering whether the Rules were met at
         the date of hearing as part of the Article  8  balancing  exercise,
         the FTT was entitled to have the  concerns  it  did  regarding  the
         inadequacies of the financial evidence.

     21. The grounds contend that all the evidence demonstrated that  R  was
         financially independent.  That entirely fails to address the  FTT's
         clear concerns that the evidence relied upon  as  at  the  date  of
         hearing was not  'specified'  evidence  and  insufficient  for  the
         reasons set out at [31] and again at [37].

Ground 3 - Chikwamba principle

     22. Mr Ahmed submitted that the FTT should have  concluded  that  there
         was no public interest in removing the appellant  from  the  UK  in
         order to make an entry clearance application that would be  certain
         to succeed.  However, the FTT remained concerned that the financial
         requirements had not been properly evidenced by  reference  to  the
         appropriate 'specified' documents.  Having directed itself to  [51]
         of Agyarko, the FTT made the clear finding that entry clearance was
         not certain to be granted at [40].  That was clearly a finding open
         to the FTT given  the  findings  as  to  the  inadequacies  of  the
         financial           evidence.            Younas            (section
         117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC) at [83] to
         [99] makes it clear that reliance upon Chikwamba  did  not  obviate
         the need to address all the relevant considerations in s.  117B  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The FTT clearly
         addressed those considerations from [33] of its decision.  The  FTT
         was entitled to find that there was a  strong  public  interest  in
         removing the appellant when he was an  unlawful  overstayer  for  a
         lengthy period who was unable to meet the financial requirements of
         the Rules.  The FTT was also correct to attach little weight to the
         family life established by the appellant when he was unlawfully  in
         the UK pursuant to s. 117(4)(b) of the  2002  Act  -  see  GM  (Sri
         Lanka) at [35].

Ground 4 - reasonableness of relocation in India

     23. Mr Ahmed submitted that at [35] the FTT erroneously directed itself
         to the need  to  demonstrate  'insurmountable  obstacles'  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  That betrays  a  misreading  of  the  FTT's
         balancing exercise conducted over the course of [33] to  [41].   At
         [35] the FTT was solely  dealing  with  s.  117B(1).   It  reminded
         itself that it was in the public interest for the Rules to  be  met
         and in this case the  'insurmountable  obstacles'  test  under  the
         Rules applied (but could not be met).  This  was  just  one  factor
         considered by the FTT, which then went  on  to  address  the  other
         public interest considerations in s.117B at [36] to  [38]  and  the
         Chikwamba principle at [39] and [40].

     24.  Although  the  FTT  did  not  explicitly  weigh  up  R's   British
         citizenship and commitments in the UK, or the  appellant's  lengthy
         (unlawful) residence in the UK, these were  clearly  well-known  to
         it, when the decision is read as a whole.  Mr Ahmed submitted  that
         the FTT was obliged to address the reasonableness  of  expecting  a
         British citizen to relocate to India. That is what the FTT did when
         undertaking the balancing exercise.  There was no need to undertake
         a separate analysis of reasonableness provided  that  all  relevant
         factors were addressed during the balancing exercise.  As  GM  (Sri
         Lanka) made clear at [52] it was  important  to  address  what  was
         "proportionate  or  reasonable".   The  FTT   did   not   apply   a
         'mechanistic   ability   to   relocate'   test    but    considered
         proportionality having considered all the  relevant  considerations
         in favour of the appellant remaining in  the  UK,  as  against  the
         public interest in removing him.  That assessment could  have  been
         fuller and clearer, but it was adequate.

     25. In any event, the FTT's factual findings were such that the  result
         in this case was inevitable.  There was a strong public interest in
         removal and little  weight  could  be  given  to  the  relationship
         pursuant to s. 117B(4)(b).  I do not accept Mr  Ahmed's  submission
         that the 'little weight provision' should have been tempered by the
         length of the relationship.  By the time of the  FTT  decision  the
         relationship was of some three  years  vintage.   By  contrast  the
         appellant remained in the UK as an overstayer  for  over  12  years
         before commencing this relationship.

Conclusion

     26. As I said at the hearing, Mr Ahmed said all that he could on behalf
         of the appellant but for the reasons I  have  set  out  above,  the
         grounds of appeal as clarified and recalibrated are not made out.

Notice of decision

The FTT decision does not contain an error of  law  and  I  do  not  set  it
aside.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer                      Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     19 January 2021
