
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/06134/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC               |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th November 2019                 |       On 26th November 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             mrs Shaheen Javaid
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  13th  July  1958.   The
    Appellant has a very poor immigration history.  She entered the  United
    Kingdom in July 2009 on a valid visit visa which was due to  expire  in
    January 2010.  The Appellant, subsequent to that visa, failed to  leave
    the UK and became an overstayer.  In 2015 she submitted an  application
    for  asylum.   That  application  was  refused.   On  refusal  of  that
    application the Appellant again continued to overstay and on  4th  July
    2018 the Appellant made a further application pursuant to a claim based
    on human rights.  That application was based on her  private  life  and
    was refused by notice of refusal dated 12th March 2019.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mather sitting at Manchester on 22nd  July  2019.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 7th  August  2019  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 7th August 2019 grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that there had been a failure by the
    judge to properly  assess  the  private  life  claim  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) on account of both an inadequacy  of  reasoning
    and a failure to properly assess material evidence.

 4. On 9th October 2019 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Loke  granted
    permission to appeal considering that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had failed to give any reasons for her findings  at  paragraph  21  and
    that the evidence did not support the claimed level of difficulty given
    the evidence of the Appellant's son and the supporting medical  report.



 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Brown.  Mr Brown is extremely familiar  with  this  matter.
    He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of  the
    grounds of appeal.  The Appellant personally is not in  attendance  but
    her son is.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  his  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submissions

 6. Mr Brown takes me to the decision of Judge Mather.  His  main  argument
    follows the findings of the judge to be found at  paragraph  21.   That
    paragraph is short and of some importance.  It reads:-

         "I am not persuaded that the evidence supports the claimed level of
         difficulty by the Appellant in carrying  out  activities  of  daily
         living."

    What Mr Brown contends is that that conclusion is written in  isolation
    without the judge having given reasons  as  to  how  she  reaches  such
    conclusions.  It is consequently, as is often the  case  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, a challenge to the judge's reasoning and as to  how  in  this
    instance the judge has reached her conclusions.  He contends  that  the
    judge has arguably not applied her mind to  the  central  issue  as  to
    whether by reason of her physical and mental state she is a person  who
    cannot in fact integrate into any country and that in order to properly
    assess this the judge needed to first give reasons why she rejected the
    evidence that was given that the Appellant could not carry out a number
    of daily living activities.  He contends that the judge does not within
    the body of the evidence set out in any great detail the evidence which
    was given by the Appellant's son and other  family  members,  but  does
    record at paragraph 10(c) that the Appellant's son and wife and another
    son are responsible for supporting  the  Appellant  "both  financially,
    physically and emotionally.".  He contends that the judge at  paragraph
    21 has simply given no reasons why she rejects  the  evidence  of  "the
    claimed level of difficulty by the Appellant in carrying out activities
    of daily living".  He contends that this lack  of  reasoning  and  this
    failure to assess in his  view  properly  the  evidence  regarding  the
    Appellant's physical and mental state showing a gap  in  her  reasoning
    which does not lead her to come to the conclusion that she has  and  he
    contends that such gap constitutes a material error of law.

 7. In response Mr  Bates  submits  that  the  judge  had  the  Appellant's
    evidence before her and that he also had the benefit  of  both  written
    and oral testimony.  He points  out  that  at  paragraph  9  the  judge
    indicates that there were bundles from both parties before her  and  at
    paragraph 10 recites in some detail the  Appellant's  case  and  claims
    based on both the written and oral evidence.  Thereafter, at  paragraph
    11, the judge states that in  reaching  her  conclusions  she  has  had
    regard to all of the evidence  before  her,  including  the  background
    information.

 8. Mr Bates points out that consideration of the Appellant's bundle showed
    that medical evidence was before the judge and that there  was  nothing
    from the Appellant's GP that provided support  and  that  the  evidence
    produced by consultants was  not  helpful  to  the  Appellant's  claim,
    pointing out that the main concern was  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    lonely if returned to Pakistan.  That in fact is  something  he  points
    out is specifically mentioned by the  judge  at  paragraph  22  of  her
    decision.  He submits that there was no objective  testimony  available
    to suggest that the Appellant was not capable of  caring  for  herself.
    He reminds me the judge heard her witnesses and there was no  evidence,
    for example, suggesting that because of the  Appellant's  health  needs
    someone would have to remind her to take her tablets.  He refers me  to
    paragraph 19 where the judge has set out the Appellant's mental  health
    condition and the manner in  which  this  mental  health  condition  is
    treated.  The judge has noted that the Appellant is not in  receipt  of
    specialist care in the UK and submits there is nothing in the  evidence
    that was before the Tribunal, or indeed even accepted by the judge,  to
    show that her care would reach the required  level  for  the  claim  to
    succeed.  He submits that there is no medical evidence  available  that
    would lead to the judge having come to a different conclusion and  that
    she has carried out a full and  detailed  analysis.   He  asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. This is a thorough decision from an experienced Immigration Judge.   It
    is always easy with hindsight to suggest that perhaps a fuller analysis
    could have been set out, but indeed judges are invited to  be  succinct
    in their reasons and the important fact is that reasons are given and I
    am satisfied explained.  Despite the submissions made by Mr Brown I  am
    satisfied that this is a judge who has given reasons for  reaching  her
    decision.  Firstly, she has indicated the evidence that was before  her
    and not only has she done that, but at paragraph 10 has set out in some
    considerable detail an analysis of both the written and oral  testimony
    that was before  her.   It  is  clear  that  the  judge  has  read  the
    documents.   Thereafter  the  judge,  admittedly  briefly,   has   made
    reference to the Appellant's mental health, noted the medication she is
    under and the lack of specialist care and at paragraph 20 has  gone  on
    to note that the Appellant has been accessing free treatment on the NHS
    despite being an overstayer with precarious immigration status.  Whilst
    it might have been better for perhaps a further paragraph to be put in,
    the conclusion of the judge  at  paragraph  21  is  one  that  she  was
    entitled to make and it is also clear from what she has said before and
    what is recited  herein  in  this  decision,  that  in  reaching  those
    conclusions the judge has considered all the evidence and made reasoned
    findings.

10. Further, paragraph 22 goes on to emphasise this  in  that  therein  the
    judge refers to the Appellant's family in Pakistan, her overstaying and
    sets out that she appreciates the Appellant's  various  medical  issues
    but is satisfied that she will have access  to  appropriate  medication
    and treatment if returned.  She further notes that there is a potential
    consequence of loneliness, but that this does not  reach  the  required
    threshold for her claim to succeed and sets  out  the  basis  by  which
    contact and visits can continue.  Finally, at paragraph  23  the  judge
    has indicated that she is not  persuaded  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in this case to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules.

11. When looked at comprehensively,  this  is  a  judge  who  has  actually
    carried out a thorough analysis and that the conclusion she has reached
    at paragraph 21 is one based on, for all the above reasons, an analysis
    of the evidence and facts that  were  before  her.   To  that  end  the
    submissions of Mr Brown amount to little more than of the  approach  by
    the judge.  In such  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  a
    decision that discloses no material errors of law and  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is maintained.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

13. No application is made for an anonymity direction and none is made.



Signed                              Date 15 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 15 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

