
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06179/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 December 2019                   |On 18 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KMM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Jones, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Whitfield, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant has appealed against the respondent's  refusal  of  his
       human rights claim in a decision letter dated 24  April  2017.   This
       was accompanied by a deportation order of the same date.

    2. The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, was born on 13  September  1991
       and is therefore now 28 years old.  In a decision sent on 27 February
       2019, the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  dismissed  the  appellant's
       appeal on human rights grounds.  In a decision sent on 12 July  2019,
       a different panel of the Upper Tribunal ('UT') found that  the  FTT's
       decision contained a  material  error  of  law  ('the  error  of  law
       decision').  The FTT's decision was set aside with directions for the
       decision to be re-made by the UT at a resumed hearing, which  we  now
       do.

Background

    3. The FTT made comprehensive findings of fact  having  heard  from  the
       appellant, his father ('J'), his partner ('E'), E's mother ('S')  and
       a friend ('ET') and having  considered  expert  reports  from  (i)  a
       country background expert on Zimbabwe, Professor Jeater ('the country
       expert report') and (ii) an independent social  worker,  Mr  Horrocks
       ('the ISW').  These findings of fact were not  challenged  or  cross-
       appealed by the respondent and it was agreed by both parties  at  the
       'error of law' hearing that they  constitute  preserved  findings  in
       relation to article 8, ECHR. Although those findings are set  out  in
       the error of law decision, it is convenient to summarise  them  here.
       There  are  slight  differences  between  the  two  summaries.    The
       appellant has a very lengthy immigration history, and minor  mistakes
       have been made within the voluminous documentation.  We are satisfied
       that this summary is the most accurate and in any event, having  been
       reviewed by the parties before us, not in any dispute.

        i) The appellant arrived in the UK on 16 September  2002  with  his
           younger brother, when he was 11 years old in order to  join  his
           parents (both Zimbabwean citizens).  At the time  the  appellant
           was treated as a dependent of his parents  and  given  leave  to
           enter until 28 August 2003.   The  parents  were  granted  three
           years' discretionary  leave  ('DL')  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom ('UK') on 15 August 2003, following a successful  appeal
           on human rights grounds.

       ii) The appellant and his family members' DL was thereafter extended
           until 2013, when the family members (apart from  the  appellant)
           were granted indefinite leave to remain ('ILR').   On 3  January
           2013 the appellant's leave was reviewed but due to his offending
           at the time, a decision was made not to grant  him  ILR  but  to
           extend his DL to 2 January 2016.   By  contrast,  the  appellant
           told us that his brothers were given ILR in 2013.  That  summary
           of the family's immigration status at the  time  seems  entirely
           plausible and  in  accordance  with  the  respondent's  relevant
           policies at the time - they would have  had  amassed  ten  years
           lawful residence in the UK.

      iii) The appellant  applied  for  ILR  in  an  application  dated  30
           December 2015, based on his ten years' lawful residence  in  the
           UK.  This application was referred to the criminal casework team
           as a result of his  criminal  offending,  and  resulted  in  the
           decision under appeal.

       iv) The appellant's criminal offending  is  set  out  in  his  'PNC'
           record, and began at an early age.  In October 2005, when he had
           just turned 14, he was cautioned  by  the  police  for  assault.
           When he was 15, in April 2007 he was convicted of  robbery.   In
           2008, he was convicted of  two  separate  offences:  failure  to
           surrender to custody at  the  appointed  time  and  theft  of  a
           vehicle.  In 2011 (when he was 19), he was convicted of  various
           driving offences and possession of Class A drugs.  The appellant
           was disqualified from driving and received an  18  month  prison
           sentence  suspended  for  18  months   with   an   unpaid   work
           requirement.  He failed to comply with that requirement and on 3
           January 2012 (when he was 20) magistrates activated six weeks of
           his suspended sentence.   In April 2012, he was again  convicted
           of   various   driving   offences   including   driving   whilst
           disqualified and uninsured, and possession  of  class  B  drugs.
           The appellant was sentenced to a community order and unpaid work
           requirement.  On 31 July 2012 he was  convicted  of  failing  to
           comply with the requirements of a community order.

        v) On 7 October 2013 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  aggravated
           burglary of a dwelling, committed on 18 April 2013 (when he  was
           21).   The  sentencing  judge  identified  aggravating  features
           including the victims being at  home,  violence  being  used,  a
           knife being present, a significant degree of planning and  being
           equipped with blindfolds and cable ties.  The  sentencing  judge
           had no doubt that the victims were severely traumatised  by  the
           offending and placed the offence within the highest category  of
           the sentencing guidelines.  This resulted in the imposition of a
           sentence of imprisonment of  ten  years,  which  was  upheld  on
           appeal by the Court of Appeal.

       vi) The appellant met E when they were  teenagers  in  2008.   Their
           relationship  has  strengthened  with  time  and  survived   the
           appellant's imprisonment between  2013  and  2018.   They  began
           cohabitating  in  2011  and  got  married  in  2015  (after  the
           appellant had been convicted and was  serving  his  sentence  of
           imprisonment).  In June 2012 (prior to  the  commission  of  the
           2013 offence) the couple had a son, Y, who is now 7  years  old.
           The appellant recommenced living with Y and E in November  2018.
           The  FTT   accepted   that   notwithstanding   the   appellant's
           imprisonment, he maintained  an  unusually  strong  relationship
           with Y,  and  Y's  behaviour  had  greatly  improved  since  his
           father's release from imprisonment.  The FTT accepted the  ISW's
           evidence that there is a significant risk that E (who works as a
           social worker)  would  suffer  an  emotional  breakdown  if  the
           appellant is deported, which may in turn lead to  the  breakdown
           of the family unit and potentially Y moving  to  live  with  his
           grandmother, S.

      vii) The appellant has no family left in Zimbabwe.  The FTT  accepted
           that the appellant  is  unlikely  to  find  formal  or  informal
           employment in Zimbabwe and therefore likely to  be  destined  to
           the 'squalid' lodger-type accommodation available in Harare,  if
           he can persuade someone to take him in, otherwise he will be  in
           the homeless / shanty town population.  He will be in a slightly
           better position relative to the population  there,  due  to  his
           limited financial support from the UK.  The FTT found  that  the
           appellant's return  to  Zimbabwe  would  be  best  described  as
           "deportation amounting akin to exile" as opposed to "deportation
           amounting to return".

     viii) The FTT also accepted that the appellant's efforts to change and
           rehabilitate are "exceptional" and "overwhelming".   His  medium
           risk of re-offending is based  entirely  upon  'static'  factors
           only.  Although the appellant pleaded  not-guilty  to  the  2013
           offence  and  maintains  that  position,  he  accepts  that  his
           conviction was still his fault and arose as a consequence of his
           lifestyle and associates at the time.  The appellant's  attitude
           and actions since his  conviction  can  be  characterised  as  a
           "model of rehabilitation".   Although  the  appellant  has  only
           recently been released from prison, his commitment to his future
           life with his family and  his  relationship  with  his  son  are
           "exceptional".

       ix) Prior to his imprisonment, the appellant was  working  with  his
           uncle as a decorator, and since his  release  from  prison,  has
           been offered employment, once he is legally able  to  take  this
           up.

UT error of law decision

    4. The UT concluded that although the FTT's decision was detailed and
       carefully drafted, it materially erred in law in:

        i) concluding that because the appellant does not have ILR, he is
           not a 'settled migrant' for the purposes of the guidance given
           in Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546;

       ii) failing to direct itself to the role played by the flexibility
           provision in s.117A(2)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), when attributing weight to the
           appellant's private life for the purposes of s.117B(5) and
           s.117C(6), in the manner anticipated as possible in Rhuppiah v
           SSHD [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536 at [36].

    5. The UT panel rejected Mr Jones' submission that there could  only  be
       one  result  when  the  correct  law  was  applied   to   the   FTT's
       comprehensive findings of fact.  The panel found  that  whilst  there
       were features of the appellant's private life in the UK that might be
       capable of  being  viewed  as  "particularly  strong"  when  assessed
       holistically, there were factors that went in the opposite  direction
       and the FTT did not make a clear finding on this issue,  either  way.
       In addition, the panel was satisfied that the FTT's error of  law  in
       its approach to Maslov and s. 117B(5) infected its obiter  conclusion
       at [141] that it would have allowed the appeal, but for  its  concern
       that it was obliged to attached "little weight" to private life.

    6. The panel therefore made it clear that  the  UT  would  need  to  re-
       evaluate the nature and degree of the appellant's private life in the
       UK, make a decision on the weight to be attached  to  it,  apply  the
       FTT's other findings of fact in the light of the  evidence  available
       as at the date of the resumed hearing, in order to apply the ultimate
       test applicable in this case as set out at s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act.



Hearing

    7. At the beginning of the hearing we clarified the  evidence  available
       to us.  This included the bundle  before  the  FTT,  a  supplementary
       bundle containing updated  witness  statements  and  an  updated  ISW
       report, and a  bundle  of  updated  country  background  evidence  on
       Zimbabwe.

    8. Mr Jones acknowledged that although article 3, ECHR was  relied  upon
       before the FTT, the conclusion that  there  would  be  no  breach  of
       article 3 (see [99] and [100] of the FTT decision) was not  appealed.
       Although Mr  Jones'  skeleton  argument  mooted  the  possibility  of
       resurrecting the article 3  argument  on  the  basis  of  the  United
       Nations description of  the  conditions  prevailing  in  Zimbabwe  as
       bordering on an humanitarian crisis in a  report  dated  29  November
       2019, he clarified that he did not wish to do so and was  content  to
       simply rely upon article 8, ECHR to support his contention  that  the
       appellant's appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

    9. The representatives  agreed  that  there  was  no  dispute  that  the
       appellant was continuously lawfully resident in the UK from the  date
       of his arrival (albeit his stay was precarious as  he  did  not  have
       settled  status),  subject  to  the  deportation  provisions  of  the
       Immigration Act 1971, following service of the deportation order.  In
       any  event,  both  representatives  agreed  that   this   appellant's
       immigration status in the  UK  should  be  considered  to  have  been
       entirely lawful, albeit precarious.

   10. Mr Jones called the appellant and E to confirm their updated  witness
       statements.  Mr Whitwell cross-examined the appellant briefly but did
       not cross-examine E.  We asked a few short questions.

   11. Before hearing submissions, we gave both  representatives  additional
       time to consider their position in the light of further  authorities,
       including inter alia, GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630  and
       CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027.

   12. Mr Whitwell  relied  upon  a  comprehensive  skeleton  argument.   He
       acknowledged that conditions in Zimbabwe would be difficult  for  the
       appellant but submitted that with financial support from the UK,  the
       appellant would be in a better position than many and able to  afford
       the basics.  He invited us to find that the public interest  in  this
       case is very strong and could not be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
       impact of the compelling circumstances.

   13. Mr Jones also relied on a comprehensive skeleton argument.  Mr  Jones
       submitted that we should approach this appeal in a similar manner  to
       the FTT, save that we must make our own findings regarding the weight
       to be attached to private life.  He argued that we should  find  that
       there are "particularly strong  features"  to  the  private  life  in
       question, to justify a flexible approach and in order to attach  more
       than "little weight" to private life.   To support this submission Mr
       Jones drew particular attention to  the  following:  the  appellant's
       length of lawful  residence  for  well  over  half  his  life,  which
       included much of his education; the appellant's  private  and  family
       life blurred in this case; his strong social and employment ties; the
       appellant retained a  strong  British  cultural  identity  albeit  he
       retained some links to Zimbabwean culture (but would nevertheless  be
       an outsider there); incarceration has  not  materially  impacted  the
       strong quality of the appellant's private life and  the  strength  of
       his attachments; he has been strongly supported  by  friends  with  a
       very positive influence on him who have been prepared  to  offer  him
       meaningful employment; his good behaviour in prison and strong  links
       maintained  during  imprisonment  such  that  the  quality   of   the
       appellant's integration did not reduce during his imprisonment.

   14. Having reached the finding regarding the weight  to  be  attached  to
       private life urged upon us by Mr Jones, he submitted that  we  should
       then allow the appeal.  This is because the FTT stated  clearly  that
       it would  have  allowed  the  appeal  but  for  the  "little  weight"
       provisions regarding private life.   Mr Jones asked us to  note  that
       although the appellant committed a very serious criminal offence, the
       FTT accepted he was rehabilitated.   Mr Jones asked us to  find  that
       the combination of the appellant's private and family life  was  very
       strong.  In support of this, he  drew  our  attention  to  the  FTT's
       findings, in particular: Exception 1 met by a large margin; Exception
       2 met in relation to E and Y (although Mr Jones noted  that  the  FTT
       was clear that the relevant the s.117C(6) threshold could not be  met
       by reference to family life alone); particularly strong  features  of
       private life; the appellant's family and private life as he knows  it
       will cease and he will live in Zimbabwe in 'exile'.

   15. After hearing helpful submissions from both parties, we reserved  our
       decision, which we now give with reasons.

Legal framework

   16. The proper  approach  to  the  relevant  article  8,  ECHR  balancing
       exercise in a case such as this, where a deportation order  has  been
       made against a foreign national, is to be found  in  paragraphs  398-
       399A of the Immigration Rules and Part 5A (s.117A-D) of the 2002 Act.
         We agree with the reasoning of Leggatt LJ  (with  whom  the  Senior
       President of Tribunals, Ryder LJ and Hickinbottom LJ  agreed)  in  CI
       (Nigeria) at [20] and [21], that it is generally  unnecessary  for  a
       tribunal to refer to the Immigration Rules in a  case  such  as  this
       where there is no dispute that the relevant provisions are  reflected
       within Part 5A.  We therefore turn immediately to the  text  of  Part
       5A.

           "117A Application of this Part

           (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts
                -

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                    family life under article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)   In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section
                    117B ...

           (3)   In subsection (2), 'the public  interest  question'  means
                the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's
                right to respect for private and family  life  is  justified
                under article 8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

             1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
                public interest.

           ...

           (4)   Little weight should be given to -

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                    is established by a person at a time when the person  is
                    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious

           ..."

   17. S. 117B is followed by this at s. 117C:

           "Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
           criminals

             1) The deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.

             2)  The  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

             3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has  not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             4) Exception 1 applies where-

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

             5) Exception 2 applies where C has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.

             6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to
                a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the  public
                interest  requires  deportation  unless   there   are   very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                Exceptions 1 and 2..."

   18. The error of law decision comprehensively sets out the relevant legal
       framework, beyond the 2002 Act.  At the hearing before us, there  was
       no real dispute between the parties as to the  applicable  law.   The
       dispute turned entirely upon the application  of  the  facts  to  the
       governing legal test in s.117C(6), as informed by  the  remainder  of
       Part 5A.  We therefore only summarise the relevant principles derived
       from the authorities relevant to an article 8 claim based upon family
       and private  life,  brought  by  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
       sentenced to imprisonment of four years  and  over  i.e.  a  'serious
       offender', who came to the UK when he was a child  and  has  lawfully
       resided here for a lengthy period.

        1) The provisions in  Part  5A,  taken  together  are  intended  to
           provide a structured approach to the application of  article  8,
           and "set the intended balance  of  relevant  factors  in  direct
           statutory form" (see [14] of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53;
           [2018] 1 WLR 5273) and produces a final result  compatible  with
           article 8 - see KE (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1382; [2018]
           WLR 2610, at [25] and Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58;  [2018]  1
           WLR 5536 at [36].

        2) The correct test to apply for serious offenders,  such  as  this
           appellant, is  to  be  found  in  s.117C(6).   If,  in  applying
           s.117C(6), the conclusion is reached that  the  public  interest
           requires deportation, the Tribunal  is  bound  in  law  to  give
           effect  to  this  and  there  is   no   further   need   for   a
           proportionality assessment.

        3) Generally, only "a very strong claim indeed" will be  successful
           - see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, [2016]  1  WLR  4799  at
           [38]  and  the  public  interest   "almost   always"   outweighs
           countervailing considerations of private or  family  life  in  a
           case involving a 'serious offender' - see Hesham Ali at [46] and
           KE (Nigeria) at [34].

        4) The public interest is movable and  in  certain  cases  must  be
           approached flexibly for the reasons outlined in Akinyemi v  SSHD
           [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 ('Akinyemi No. 2') at [39] to [52].  A full
           assessment of the public interest must then be balanced  against
           an assessment of the article 8 factors said either on their  own
           or cumulatively to constitute  "very  compelling  circumstances"
           for s.117C(6).

        5) Although  s.117C(6)  sets  an  "extremely  demanding"  test,  it
           nonetheless requires "a wide-ranging exercise", so as to  ensure
           that Part 5A produces a result compatible with article 8  -  see
           NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [2017] 1  WLR  207  as
           applied in  MS  (s.117C(6)):  "very  compelling  circumstances")
           Philippines [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC), [2019] Imm AR 769 at [16] and
           RA (s.117C: Unduly Harsh; offence: seriousness Iraq) [2019] UKUT
           123  (IAC),  [2019]  Imm  AR  780  at  [22].   The  wide-ranging
           evaluative exercise required under s.117C(6) clearly includes an
           application of the principles in the Strasbourg  authorities  to
           ensure compatibility with the UK's obligations under  Article  8
           of the ECHR - see NA (Pakistan) at [29] and [38].

        6) Of particular relevance to this case, is the line of  Strasbourg
           authorities addressing the nature and scope of private  life  as
           set out in Uner v The Netherlands [2006]  45  EHRR  14  and  the
           guidance in Maslov - see the summary in Akinyemi No. 2 at  [46]-
           [51]  of  the  Supreme  Court's  approach  to   the   Strasbourg
           authorities in Hesham Ali.  This is because having come  to  the
           UK and resided here lawfully during his  childhood  and  beyond,
           the appellant is entitled to be considered a 'settled  migrant',
           and in any event for this background  to  inform  the  balancing
           exercise in his favour - see the error of law decision  at  [35]
           to [39] and the more recent analysis in CI (Nigeria)  at  [103]-
           [114].  However, it is inappropriate to treat  the  judgment  in
           Maslov as if it is legislative text with a 'bright line rule'  -
           see [111]-[112] of CI (Nigeria).

        7) The wide-ranging exercise required means that a serious offender
           is permitted to rely  upon  matters  relevant  to  one  or  both
           exceptions in s.117C(3) as well as his ability to meet these  in
           conjunction with  other  factors  collectively,  when  assessing
           s.117C(6) - see NA (Pakistan) at [32].  Although the  exceptions
           are self-contained and  exclude  further  consideration  of  the
           public interest  (see  KO  (Nigeria)),  in  order  to  determine
           whether the public interest  is  defeated  by  "very  compelling
           circumstances", a case-specific analysis of the public  interest
           is necessary - see MS at [17] to [20].

        8) The list of relevant factors to be determined when conducting an
           article 8 balancing exercise and therefore the exercise required
           by s.117C(6) is not closed - see GM (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2019]
           EWCA Civ 1630 at [31].  In particular, the  concept  of  private
           life, as set out in the Strasbourg authorities such as Uner  and
           Maslov is wide and includes social ties with relatives - see  CI
           (Nigeria) at [57] to [59].

        9) Following Rhuppiah, those persons with anything less  than  ILR,
           have a "precarious"  immigration  status  for  the  purposes  of
           s.117B(5), and it follows that more  than  "little  weight"  can
           only  be  given  to  their  private   life   where   there   are
           "particularly strong features".  Although private life developed
           over many years during childhood tends to take on a special  and
           compelling character, s.117B(5) applies to children as  well  as
           private life developed as a child and all relevant factors  must
           be viewed holistically - see the error of law decision at [49].

       10) The guidance in Rhuppiah, including the flexible application  of
           s.117B(5) wherein the private life in question has "particularly
           strong features", is relevant to the assessment of private  life
           for the purposes of s.117C(6).  At this stage, an assessment  of
           both private and family life is  necessary,  and  care  must  be
           taken not to apply s.117B(4) to family life - see GM (Sri Lanka)
           at [35].

Discussion

FTT's findings

   19. As we have already observed, the respondent did not  seek  to  cross-
       appeal the FTT's findings of fact.   When  we  conduct  the  ultimate
       evaluation under s.117C(6), we apply those findings of fact but  must
       do so by reference to all the evidence available to us as at the date
       of the hearing (the reference to the date of decision at [59] of  the
       error of law decision was clearly a typographical error).   In  doing
       so, the overall evaluation of the  largely  accepted  factual  matrix
       when applying the test in s.117C(6) is for us, as  we  are  re-making
       the decision.

   20. In the 'error of law' decision, the panel observed  that  whilst  the
       FTT highlighted features of the appellant's private life  in  the  UK
       that might be capable of being viewed as "particularly  strong"  when
       assessed holistically, there was no clear finding to this effect  and
       a clear finding  on  this  is  necessary.   It  follows  that  it  is
       important that we directly address whether in  this  particular  case
       there is sufficiently  strong  private  life  to  enable  a  flexible
       approach to s. 117B(5), as  explained  in  Rhuppiah.   This  in  turn
       informs the degree of flexibility when assessing the requisite weight
       to be given to private (but not family)  life  for  the  purposes  of
       s.117C(6).

   21. We do not accept Mr Jones' submission that if we identify that  there
       are "particularly strong features" of the appellant's  private  life,
       the appellant's appeal must be allowed, because that  was  the  FTT's
       "default position" or at least what it indicated it would  do  -  see
       [141]-[143] of the FTT's decision.  The approach is much more nuanced
       than that.  The identification of "particularly strong  features"  of
       private life simply means that more than "little weight" can be given
       to private life and a  more  flexible  approach  is  warranted.   The
       overall nature and degree of the appellant's  private  life  and  the
       weight to be attached to it, remains a matter for us.   The  ultimate
       decision  on  whether  there  are  the  requisite  "very   compelling
       circumstances" over and above the exceptions is  also  an  evaluative
       judgment for us to make.  The FTT did not explain with any degree  of
       particularity how much weight it would have  given  private  life  or
       address the extent to which the appellant's private life blurred into
       his family life.  In addition, Mr Jones acknowledged in his  skeleton
       argument that the error of law decision made it clear  that  although
       the FTT found Exception 1 to be met by a considerable margin, the  UT
       would need to make its own private life assessment  because  the  FTT
       focused on conditions in Zimbabwe, and less  so  on  the  appellant's
       private life established in the UK.

   22. The FTT  confessed  that  it  did  not  regard  the  exercise  to  be
       undertaken in the appeal to be straightforward - see [139] of the FTT
       decision.  Having  erred  in  law  in  its  approach  to  Maslov  and
       Rhuppiah, and therefore to private life more  generally,  it  remains
       for us to  undertake  an  assessment  of  private  life  that  it  is
       accordance with the authorities,  and  to  then  weigh  this  in  the
       balance when re-making the decision.

Public interest

   23. We begin with the public interest.  This is a flexible concept, as a
       matter of general principle - see s.117C(2) of the 2002 Act.  The
       offence committed by this appellant, which carried a custodial
       sentence of ten years, is without doubt at the more serious end of
       the spectrum, and as such there is a greater, and in our view a prima
       facie very significant and powerful public interest in his
       deportation.   In so finding, we have taken into account the comments
       of the sentencing judge.  We acknowledge that the sentencing judge
       declined to attach significance to the appellant's previous offending
       but we agree with the FTT's observation at [136] of the FTT decision,
       that it carries some weight when assessing the strength of the public
       interest, albeit relative to the 2013 burglary, it is of
       comparatively minor severity.  We nonetheless attach weight to the
       undeniable fact that prior to the 2013 offence, the appellant
       regularly and repeatedly offended from the age of 14 up until his
       lengthy imprisonment when he was 21, in the manner set out in his
       'PNC' record.

   24. We have also approached the public  interest  in  the  light  of  the
       reasoning in Akinyemi No. 2 at [39] to [52], and the conclusion  that
       there will be cases where the person's circumstances in an individual
       case can reduce the legitimate and strong public interest in removal,
       albeit that the number of these cases will necessarily be  very  few,
       having regard to  the  legislation  and  the  Immigration  Rules.  As
       emphasised by Ryder LJ at [42] and [43], the facts of  Mr  Akinyemi's
       case were unusually stark because: (i) he had lived in the  UK  since
       birth; (ii) with an entitlement for most of that  period  to  acquire
       British citizenship, and; (iii)  he  had  no  significant  social  or
       cultural links with the country to which he was to be deported.   The
       facts of the present case, save for (iii)  are  materially  different
       and cannot properly be described as unusually stark.

   25. We note that Ryder LJ considered Mr Akinyemi's residence  in  the  UK
       for his entire life to be "materially  different  from  the  paradigm
       foreign criminal who arrives in the UK from another  state  and  then
       commits crimes: a circumstance where the need for  foreign  nationals
       to appreciate  the  consequence  of  criminal  conduct  in  terms  of
       expulsion is much more obvious" -  see  [33].   The  context  of  the
       instant case does not  necessarily  fit  neatly  into  the  "paradigm
       foreign national" case described above because the appellant came  to
       the UK lawfully as a child and remained  in  the  UK  lawfully.   For
       reasons relating to this and the conditions prevailing  in  Zimbabwe,
       the FTT accepted and we take into account that  the  consequences  of
       deportation for this appellant would not be  a  return  to  a  'home'
       state but would be more akin to 'exile'.

   26. On the other hand, the appellant must have been  aware  that  however
       British he may have felt, he was not a British citizen  and  was  not
       even entitled to ILR.  His status in the UK was  initially  dependent
       upon his parents' own precarious immigration status in  the  form  of
       DL.  When he became an adult (he became 18 in  September  2009),  his
       status became even more precarious - whilst he could  rely  upon  his
       length of residence, ILR was unlikely given his  criminal  offending.
       Although this knowledge as a child must carry less weight for obvious
       reasons, such knowledge  as  an  adult  is  more  significant.   This
       appellant must have known that his status in the UK  was  precarious.
       The appellant's case was reviewed on 3 January 2003 (when he was 21),
       at which time he was only given DL despite amassing the requisite ten
       years long residence in the UK.   By  contrast,  at  that  stage  his
       brothers and parents were granted  ILR,  following  their  ten  years
       residence in  the  UK.   Notwithstanding  the  clear  signal  to  the
       appellant that his immigration status was  precarious,  he  committed
       the very serious burglary offence very shortly after  this  in  April
       2013.

   27. In addition, whilst we do not go behind the FTT's findings as to  the
       obstacles the appellant would face if deported to Zimbabwe, it cannot
       be said that he has never known any environment other  than  that  of
       the UK (as in Akinyemi No. 2).  He was born in and spent  a  part  of
       his formative childhood in Zimbabwe and then lived in a household  in
       the UK with his Zimbabwean  parents  and  siblings,  with  associated
       Zimbabwean food and culture.  He continued to benefit from  the  love
       and support of his Zimbabwean parents during his childhood  and  this
       continues (unlike Mr Akinyemi who lost his mother at age 14).

   28. We now turn to the issue of the appellant's rehabilitation  and  risk
       of re-offending.  The FTT noted that  the  appellant's  risk  of  re-
       offending was assessed in an OASYS report dated 13 June  2007  to  be
       'medium'.  We have not been taken to  any  other  evidence  from  the
       probation service to undermine this.  The FTT summarised the detailed
       evidence regarding the appellant's good behaviour in prison,  pursuit
       of only positive, law abiding contacts and positive  attitude  -  see
       [73] to  [86].    This  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  numerous
       supporting letters from prison officers and those  working  with  the
       appellant in  prison  in  the  FTT  bundle.   The  FTT  regarded  the
       appellant's rehabilitation to have been "truly exceptional".   We  do
       not go behind the FTT's findings.  However, the  appellant  has  only
       been out of prison since August 2018 (about 18 months)  and  has  not
       been 'tested' outside of the prison environment for  a  very  lengthy
       period or even a significant period of time in  the  context  of  the
       lengthy period that he offended.  This  must  be  considered  in  the
       context of his background as a person who started  committing  crimes
       at a young age and this offending escalated and  continued  into  his
       adulthood. The nature and extent of this offending  is  difficult  to
       explain.  The appellant has cited immaturity and bad  influences  yet
       at all relevant times he had clear support from  loving  parents,  in
       addition to support from a loving and  aspirational  partner,  and  a
       large extended family.  He was working at the time and did  not  have
       any mental health issues.   We  also  note  that  the  appellant  was
       released on licence, which would carry with it a strong incentive not
       to commit further offences.

   29. Nonetheless, we attach weight to the positive strides  the  appellant
       has taken to evidence his rehabilitation during his imprisonment  and
       upon release in 2018 (as found by the FTT), but agree  with  the  FTT
       that this carries limited weight in the overall analysis.  It is  now
       well-established that rehabilitation is only one facet of the  public
       interest and as noted by Hamblen LJ (with whom Floyd  LJ  agreed)  in
       Binbuga v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551,  [2019]  Imm  AR  5  at  [84]
       "rehabilitation involves no more than returning an individual to  the
       place society expects him to be".  The appellant  has  made  laudable
       efforts to progress  his  rehabilitation  but  his  overall  risk  of
       reoffending must take this into account.  We are satisfied  that  the
       history and nature of his offending in all the circumstances is  such
       that he remains at a medium risk of re-offending.  If  the  probation
       service had materially altered its analysis of  risk  from  the  2017
       OASYS report we would have expected this evidence to be placed before
       us and drawn to our attention.

   30. The s.117B factors mostly weigh in the appellant's favour  as  it  is
       not disputed that  the  appellant  speaks  English  and  has  genuine
       employment offers  available  to  him  to  enable  him  to  be  self-
       sufficient, and we take these matters into account, albeit  they  are
       largely neutral.

   31. Having considered all the matters relevant  to  the  public  interest
       both generally and in this individual case, and the extent  to  which
       these factors are connected to the legitimate aim of preventing crime
       and disorder and maintaining immigration control,  we  are  satisfied
       that the public interest in the appellant's deportation remains  very
       strong.

Family life

   32. We bear in mind the FTT's detailed findings under the sub-heading
       'family situation' from [46] to [70] of the FTT decision.  In
       particular, the FTT accepted that Y's relationship with the appellant
       is "unusually strong" and their separation would lead to "seriously
       adverse consequences on Y's development".  E's mental health, her
       care for Y, and her career would all "seriously suffer".  The impact
       upon E and Y would be "both more than would necessarily be involved
       for any child or partner whose parent or partner was faced with
       deportation, and more than that which is acceptable or justifiable
       even in the context of the high public interest engaged".  The ISW
       report dated 27 October 2019 supports this analysis and describes the
       relationship between the appellant and Y as having become even closer
       since he resumed cohabitation.  We accept Mr Horrocks' assessment
       that the appellant's return to the family home has led to an overall
       improvement in the emotional well-being of both E and Y.  The FTT
       accepted that it would be unduly harsh for E and Y to live in the UK
       without the appellant, and also unduly harsh for them to live in
       Zimbabwe, such that Exception 2 is met, in relation to the
       appellant's relationships with both E and Y.   As the FTT observed,
       the appellant's strong and committed relationships with E and Y
       (which have involved much perseverance to sustain) would effectively
       end, as even communication would be infrequent / unreliable given the
       prevailing conditions in Zimbabwe.  Our assessment has taken all of
       these matters into account.  We accept that Exception 2 is met as at
       the date of the hearing before us.  We now turn to consider whether
       there is evidence to support the claim that the disruption to family
       life goes over and above the level of undue harshness.  We are
       obliged to consider this for s.117C(6) and we do so now.

   33. We begin by acknowledging that Y's best interests to continue to have
       a dedicated and positive father carries significant weight and is a
       primary consideration. The appellant was Y's primary carer before his
       imprisonment and has resumed that role after his release.  However,
       we note that the FTT was cautious about elevating the impact on
       family life beyond undue harshness - see [140] of the FTT decision.
       We note that Exception 2 has been met vis a vis both E and Y and this
       is relevant when assessing "very compelling circumstances" on a
       cumulative basis.  We proceed on the basis that the effect of
       deportation on the appellant's family life with both E and Y would be
       unduly harsh, but we are satisfied that this threshold has only just
       been met, for the reasons we outline below.

   34. E and Y have had the active support of a very close large extended
       family unit during the entirety of Y's life including the appellant's
       incarceration, and they will be able to depend on this again, if the
       appellant is deported.  We note that E is very close to her mother S,
       and at the time of the FTT hearing saw her on a daily basis - see
       [46] of the FTT decision.  This has changed to weekends according to
       Mr Horrocks' report.  Although it would not be ideal and there would
       be practical difficulties involved, we are satisfied that if
       necessary, E could turn to S on a more regular basis.  E has recently
       moved to live closer to S and confirmed in evidence to us that they
       are only a 10 minute drive away.  We accept that E and S have
       demanding jobs and S has 18 grandchildren, and in the circumstances,
       support from S will be difficult.  We are nonetheless satisfied that
       notwithstanding these difficulties, E's extended family will be able
       to play an important role in supporting and assisting both E and Y,
       in the absence of the appellant.    The FTT made it clear that there
       is a "wide and positive family network on E's side", without any
       history of 'family criminality' - see [64] of the FTT decision.  We
       agree with the FTT's observations that the adverse impact of the
       separation will be keenly felt by E and Y, but that E together with
       her family will be able to protect Y from the very worst outcomes.
       Like the FTT we do not accept that Y is at any meaningful risk of
       being lost to gang culture in the absence of the appellant.  We have
       noted that Y is said to have been emotionally damaged by the
       separation with his father when he was imprisoned, but again we are
       satisfied that he will have plenty of family members to assist him
       navigate what will be an inevitably difficult period.  Y will also
       benefit from being able to maintain links with his paternal family
       and Zimbabwean heritage whilst living in the UK, as the appellant's
       family also live nearby.

   35. We have taken into account Mr Horrocks' caution that E's mental
       health may be adversely impacted by the appellant's deportation and
       have noted the FTT's findings in this regard, including E's history
       of depression.  However, again E will be able to turn to her own
       family and the various statutory agencies for assistance.  We note
       the absence of any current medical evidence that E suffers or is at
       risk of suffering from any serious mental health condition.

   36. We emphasise that the protective factors identified above in no way
       undermine the FTT's finding that Exception 2 is met, and we have
       proceeded on that basis.  Rather, these serve to explain why in our
       view, the effect of the appellant's deportation on both E and Y only
       just meet the high threshold required by Exception 2.  In this regard
       it is relevant to note that E began her relationship with the
       appellant when he only had DL.  More significantly, E continued that
       relationship and took steps to strengthen it, when she knew that the
       appellant's immigration status was precarious and at a time that he
       continued to flout the law through criminal offending (with the
       inevitable result that his immigration status became even more
       precarious).  We fully acknowledge that Y cannot be blamed for any of
       this and that this history in no way undermines the current strength
       of the family relationships.  However, it is a relevant matter to
       accord some limited weight to when assessing the effect on family
       life holistically - see Rhuppiah at [27]-[35].  However, for
       completeness, we would have reached the same ultimate conclusion had
       we left this factor out of account.

   37. Exception 2 focuses entirely upon the effect of deportation upon a
       qualifying child and / or partner.  It is no way addresses the fact
       that this appellant's own meaningful and close family life with them
       and his extended family members will effectively cease.  We have
       factored the broader impact of deportation upon family life for all
       concerned (the appellant, E, Y, the appellant's parents and extended
       family, E's extended family) and are satisfied that it cannot be said
       that the effect of deportation on family life goes "over and above"
       the threshold of undue harshness.  As we have set out above, we are
       satisfied that the effect on E and Y only just meets the standard
       imposed by the concept "unduly harsh" and the effect on the extended
       family members will be much less significant, as the appellant has
       been living independently for a lengthy period.

Private life

   38. The FTT found that Exception 1 was met and there is no reason to go
       behind this finding.  Mr Jones acknowledged that the updated country
       background evidence on Zimbabwe is merely consistent with the FTT's
       findings, and as set out above, he made no application to resurrect
       reliance on article 3.

   39. Although the FTT found that Exception 1 was met, (a) and (b) were
       accepted by the respondent and the FTT therefore (understandably)
       focussed on the likely conditions for the appellant in Zimbabwe for
       the purposes of (c) i.e. whether there would be very significant
       obstacles to his integration in Zimbabwe - see [22]-[45] and [105]-
       [108] of the FTT decision. As noted above, the FTT was not prepared
       to find that the appellant's circumstances in Zimbabwe would be so
       serious that there would be a breach of article 3.  It is relevant to
       consider the reason for this: unlike the vast majority of
       Zimbabweans, the appellant would be able to benefit from financial
       support from his parents.  Although likely to be small, the appellant
       will have adequate financial resources to obviate destitution in
       Zimbabwe.

   40. We bear in mind the FTT's findings, but must make a decision as to
       the nature and extent of the appellant's private life and the weight
       to be attached to it for ourselves, in the light of the FTT's error
       of law in its application of Maslov and Rhuppiah, leading to the
       obiter conclusions from [141] onwards.  We must consider the totality
       of the appellant's social ties, including his identity and
       relationships.  In CI Nigeria Leggatt LJ explained that the nature
       and scope of the concept of private life is wide from [57]:

           "... The nature and scope of the concept was explained by the
           Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights in ner v
           The Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR 14, para 59, when it observed
           that: para 59, when it observed that:

                "... not all [settled] migrants, no matter how long they
                have been residing in the country from which they are to be
                expelled, necessarily enjoy 'family life' there within the
                meaning of article 8. However, as article 8 also protects
                the right to establish and develop relationships with other
                human beings and the outside world and can sometimes embrace
                aspects of an individual's social identity, it must be
                accepted that the totality of social ties between settled
                migrants and the community in which they are living
                constitute part of the concept of 'private life' within the
                meaning of article 8." (citations omitted)

           58.   Relevant social ties obviously include relationships with
           friends and relatives, as well as ties formed through employment
           or other paid or unpaid work or through participation in
           communal activities. However, a person's social identity is not
           defined solely by such particular relationships but is
           constituted at a deep level by familiarity with and
           participation in the shared customs, traditions, practices,
           beliefs, values, linguistic idioms and other local knowledge
           which situate a person in a society or social group and generate
           a sense of belonging. The importance of upbringing and education
           in the formation of a person's social identity is well
           recognised, and its importance in the context of cases involving
           the article 8 rights of persons facing expulsion because of
           criminal offending has been recognised by the European Court.
           Thus, in the ner case at para 58, the court considered it "self-
           evident" that, in assessing the strength of a foreign national's
           ties with the "host" country in which they are living, regard is
           to be had to "the special situation of aliens who have spent
           most, if not all, of their childhood in the host country, were
           brought up there and received their education there."

           59.   The European Court returned to this theme in Maslov,
           stating (at para 73) that:

                "... when assessing the length of the applicant's stay in
                the country from which he or she is to be expelled and the
                solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with the
                host country, it evidently makes a difference whether the
                person concerned had already come to the country during his
                or her childhood or youth, or was even born there, or
                whether he or she only came as an adult.""

   41. It is convenient to consider the wide concept of private life in this
       case and the weight we to attach to it under sub-headings we set out
       below.

Length, lawfulness and surrounding circumstances of residence in the UK

   42. It is undisputed that the appellant has lawfully resided in the UK
       for most of his life from the age of 11, and he therefore falls
       within the description of being in a "special situation", as
       described in Uner.  In addition, as observed at [49] of the error of
       law decision "private life developed by a child over many years tends
       to, and usually does take on a special and compelling character".
       However, the private life developed by this appellant is weakened by
       his criminal offending and flouting of punishments from the age of
       14.  This behaviour continued and escalated notwithstanding the
       positive family and other relationships in his life.  The appellant
       may have concluded his primary education and completed his secondary
       education in the UK, but Mr Jones did not draw our attention to any
       secondary school qualifications he achieved, which tends to indicate
       the appellant did not achieve any worthy of note.  That would be
       consistent with the appellant's history of juvenile offending.

   43. Zimbabwe has changed fundamentally since the appellant's departure
       and most meaningful ties to his country of birth have been severed.
       The FTT described the obstacles to integration going "well beyond"
       the "very significant obstacles" threshold and assessed his
       deportation as being akin  to 'exile'.  This must of course be viewed
       in context, as pointed out above, when addressing the public
       interest.  This is not a case in which the appellant has no knowledge
       of and has never lived in his country of origin.  He grew up with his
       Zimbabwean family.  This is also a case in which the appellant has
       never had ILR and because of his criminal offending was most unlikely
       to obtain it.  The reality is that this appellant's immigration
       status was precarious in fact as well as in law.  His criminal
       offending (even before the 2013 offence) was such that he was most
       unlikely to obtain ILR, notwithstanding his ten years lawful
       residence.

   44. Having considered all these matters in the round we are satisfied
       that the appellant's arrival to the UK as a child and his length of
       stay, together with the finding that he has no practical ties to
       Zimbabwe beyond his heritage and will have to face very difficult
       conditions there detrimental to his 'physical and moral integrity',
       are significant matters to take into account when assessing the
       overall strength of his private life.  The Strasbourg line of
       authorities predicated upon Maslov, entirely support that approach.

Nature and extent of integrative links to the UK

   45. It is undisputed that the appellant is socially and culturally
       integrated to the UK.  The FTT accepted the appellant to be closely
       socially and culturally integrated to the UK but did not consider
       this in any detail, relative to the likely conditions he would face
       in Zimbabwe.

   46. We accept the evidence before us that the appellant firmly regards
       himself as British in every aspect including his language, culture
       and identity, and that is more marked because of his lack of ties in
       any meaningful sense with his country of birth.  The appellant is
       deeply familiar with and entrenched in the British way of life, as
       are his family members.  This is unsurprising as he was brought up
       and educated in the UK from the age of 11, and has therefore resided
       here for 17 years.

   47. Whilst we accept the appellant is clearly socially and culturally
       integrated in the UK, the nature of his links to the community have
       not been entirely positive.  He began offending and associating with
       pro-criminal individuals at the young age of 14.  The appellant
       continued to offend during his teenage years.  Although he came to
       the UK at a young age, the strength of his positive connections and
       social ties have been weakened by his criminal associations from a
       young age.   He demonstrated a disdain for the rule of law and the
       punishments handed down to him.  His offending carried on into his
       adulthood and he committed a very serious offence when he was 21.  By
       this time, he had been with his partner for a number of years and had
       a child.  Yet this, combined with the support of his extended family
       and his employment at the time, were insufficient to prevent the
       commission of a serious offence as an adult.   In addition, the
       appellant has spent a significant part (five years) of his adulthood
       in prison.  As noted in CI (Nigeria) at [61], periods of imprisonment
       represent time spent excluded from society during which the prisoner
       has little opportunity to develop social and cultural ties.  We note
       that in this case, the appellant's ties to his partner and child have
       continued throughout his imprisonment and strengthened upon his
       release.  To the appellant's credit, he has severed ties with those
       associates whom he perceived to represent a negative influence post-
       conviction and retained positive friendships as set out in witness
       statements and letters of support in the bundle before the FTT.
       These friends have shown a belief in the appellant by offering him
       concrete employment that the appellant is keen to take up, if
       permitted to do so.    The appellant clearly spent significant
       periods as a juvenile and in early adulthood interacting with
       negative pro-criminal associates.  Whilst the appellant's social and
       cultural integration has not been destroyed by reason of his lengthy
       period of offending and imprisonment, we are in no doubt that it has
       been weakened by these matters.

   48. In reaching this conclusion, we have taken into account that the
       appellant's links to Zimbabwe are marginal and the FTT's acceptance
       that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
       integration to Zimbabwe and assessment at [108] that this goes "well
       beyond the necessary threshold".   This is supported by the updated
       country background evidence before us.  However, it does not follow
       that a person who has ceased to be socially and culturally integrated
       to his country of origin must have very strong integrative links with
       his adopted country.  As noted in CI (Nigeria) at [72] a person may
       actually not be socially and culturally integrated anywhere.  We
       emphasise that is not the position here.   We are satisfied that the
       appellant's length of residence, which began when he was a child,
       together with his upbringing, education and family relationships are
       such that he has been and remains socially and culturally integrated
       in the UK.  However, his history of offending and lengthy
       imprisonment have weakened his integrative links and the overall
       strength of his private life.

S. 117B(5) - "little weight" - "particularly strong private life"?

   49. We have considered the above matters and given particularly careful
       attention to the matters highlighted by Mr Jones in his skeleton
       argument and during his oral submissions to support his submission
       that the appellant has demonstrated a "particularly strong" private
       life in the UK: lengthy residence;  British identity, culture and
       language; no meaningful ties to Zimbabwe; strong immediate and
       extended family ties; friendship / social ties; past employment and
       future employment opportunities; adverse consequences for physical
       and moral integrity.

   50. We have carefully considered all aspects of this appellant's private
       life in the round, in support of Mr Jones' submission that it is
       sufficiently significant, such that notwithstanding the appellant's
       "precarious" immigration status, his private life can carry more than
       "little weight", in the manner explained in Rhuppiah.

   51. We accept that this is a case that can be described as a 'hybrid'
       because it involves both family / private life considerations of
       note, hence the FTT's conclusions (which we accept as at date of
       hearing), that both Exceptions 1 and 2 are met, and that family life
       blurs into private life.  We note the observations in GM that
       s.117B(5) only operates in relation to private life not family life.
       However, when considering whether there are "particularly strong
       features" of the private life in question, we consider that the need
       to flexible (to ensure Article 8 compliance) as well as realistic,
       means that we are entitled to consider those aspects of family life
       that shape the nature and degree of social ties and relationships as
       part of private life.  We remind ourselves that this wording in s.
       117B(5) is not to applied inflexibly.  Indeed, the form of words
       adopted by Lord Wilson is predicated upon the recognition that
       s.117A(2) provides a degree of flexibility.

   52. We accept that the appellant's social ties necessarily involve those
       family ties that do not constitute 'family life' for the purposes of
       Article 8 i.e. his relationship with extended family members.  We
       also accept that it is unrealistic to completely 'hive off' the
       appellant's article 8 'family life' with E and Y from his private
       life altogether.    The reality of the situation is that the
       appellant's family life in the more general sense blurs into his
       private life.   This is perhaps more pronounced in this case because
       the appellant met his now wife when they were 15 and 16 respectively,
       and also had a child together when they were young.  His wife and her
       family are all British citizens and thoroughly British in cultural
       terms.  He is also close to his own parents.  As pointed out by Mr
       Jones, the unwavering support provided to the appellant by his
       parents, E and her wider family has continued throughout his
       imprisonments and thereafter during the course of the deportation
       proceedings. However, when assessing the strength of the appellant's
       private life, the focus must be on his private life.  Contrast that
       with a proper assessment of family life, which necessarily involves a
       consideration of the family life shared by all the relevant members -
       see Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, [2008] 3 WLR 166.  We have
       therefore focussed upon this appellant's private life in the UK but
       note that it has been moulded by the social ties he has with his
       immediate and extended family members.

   53. We return to the language of s.117B(5).  We are not satisfied that
       the private life established by the appellant in the UK, when his
       immigration status was precarious i.e. from the age of 11, contains
       "particularly strong features" in the sense explained in Rhuppiah.
       The FTT was clear in its assessment that the appellant was able to
       demonstrate that he met requirement (c) of Exception 1 by a
       considerable distance.  This focuses upon the conditions in Zimbabwe
       and to a lesser extent on the fact that the appellant will be an
       outsider there.  However, for the purposes of s.117B(5) our attention
       must focus on the private life the appellant has developed in the UK.
        In the circumstances, we wish to emphasise that nothing we say here
       should be interpreted as undermining our acceptance that the three
       conditions in Exception 1 are met, and that (c) is met by some
       distance.  We entirely accept that this private life has strong
       features for all the reasons submitted by Mr Jones.  When viewed
       holistically, we consider that the appellant's overall private life
       in the broadest sense has however been substantially weakened by his
       long history of criminal offending and imprisonment, and does not
       have "particularly strong features".  To put it bluntly, the
       appellant has been in the UK for a lengthy period since the age of 11
       and developed inter alia, social, cultural, family, relationship and
       employment ties, but he has been regularly involved in repeated
       criminal behaviour from the ages of 14 to 21, and was in prison from
       the ages of 21 to 26.  He is now 28.

   54. It therefore follows that we attach "little weight" to the
       appellant's private life in the UK.  If we are wrong, and the
       appellant's private life as we have set it out above, has
       "particularly strong features" such that we should apply more than
       "little weight" to it, we would not be minded to attach great weight
       to it in the overall balancing exercise, as a result of the
       inevitable impact of the appellant's significant and protracted
       period of criminal offending and imprisonment.

Overall approach to private life

   55. Drawing the strands of private life together: Exception 1 is met;
       requirement (c) of Exception 1 is met by some distance, with the
       appellant having lawfully lived in the UK since his childhood; we
       attach "little weight" to the appellant's private life established in
       the UK, even bearing in mind its 'hybrid' nature, influenced as it is
       by family life.

S. 117C(6) - very compelling circumstances over and above exceptions 1 and
2

   56. We hope that we have carefully set out the wide-ranging enquiry we
       have undertaken.  We now address all the relevant matters together in
       order to apply the relevant test pursuant to s.117C(6) of the 2002
       Act.  We begin by repeating a summary of the 'pros' in favour of
       there being "very compelling circumstances" in this case: Y's best
       interests; Exception 1 is met; the appellant has not just been
       lawfully present in the UK for the majority of his life but came to
       the UK lawfully as a young child; Exception 2 is also met in relation
       to both E and Y; there is therefore the combination of Exception 1
       and 2 and the blurring between private and family life in this case;
       the circumstances for the appellant in Zimbabwe will be very
       difficult indeed; the appellant has evidenced laudable efforts toward
       rehabilitation; he is supported not just be his immediate family
       members but also by extended family members and friends.

   57. We have explained why the appellant's private life established in the
       UK does not contain "particularly strong features", albeit he meets
       the requirements of Exception 1.  We have also outlined why do not
       consider that the appellant's family life with his qualifying child
       and qualifying partner can be described "very compelling
       circumstances, over and above those described in" Exception 2.  We
       entirely accept that there may be cases where the combination of
       meeting the two exceptions may tip the balance, even where each
       considered discretely cannot be said to reach the "over and above"
       threshold. We now address whether the combination of Exceptions 1 and
       2 being met, together with all the aspects of private life and family
       life not specifically included in those exceptions, can be said to
       give rise to "very compelling circumstances over and above those
       described in exceptions 1 and 2".  Relevant matters outside of
       Exceptions 1 and 2 include inter alia, the appellant's own family
       life ending, the effect of his deportation on extended family members
       particularly his parents and E's mother, private life in its widest
       sense including the "special situation" the appellant is in by virtue
       of having been in the UK lawfully for most of his life, since his
       childhood.

   58. We are satisfied that notwithstanding the cumulative impact of the
       appellant meeting Exceptions 1 and 2 together with all the other
       'pros', the high threshold required by s.117C(6) has not been met in
       this case.  Our conclusion would be the same, even if we concluded
       that there are "particularly strong features" of private life present
       such that more than "little weight" could be attached to the private
       life in question.  As the FTT observed at [140] if the appellant had
       received a shorter sentence or been involved in a less serious
       offence, the approach may have been more favourable to him.  However,
       the ten year sentence signals a very strong public interest.  We have
       already considered other factors relevant to the public interest in
       the round and reached the conclusion that the public interest in this
       case remains very strong.  When that is weighed against the nature
       and degree of the appellant's private and family life (both viewed in
       their widest sense) on a cumulative basis, we are not satisfied that
       this is one of those rare cases where the extremely demanding
       threshold in s.117C(6) is met.  The effect on E and Y will be unduly
       harsh and the appellant will have to give up his British life and
       family and start a new life in Zimbabwe in very challenging
       conditions indeed.  However, it must also be remembered that the
       public interest in support of deportation in this case is very strong
       and each of the main protagonists are currently in good health and
       will continue to have other committed family members to support them
       (albeit the appellant from a distance) through the very difficult
       challenges likely to result from the appellant's deportation.

Conclusion

   59. The appellant is a 'serious foreign criminal' and in order for his
       appeal on article 8 grounds to succeed he must meet the extremely
       demanding test in s.117C(6).  For the reasons we have provided above,
       we are satisfied that the public interest in this particular case
       requires deportation because when all the relevant factors are
       considered in the round, it cannot be said that there are "very
       compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions
       1 and 2".

Decision

   60. We dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 16 December 2019

