
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06134/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 20 March 2020                     |On 28 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                               SHAHEEN JAVAID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a national of Pakistan and is presently aged 61.

She appeals against a decision of the respondent to refuse her leave to
remain on human rights (article 8) grounds conveyed by means of a decision
dated 12 March 2019.

The appellant's appeal was initially considered by Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Mather ('the Judge') who dismissed it by way of a decision dated 7
August 2019. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal and her appeal was dismissed by a decision dated 26 November 2019.
The appellant sought permission from the Upper Tribunal to appeal to the
Court of Appeal on a point of law. I considered that application and by way
of a decision dated 23 December 2019 I determined that the Deputy Judge who
undertook the error of law consideration had failed to provide adequate
reasons and so set aside the decision under rule 43 of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. In making my decision I observed:

         'Through counsel the appellant made various submissions at the
         hearing before the Deputy Judge as to why Judge Mather had
         materially erred in law in considering her difficulties in coping
         with day-to-day activities and the impact of such difficulty upon
         her reintegration into life in Pakistan. There are strong merits to
         the argument advanced by the appellant that the Deputy Judge's
         reliance upon [10] of Judge Mather's decision was a material error
         as [10(c)] merely refers to the provision of support by family
         members in the most general of terms and does not engage in any
         detail with the corroborating evidence relied upon by the appellant
         resulting in insufficient engagement with such evidence in the
         paragraph to provide a foundation for the subsequent finding at
         [21] of Judge Mather's decision.'

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not issue an anonymity direction and neither
representative requested that I issue one.

Background

The appellant was granted entry clearance as a visitor on 8 July 2009 and
entered the United Kingdom with her husband later that month, enjoying
leave to enter until January 2010. She overstayed. She claimed asylum in
2015 and the respondent refused this application in September 2015. Her
husband died on 14 March 2017. She applied for leave to remain on human
rights (article 8) grounds by way of an application dated 4 July 2018 and
the respondent's adverse decision is the subject of this appeal.

The appellant lives with one of her sons, Ahmed Javaid and his family.
Another son lives nearby. Her younger sister and brother remain in Pakistan
and have families of their own.

The appellant has been diagnosed with several medical conditions including
Type 2 diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. She suffered a
heart attack in 2011.

Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Manchester on 22 July 2019. The
appellant was represented by Counsel. In dismissing the appellant's appeal
the Judge reasoned, inter alia:

         '15. I accept the respondent's submission that the appellant has
            spent the majority of her life in Pakistan. She does not speak
            English. She would have been exposed to the cultural norms of
            Pakistani society in a significant manner. She understands how
            life in Pakistani society is carried on and has a capacity to
            participate in it. Her siblings still live there, and she will
            be able to access adequate medical treatment. I was not
            persuaded on the evidence before me that there would be very
            significant obstacles to her integration in Pakistan.

         ...

         19. With regard to the appellant's mental health condition, she is
            prescribed sertraline at a standard dose. She is not under
            specialist care in the United Kingdom. I accept that sertraline
            is available in Pakistan.

         20. The appellant has been accessing free treatment on the NHS
            despite having no leave to remain since January 2010. I give
            little weight to the private life established by the appellant
            in the United Kingdom, as her immigration status has been
            precarious since then.

         21. I am not persuaded that the evidence supports the claimed level
            of difficulty by the appellant in carrying out activities of
            daily living.

         22. The appellant is 61 years old. She speaks no English. She lived
            in Pakistan for the majority of her life - she has two siblings
            still in Pakistan who also have families. She has known that
            she has had no lawful leave to remain in the UK since 2010 and
            has taken no steps to leave despite a failed application to
            regularise her stay. Whilst I appreciate the appellant suffers
            various medical issues, I am satisfied she will have access to
            appropriate medication and treatment. I appreciate the
            appellant derives comfort in visiting her husband's grave and
            that she will miss her family, who wish to remain in the UK and
            that loneliness will be a consequence. It is open to her
            children and grandchildren to visit the appellant and for her
            also to apply for a visit visa or make whatever application is
            felt appropriate. They will also be able to access modern
            technology to keep in contact.

         23. I am not persuaded that there are exceptional circumstances in
            this case to warrant a grant of leave to remain outside the
            Rules.'

Grounds of Appeal

The appellant relies upon grounds of appeal authored by Counsel that run to
three pages. One ground of complaint is identified, though two grounds are
actually relied upon, namely that the Judge failed to properly assess the
private life claim to remain in this country under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
on account of both an inadequacy of reasoning and a failure to properly
assess material evidence.

The core of the appellant's contention as to the error of law is identified
at [2] of the grounds:

         'The Judge has arguably not applied her [consideration] to the
         central issue as to whether by reason of her physical and mental
         state, [the appellant] is a person who cannot in fact integrate
         into any country.'

Further, at [4] and [5] the grounds detail:

         'The Judge does not within the body of the evidence set out in any
         great detail the evidence which was given by the appellant's son
         and other family members but does record at para 10(c) that the A's
         son and wife and another son are responsible for supporting the A
         'both financially, physically and emotionally' (sic). The Judge at
         para 21 simply gives no reasons why she rejects the evidence of
         'the claimed level of difficulty by the appellant in carrying out
         activities of daily living.

         In terms of A's ability to function in such a way which would allow
         her to re-integrate in Pakistan without significant difficulties,
         the psychiatric evidence which was before the Tribunal was both
         informative and resonant ...'

In granting permission to appeal on all grounds, Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Loke reasoned:

         'It is arguable that the Judge failed to give any reasons for his
         finding at [21] that the evidence did not support the claimed level
         of difficulty given the evidence of the appellant's son and
         supporting medical report.'

No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

Decision

At the hearing Mr McVeety candidly accepted that the Judge's reasoning as
to the claimed level of difficulty possessed by the appellant in carrying
out her activities of daily living at [21] of the decision could not
survive for lack of reasoning. He accepted that there had been evidence
provided by members of the appellant's family as well as medical
practitioners as to her claimed difficulties and whilst in the respondent's
view they were not of such nature as to satisfy the requirements of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules at the very least adequate
reasoning was required if this element of the appeal was to be dismissed.
He therefore confirmed that the respondent did not oppose the setting aside
of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Having considered the papers in this matter, including the witness
statements and medical evidence relied upon, as well as the appellant's
grounds of appeal, I am satisfied that the concession made by Mr McVeety is
a correct one. In considering what is the core of the appellant's case as
to her inability to look after herself upon return to Pakistan, and so be
unable to integrate, the Judge was required to provide adequate reasons so
that the appellant understood the basis to why her account, and the
evidence of her witnesses, was rejected: Save Britain's Heritage v. No 1.
Poultry Ltd [1991] 1 WLR 153. The consideration of the evidence relied upon
at [21] details no reasoning, merely rejection. This is a material error of
law. For the reasons acknowledged by Mr McVeety the Judge's decision must
be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 7 August
2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
Act 2007.

This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Manchester
for a fresh hearing before any Judge other than Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Mather.

No findings of fact are preserved


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 2 April 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email
