
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
HU/06298/2016

                                                   HU/06302/2016

                                                   HU/06309/2016

                                                   HU/06312/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 November 2017                       |    On 4 December 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                    B M P
                                    H B P
                                     Y P
                                     D P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini, instructed by E2W UK Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellants
herein  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify the  appellants.   Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first two appellants are husband and  wife,  born  respectively  in
    1975 and 1983. The third and fourth appellants  are  their  children  -
    born in the United Kingdom  in  March  2008  and  November  2011.   The
    appellants are all citizens of India, the adult appellants having  come
    to the UK as visitors on 24 June 2007 and  thereafter  having  remained
    here unlawfully.

 2. On 13 May 2013, the appellants each applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds, but such applications were refused on 20 June of the
    same year.  On 5 January 2016 the appellants' legal  advisers  wrote  a
    'pre-action protocol letter' threatening  judicial  review  proceedings
    and  requesting  the  Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  her   earlier
    decisions, reconsider the appellants applications  for  leave  and,  if
    refused, to provide  the  appellants  with  a  right  of  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State treated this letter as a  human  rights  application
    and duly considered it.  These applications were refused in a composite
    decision of 18 February 2016. This decision attracted a right of appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to Section 82 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal was duly heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan on  6
    February 2017 and dismissed in a decision sent to  the  parties  on  28
    February  2017.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   was
    subsequently granted, on 8 September 2017, by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    J M Holmes -  thus the matter comes before me.

Decision and Discussion

 4. After reflecting on Mr Bazini's primary submission to the  effect  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to give  consideration  to
    whether it would be reasonable expect the third appellant to leave  the
    United Kingdom, as required by  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  Miss  Isherwood  accepted  that  the
    Tribunal's decision disclosed such an error and that this error was  so
    fundamental that the decision ought to be set aside.

 5. Given this concession, I need do no more than summarise my reasons  why
    I conclude it was appropriately made.

 6. The third appellant, born in the UK and having lived here  continuously
    since birth, was aged 8 years and 11 months  as  of  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    reads as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 7. It is not in dispute that the  adult  appellants  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the third appellant.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal also accepted that the third appellant was  a  qualifying
    child, as defined in section 117D of the 2002  Act.  Consequently,  the
    issue that  required  determination  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom (as required by s117B(6)).

 8. In MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705  the  Court  of  Appeal
    gave consideration to the application of  section  117B(6),  ultimately
    following the approach taken by the Court in its earlier decision of MM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, to the effect  that  wider  public
    interest considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
    reasonableness criterion.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal failed to direct itself to either the terms  of
    section 117B(6) or to the decision in MA (Pakistan). Indeed, nowhere in
    its decision did the First-tier  Tribunal  address  the  issue  of  the
    reasonableness of requiring the third appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst  there  is  reference  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to the  third  appellant's  length  of  residence  in  the  UK
    weighing heavily in favour of him being permitted  to  remain  here,  I
    concur with the parties that this is not sufficient to demonstrate that
    it undertook the specific task required of it by section 117B or,  that
    if it did it undertake such task, it did so  lawfully.  Accordingly,  I
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

10. Both parties submitted that this appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal. On the facts of this  case  I  agree  that  this  is  an
    appropriate course. The factual matrix  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is of now some vintage, given the nine months that has elapsed
    since its decision. The appellants wish to put in evidence relating  to
    events that have occurred  after  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. I make two further observations, which may be relevant to  the  listing
    date given by the First-tier Tribunal. First, the  Secretary  of  State
    wishes to consider applications for British  citizenship  made  by  the
    third and fourth appellants. She hopes to do this prior to  the  appeal
    proceeding. Second, the Supreme Court is to consider the lawfulness  of
    the decisions in MA (Pakistan) and MM  (Uganda)  in,  or  around  April
    2018.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
