

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06920/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2017                           |On 16 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS LEILLAH KAFUMBE NAIGA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Manning     (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nixon hereinafter "the Judge")
whereupon she had allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 15 September 2015 refusing to grant leave to remain on
human rights grounds.

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a national  of  Uganda  and  was
born on 13 February 1981.  She is married and, according to the findings of
Judge, has  two  children.   Her  husband  and  the  two  children  are  all
nationals of Uganda as well, though it is perhaps important to note that  it
appears  the  children  have  both  been  born  and  brought   up   in   the
United Kingdom.

3.    The claimant first arrived in the UK in  2005.   It  was  accepted  by
the Judge  that  she  had  had  valid   leave   since   her   arrival   on
12 September 2005 save for a period of 110 days between February 2011 and
May 2011.  The various grants of leave she had received had been on account
of her studies in the UK and then as a Post-Study Work Migrant under Tier 1
and a General Migrant under Tier 2 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  last
grant of leave was given until 15 May 2016.  The claimant had then,  prior
to that leave expiring, sought a grant of indefinite leave to remain on  the
basis, or at least principally on the basis, that she had  clocked  up  over
10 years continuous lawful residence.

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  because  it  was
considered that, with respect to the Immigration Rules, she  did  not  have
the claimed period of continuous lawful residence due to the 110 day period
referred to above.  That meant, said the Secretary of  State,  she  did  not
meet the requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of  long
residence as set out in paragraph 276B of the Rules.  The  respondent  also
thought that, with respect to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (see ECHR) she did not satisfy the requirements of  Appendix FM  nor
those contained within paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules.   The  Secretary  of
State also thought that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  justify
a grant of leave under Article 8 outside the Rules.

5.    The Judge heard the appeal on 18 October 2016.  There was no  cross
examination of the claimant or her husband.  The Judge  accepted  that  the
110 day gap had been attributable to an error made by the  claimant's  then
employer, but it was concluded that the long residence  requirements  within
paragraph 276B were not satisfied.  It was also  decided,  and  indeed  the
contrary does not appear to have been argued, that the  claimant  could  not
bring herself within the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE.
As to Article 8 outside the rules, though, the Judge reached  a  different
conclusion and said this:

      "     15.  ... however, I find  that  there  are  arguably  compelling
      circumstances in this case  to  go  on  to  consider  the  case  under
      Article 8 and I  bear  in  mind  the  decision  in  SS(Congo)  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 387 when reaching this conclusion .  As a starting point, I
      remind myself of the sequential questions laid down by Lord Bingham in
      Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

            17.  I find that the appellant has established  a  private  life
      during her 11 days in the UK.  Aside from her work for the charitable
      organisation by which she  is  employed,  I  have  also  seen  letters
      regarding her work for the Black Health Network, the  New  Communities
      SF forum and the Uganda Muslim Community and  I  find  that  she  has
      proved herself to be an asset to the  community.   I  have  also  seen
      letters from others who speak highly of her character.   I  note  that
      she lives in the UK with her husband and children, all  of  whom  have
      integrated into society.  I further note  that  she  has  a  place  at
      Warwick University as an MA Social Work Course (sic)  thus  furthering
      the likelihood that she will be an asset  to  the  community  and  the
      economy as a whole.

            18.  I find  that  if  she  were  removed,  that  removal  would
      clearly interfere with the significant and worthwhile private life she
      has established and she could not continue her contributions to the UK
      society from abroad.  In carrying out the necessary balancing  act,  I
      am obliged to bear in mind the public  interest  considerations  under
      117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I note that
      she and her family have lived in the UK for over a decade, they  speak
      English, provide a valuable contribution  to  the  community  and  are
      financially independent.  Accordingly, I find  her  removal  would  be
      disproportionate to the need for  effective  immigration  control  and
      would constitute a breach of her Article 8 rights.  This appeal  must
      succeed in Human Rights grounds."

6.     The  Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to   appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal and, on 16 February 2017, permission was granted by a judge
of the First-tier Tribunal who said this:

      "It is arguable that no proper balancing  exercise  has  been  carried
      out and that insufficient consideration has been given to  the  public
      interest in maintaining immigration control."

7.    The matter was then listed before me, initially, for  a  consideration
as to whether or not the Judge had erred in law and,  if  so,  what  should
flow from that.  The directions also made provision  for  the  possible  re-
making of the decision (should that  be  necessary)  at  the  same  hearing.
Representation was as stated above.

8.    Ms Aboni argued that the Judge's reasoning was inadequate.  In  that
context she relied very much  upon  the  written  grounds  of  appeal.   She
argued that  the Judge  had  not  had  proper  regard  to  the  content  of
section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and,  in
particular, to a requirement to attach only little weight to a private  life
in the UK which had been established in circumstances where  the  claimant's
immigration status had been precarious.  Pausing  there,  it  might  seem  a
little odd to regard this  claimant's  immigration  status  as  having  been
precarious given that she has, for the most part, had valid  leave  properly
obtained.  Nevertheless, and there was no  disagreement  about  this  before
me, case law is such that anything falling  short  of  indefinite  leave  to
remain is to be characterised as  precarious  within  the  meaning  of  that
section of that Act.

9.    Ms Manning argued that it was readily apparent that the Judge had had
regard  to  section 117B  because  it  had  been  specifically  mentioned.
The Judge had not been required to refer  to  that  section  in  any  great
detail.  When the decision was read as  a  whole  it  was  apparent  that  a
proper Article 8 balancing exercise had  been  carried  out  and  that  the
challenge brought by the Secretary of State was no  more  than  disagreement
with the outcome.

10.   As I indicated to the parties, I have concluded that the  decision  of
the Judge did involve the making of an error of law.  In that context,  the
key reasoning for the decision is relatively brief.   That,  of  itself,  is
not to be criticised.  However, whilst the Judge did refer to section 117B,
it has not been explained how the Judge  felt  able  to  allow  the  appeal
purely on the specified private life grounds in  the  face  of  a  statutory
requirement that little weight was to be attached to the claimant's  private
life.  I am not at all saying  that  it  is  impossible  for  an  appeal  to
succeed on private life grounds notwithstanding the content of 117B.  But  I
do say that, on the facts of  this  case,  and  given  that  the Judge  was
relying exclusively upon private life grounds to which she referred  in  her
decision, it was incumbent upon her to offer something by way of  a  further
explanation  as  to  how  the   appeal   could   succeed   on   that   basis
notwithstanding a clear statutory requirement concerning weight.

11.   There are, in fact, further errors.  In looking at paragraph 18 it is
clear that the Judge attached some weight to  what  she  found  to  be  the
claimant's "valuable contribution to the community".   That  would  seem  to
link to the finding at paragraph 17 that she has  been  "an  asset  to  the
community.  However, in my judgment, whilst the Judge might  very  well  be
right about  all  of  that,  article  8  is  not  intended  to  reward  good
citizenship or a high community value.  Such considerations are  essentially
neutral as Ms Manning accepted.  Further, I accept  Ms Aboni's  submission
that the ability to speak English and  to  be  financially  independent  are
also neutral factors and I did not  understand  Ms Manning  to  be  arguing
against that.  So, a substantial part of the  rationale  for  the  decision,
appearing at paragraph 18, is  based  upon  a  wrongful  categorisation  of
neutral factors as positive ones from the claimant's perspective.

12.   In the circumstances I have concluded that the Judge did err  in  law
(though I can see why the Judge arrived at her decision) and  the  decision
must be set aside.  I would also observe that, although the Judge  did  not
treat this as a matter of significance weighing in favour  of  the  claimant
(or at least did not make it clear that it was being treated  as  such)  the
fact  that  the  claimant  would  have  satisfied  the  rules  relating   to
indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of  long  residence  but  for  the
admitted fault of others might, on one view have been regarded  as  quite  a
powerful argument in favour of her Article 8 appeal outside the rules.   In
that context, I would not have thought that such an  argument  ought  to  be
categorised as a "near miss" argument because she is not simply stating  she
came close to the 10 year period but, rather, is drawing  attention  to  an
unusual occurrence which it might be thought the rules  covering  Article 8
do not adequately cater for. I did wonder  whether  it  might  be  that  the
Judge did have this in mind when making her decision but since she  did  not
say so, I cannot conclude that she did.  However, given what I have  decided
to do regarding the future conduct  of  this  appeal,  the  significance  or
otherwise of such an argument will be for another judge to decide.

13.   When I told the parties I was going to set the  decision  aside,  both
representatives indicated that they considered  it  appropriate  for  me  to
remit to the first-tier for a complete rehearing.  Whilst I was of the view
that matters could have been dealt with more speedily in the Upper Tribunal
(indeed I thought we could proceed to re-making  straightaway  at  the  same
hearing) I do take the point that further fact-finding is  necessary  and  I
bear in mind that the First-tier Tribunal is an expert  fact-finding  body.
Given that and given the agreement between the two representatives,  I  have
concluded that remittal is the appropriate  course.   I  have,  accordingly,
made some brief directions regarding remittal but they are brief because  of
a reluctance to, as it were, tread on the First-tier Tribunal's toes.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  Accordingly, its decision is set aside and the case is remitted for  a
complete rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.

Signed:                                                            Date:  15
June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made.


Signed:                           Date: 15 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

Directions for the First-tier Tribunal

1.    The appeal is remitted for a  complete  rehearing  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal.   None  of  the  previous  findings  and  conclusions   are
preserved.

2.    The rehearing shall take  place  before  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon.



Signed:                           Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

