
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06745/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 5 February 2019             |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                           MR ABDELMADJID SLIMANI
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  2  February  1970.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cary
    sitting at Taylor House on 19 October 2018 in which the Judge dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  2
    March 2018. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for
    leave to remain on the grounds of long residence and private and family
    life.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant said he arrived clandestinely in the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 1994 by hiding in a lorry. On 9 December 2014 he applied  for
    leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  long  residence
    provisions, but this application was refused without a right of  appeal
    in February 2015. In November 2016 he made a  human  rights  claim  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family  life  with  his  spouse,  a
    British citizen ("the sponsor"). The Appellant had married the  sponsor
    in an Islamic ceremony on 13 October 2013  and  the  couple  thereafter
    began living together at  an  address  in  Camberwell  and  were  still
    together. The Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the sponsor and  as  a  result
    considered he could not meet the eligibility relationship  requirements
    of Appendix FM. In the alternative, if  the  relationship  was  genuine
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and the sponsor
    continuing their family life in Algeria.

The Decision at First Instance

 3. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant, the sponsor and two  other
    witnesses, the first was Mr [KA] ("Mr [K]"), a family  friend  who  had
    previously been married to the sponsor. The other witness was  Ms  [KC]
    ("Ms [C]"), also a family friend who told the Judge she had  first  met
    the Appellant in 1996 when the Appellant was working in a restaurant.

 4. The Judge set out his findings at [35] onwards. The  Appellant's  claim
    under paragraph 276ADE (1) (iii) of the immigration rules was  that  he
    had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years. The
    Judge analysed the supporting evidence for this proposition at [39]  et
    seq but was not prepared to accept that the Appellant  could  establish
    on the balance of probabilities 20 years continuous residence.  It  was
    possible that the Appellant had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    around 2008 which was when the sponsor claimed she had first  seen  the
    Appellant at a restaurant following her wedding to her  first  husband,
    the witness.

 5. The 2nd argument was that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant and the sponsor continuing their  married  life  in  Algeria.
    While  the  Appellant  and  sponsor  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship, the Judge found, after directing himself on the  relevant
    case  law,  that  the  Appellant  could  not   establish   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles pursuant to paragraph EX.1 (b) of Appendix FM.
    Whilst the sponsor who was born in the United Kingdom and was a British
    citizen might not wish to uproot herself  and  relocate  to  Algeria  a
    significant degree of hardship or inconvenience for the couple did  not
    amount to insurmountable obstacles. The Rules did not enable  a  couple
    to choose which country they would prefer to reside in.  The  Appellant
    had family members in Algeria who could assist the  sponsor  to  manage
    there. She would have the support of the Appellant. There was  no  real
    evidence the Appellant would not be able to find employment on return.

 6. At [49] the Judge considered the  medical  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    condition  but  noted  that  no  evidence  had  been  produced  on  the
    availability  or  otherwise  of  appropriate  medical   facilities   or
    assistance in  Algeria.  The  sponsor  was  suffering  from  rheumatoid
    arthritis.  The  Judge  had  various  appointment  letters  from  Guy's
    Hospital and King's College Hospital but there was nothing  to  suggest
    that the sponsor would be unable to manage if she  chose  to  accompany
    the Appellant to Algeria. She was taking medication but  there  was  no
    evidence to say that that medication was not accessible in Algeria.

 7. The Appellant's status was that he was  here  illegally  and  something
    very compelling was required in those  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in  the  Appellant's  removal.  There  was  nothing  to
    suggest that the Appellant was entitled to  succeed  under  Article  8.
    Furthermore, the Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the  minimum  income
    requirement under Appendix FM of �18,600 and to  demonstrate  this  the
    Judge set out the various state benefits received by the sponsor.  Were
    the Appellant to return to Algeria to apply  for  entry  clearance  his
    application would be unsuccessful. The Appellant's immigration  history
    did him no credit and he produced no  formal  language  qualifications.
    The  family  were  not  economically  self-sufficient,  and  the  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

The Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellant appealed against this  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had appeared at first instance and who appeared before  me.
    The grounds took three main points. The first was that  the  Judge  had
    failed to give proper consideration to the evidence of Mr [K] who  said
    that he was  aware  that  the  Appellant  was  working  in  an  Italian
    restaurant and this was potential corroboration of the Appellant's work
    history and therefore length of residence. It also added weight to  the
    evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  Ms  [C]  regarding  the  Appellant's
    employment in an Italian restaurant. The Judge was obliged to  consider
    and give due weight to Mr [K]'s account as  well  as  consider  how  Mr
    [K]'s credibility affected the weight to be given to  the  evidence  of
    the other witnesses.

 9. The 2nd ground was  that  there  was  an  irrational  approach  to  the
    evidence of Ms [C]. The Judge concluded that little reliance  could  be
    placed on Ms [C]'s evidence finding it incredible  that  she  would  be
    able to remember the Appellant 10 years  after  last  meeting  him  and
    because she was able to describe what the  Appellant  was  wearing  the
    last time they had met in 2005. This failed  to  take  account  of  the
    number of times Ms [C] had stated she had previously met the Appellant.
    She had met him 4 or 5 times a year between  1996  and  2000  totalling
    about 20 to 25 meetings. There was nothing inherently incredible  about
    recalling  someone's  face  after  seeing  them  so  many  times.   The
    description of the Appellant's clothing by Ms [C] appeared to  describe
    clothing that was entirely normal for someone working in a  restaurant.
    She had acknowledged that the Appellant may have been wearing dark blue
    trousers, rather than black.

10. The 3rd ground was that the Judge failed to take into account  material
    Article 8 considerations. This was a reference to the Judge's treatment
    of the sponsor's medical condition. The sponsor  needed  a  wheelchair,
    could not stand long enough to cook, dressing was difficult for her and
    she needed help to wash her hair. She was unable  to  speak  Arabic  or
    Berber. She was entitled to employment support allowance  demonstrating
    that she had an illness or disability affecting her  ability  to  work.
    She had an entitlement to Personal Independence  Payments.  Her  health
    problems could  not  be  surmounted  in  Algeria  even  if  appropriate
    medication was available. She was dependent on the Appellant for day-to-
    day  support.  She  could  only  leave  the  property  when  taken   by
    wheelchair.

11. She would be completely isolated if she had to reside in  Algeria  with
    no realistic prospect of being able to integrate into Algerian society.
    It was unclear why the  Judge  presumed  that  the  Appellant's  family
    members would be able to support the sponsor.  The  Appellant's  father
    was in his 90s and his mother was over 75.  His  sisters  were  married
    with their own families whilst his brothers  and  their  families  were
    having to live in the  parents'  two-bedroom  property.  The  sponsor's
    daughter had four children aged between 15 months and 18 years old  who
    all lived in a three-bedroom property.

12. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 5  December  2018.  In
    granting permission to appeal (on the long  residence  point  only)  he
    wrote that it was arguable that the  Judge  had  set  out  insufficient
    analysis of the acceptance or otherwise of the evidence of Mr  [K].  It
    was arguable that further elucidation of the weight or otherwise to  be
    attached to that evidence was required given the relevance or potential
    relevance to the length of time which the Appellant had  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Hearing Before Me

13. At the hearing before me counsel relied on his grounds of  appeal.  The
    Judge had acknowledged that Mr [K] had given relevant evidence but  had
    failed to apply it.  He  had  disregarded  Mr  [K]'s  evidence  in  one
    sentence that Mr [K] had only arrived in United  Kingdom  "around  mid-
    1999". If Mr [K]'s evidence was found to be credible that would have  a
    knock-on effect on the weight to be given to the other evidence in  the
    case.

14. The 2nd ground was that the Judge had rejected  Ms  [C]'s  evidence  on
    plausibility grounds  when  the  issue  was  her  credibility.  It  was
    irrational for the Judge to suggest  that  Ms  [C]'s  recollection  was
    incredible. The 3rd ground was the challenge to  the  Judge's  findings
    that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    continued in Algeria. The Judge had failed to  take  into  account  the
    practical difficulties if the sponsor were forced  to  relocate.  There
    was a failure to consider how the couple could  support  themselves  in
    Algeria in circumstances where the sponsor had no experience of life in
    that country.

15. In reply the Presenting Officer stated that the determination was sound
    and there was no evidence that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the evidence of Mr [K], the Judge was balancing the evidence in
    total. The Judge had approached  the  issue  of  long  residence  in  a
    detailed way. There were some anomalies in the evidence which the Judge
    pointed out. It was a high threshold to cross to say that  the  Judge's
    treatment of Ms [C]'s evidence was irrational. That argument could  not
    be made out in this case. This ground was really a just a  disagreement
    with the Judge's findings on that  witness'  evidence.  The  Judge  had
    adequately explained why he did not find her evidence  credible.  There
    were detailed reasons in the determination showing how he  had  arrived
    at the conclusion that the Appellant could not show long residence.

16. The determination had dealt  with  insurmountable  obstacles  (the  3rd
    ground) in a very thorough way including the sponsor's medical  issues.
    The sponsor would have the support of  the  Appellant  upon  return  to
    Algeria but that did not mean that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to
    find work. The evidence was not that the  sponsor  required  round-the-
    clock care, she was mobile in the house on  crutches.  The  Appellant's
    evidence was  that  he  had  family  members  in  Algeria  and  it  was
    reasonable to expect a degree of support from them  particularly  given
    the fact that one was not talking about day-to-day care.

17. In conclusion counsel accepted that the Judge's failure to elaborate on
    Mr [K]'s evidence did not necessarily mean that the Judge had not taken
    it into account, but the problem was one did not know whether the Judge
    had or had not. The  rationality  challenge  was  not  to  the  adverse
    credibility findings, but it was because the  Judge  had  drifted  from
    credibility to plausibility. To  analyse  the  difficulties  which  the
    sponsor  would  face  in   Algeria   required   more   than   just   an
    acknowledgement of the medical evidence, the Judge needed  to  consider
    its relevance. It was plain there was a significant level of dependency
    by the sponsor on the Appellant. The Appellant's family were unable  to
    offer practical support to the sponsor. In the event a  material  error
    of law was found in the determination the rehearing should be  remitted
    to the First-tier.

Findings

18. The challenge to the Judge's decision in this  case  is  essentially  a
    reasons-based challenge. The Appellant sought to  put  forward  to  the
    Tribunal that he had lived in the  United  Kingdom  continuously  since
    1994. To this end he relied on two witnesses. The first was Mr [K]  but
    his evidence was undermined by the fact that he himself had arrived  in
    the United Kingdom some years later and could not therefore  positively
    confirm that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom at  the  time  the
    Appellant claimed.

19. The 2nd witness relied upon  was  Ms  [C],  but  the  Judge  found  her
    evidence to lack weight because of the difficulty  of  identifying  the
    Appellant when she had seen him so long ago. The  Appellant's  argument
    is that she would have been familiar with  the  Appellant  because  she
    would have seen him several times. That was a matter for the  Judge  to
    consider. I remind myself that the Judge had the benefit of seeing  the
    witnesses give evidence and  be  cross-examined.  The  Judge  gave  his
    reasons why he did not accept the evidence that was put to him and  the
    grounds of appeal in relation to the treatment of those  two  witnesses
    is a mere disagreement with adverse conclusions. The Judge rejected  Ms
    [C]'s evidence on the basis that her claim to  remember  the  Appellant
    with a high degree of precision was neither plausible nor credible. The
    argument put forward in the grounds of appeal that the Judge moved from
    one to the other makes a distinction which does not fairly reflect  the
    fact  finding  exercise  the  Judge  was  conducting.   The   test   of
    irrationality presents a high threshold to cross and  the  careful  and
    detailed consideration by the Judge of the evidence in this case  means
    that the Appellant is nowhere near crossing that threshold.

20. Judge Hollingworth in granting permission to appeal indicated that some
    further consideration of Mr [K]'s evidence could or  should  have  been
    made by the Judge but given the basic problem with  Mr  [K]'s  evidence
    that he was not in the United  Kingdom  at  the  relevant  time  it  is
    difficult to see how much further his evidence  could  have  taken  the
    case. The argument that if the Judge had placed more weight on Mr [K]'s
    evidence it might have strengthened the other evidence in the  case  is
    something of a circular argument. The problem is that Mr [K]'s evidence
    did not reach the stage where significant weight could be given to  it.
    If Mr [K] had been able to demonstrate that the  Appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 1994 and/or was living in the United Kingdom from
    1994 onwards the argument might have been different but  that  was  not
    the case here.

21. Judge Hollingworth did not grant permission to appeal  in  relation  to
    the Article 8 claim but for the sake of  completeness  and  as  I  have
    heard argument on the point I will deal with it in this  decision.  The
    sponsor had certain medical issues, but  the  Judge  did  not  overlook
    them. He carefully considered such matters and weighed  up  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for the sponsor to have to  relocate  to  Algeria
    with the Appellant. The Judge considered the fact  that  the  Appellant
    would be able to assist the sponsor in relocation and that the  parties
    did not in any event have a right to choose  where  to  exercise  their
    family life together. If the Appellant wished to demonstrate that there
    were  inadequate  medical  facilities  available  for  the  sponsor  in
    Algeria, he needed to provide some evidence of that, but the Judge  was
    clear in saying that no such evidence had been presented.

22. Similarly, the Appellant is unable to make the argument that  he  could
    not assist the sponsor in adapting to life in  Algeria.  The  Appellant
    has family members in Algeria and even if the Appellant does  not  wish
    to live with his brothers, it is difficult to see why they would not be
    prepared to help the Appellant upon return. There does  not  appear  to
    have been any substantial evidence from the  brothers  indicating  that
    they would not or could not assist in relocation. The  Appellant  would
    be able to work  in  Algeria  and  this  income  would  assist  in  the
    relocation.

23. The Appellant could not bring  himself  within  the  immigration  rules
    because he could not demonstrate continuous residence of more  than  20
    years. His claim outside the immigration  rules  under  Article  8  was
    dismissed by the Judge because whilst there would be some inconvenience
    in relocating it did not pass the test of being unduly harsh. The Judge
    found  for  the  cogent  reasons  he  gave  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's relocation to Algeria and  the
    reluctance of the sponsor to go was not of itself  a  decisive  factor.
    For this see paragraph 73 of the decision in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11
    upholding the Upper Tribunal and Court of Appeal's dismissal in a  case
    where a United Kingdom-based sponsor had indicated their reluctance  to
    relocate in the event that the Appellant in that case was removed.

24. The question was how a  fair  balance  should  be  struck  between  the
    competing  public  and  individual  interests  involved,   applying   a
    proportionality test. This the  Judge  correctly  struck,  and  I  have
    summarised  some  of  the  relevant  points   which   went   into   the
    proportionality exercise at [7] above. Both in relation to the claim of
    long residence and the claim under Article  8  the  grounds  of  onward
    appeal and the Appellant's submissions made to me  amount  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In
    the circumstances I do not consider that there was any  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against that decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 11 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 11 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
