
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06019/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                            |On 08 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               MD TOFAEL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan, a legal representative at Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and overview

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to proceed with the matter as a paper hearing when  there
    was a letter dated 10 May 2018 requesting that it proceed  as  an  oral
    hearing.

2.   Mr Hasan, who appears on behalf of the appellant,  has  submitted  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence (the Immigration Judge),  who  heard
    the appeal in Hatton Cross, ought to have acceded to the  request  that
    the matter proceed as an oral hearing rather than a paper hearing.   On
    10 May 2018, the Immigration Judge decided that as the appeal had  been
    allocated to a paper list at the  appellant's  own  request,  the  late
    request to reallocate the matter  to  an  oral  hearing  would  not  be
    acceded to.

3.   Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Hasan argues  that  it  was  fundamentally
    unfair and contrary to the requirement of common law  that  all  courts
    and tribunals should act fairly for the judge to proceed in the  manner
    he had.  The appellant suffers from a  form  of  arthritis  of  unknown
    origin, but it would be desirable, says Mr Hasan, to obtain evidence to
    support this and place  it  before  a  Tribunal  at  an  oral  hearing.
    Furthermore, the appellant should be given an  opportunity  to  explain
    his case orally to the Tribunal.  However, it was accepted in  response
    to questions from me that in fact the appellant had not  submitted  any
    documents in response to the directions that were sent out by the First-
    tier Tribunal. The directions required that  any  evidence  had  to  be
    supplied to the First-tier Tribunal before 10 May 2018, when the appeal
    papers were allocated to the Immigration Judge. In particular,  if  any
    document was to be relied on in support of the  appeal  it  had  to  be
    served in compliance with those directions.  It was the  appellant  who
    originally requested a paper hearing and paid the fee for that type  of
    hearing and he had to be taken as cognisant with what this required.

4.   When the appellant appealed the decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the  matter  came  before  Judge  Appleyard,  the  Resident  Judge   in
    Birmingham,  who  explained  that  the   judge   who   considered   the
    application, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, made reference to  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 S I 2604 / 2014 (the 2014 Rules).  His decision was
    based on the letter of 10 May  2018  which  states:  "Our  instructions
    confirmed that the appellant wishes to attend court  to  give  evidence
    and therefore we are instructed to make a request  for  oral  hearing".
    The appellant was represented throughout by Universal Solicitors. Judge
    Appleyard made the point that the procedure for re-allocating an appeal
    from a paper determination to an oral hearing could have  been  checked
    by Universal Solicitors, but they failed to do so, or pay the  required
    fee for this to be done. Therefore, Judge Appleyard decided  to  refuse
    permission to appeal in this case.

5.   In the grounds of appeal Mr Hasan has referred to the relevant part  of
    the 2014 Rules, to which reference has been made already. He points out
    that unless the appellant has consented to the appeal being  determined
    without  a  hearing,  and  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  in   all   the
    circumstances that it is correct to proceed with a paper determination,
    it is appropriate for the hearing to proceed as an oral hearing  rather
    than a paper one.


Discussion

6.    The  trouble  with  Mr  Hasan's  argument  is  that  the   appellant's
    representatives had not done what they should have done  and  paid  the
    relevant fee for reallocation (see rule 25 the  2014  Rules).  Had  the
    appellant's solicitors ensured that they complied with the requirements
    for re-allocation to an oral hearing by  paying  the  appropriate  fee,
    there is no doubt the appeal would have been re-allocated.

7.   Perhaps more importantly, as Mr Bates submitted in  opposition  to  the
    appeal, there is no reason to think that the  Immigration  Judge  would
    have reached a different conclusion on the merits of the case  even  if
    the appellant had given oral evidence. However, fundamentally it  comes
    down to an issue of fairness. I have to ask whether there was any  lack
    of fairness on the part of the Immigration Judge and, if so, whether it
    resulted in a lack of adequate  consideration  of  the  merits  of  the
    appeal. I have to ask whether it would ultimately lead to  a  different
    outcome before a different judge. In other words, would it have made  a
    difference to the likely outcome if the appellant  had  been  given  an
    opportunity to give oral evidence?

8.   The appellant resists removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  having  been
    refused leave to remain by the respondent on the basis of  his  private
    life on 16 February 2018.  As Mr  Bates  pointed  out,  the  claim  was
    straightforward.  It could have to be either  challenged  under  either
    Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  The current grounds raise  both  Articles
    and rely on medical documents supplied to the Secretary of State  which
    suggest that he would be deprived of medical treatment in the  UK.  The
    appellant claims that his  medical  condition  was  of  an  exceptional
    nature and it was necessary for him to remain if  he  left  the  UK  to
    receive treatment from a rheumatologist, an internal specialist  and  a
    haematologist, which specialisms would  not  be  available  to  him  in
    Bangladesh. It is claimed that this amounted  to  a  violation  of  his
    Article 3 rights within the terms of the leading case of  Re  N  [2005]
    UKHL 31.   Furthermore,  the  appellant  submitted  that  it  would  be
    irrational to reach an adverse decision on his Article 8  rights  given
    his strong ties with family and friends in the UK, his  four  years  of
    residence in the UK, and the need to respect his personal integrity and
    his right to respect for his private or family life.   The  Immigration
    Judge dismissed the appeal against the refusal  by  the  respondent  to
    allow the application for further leave to remain under both articles 3
    and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

9.   Unfortunately, the appellant did not lodge any  documents  that  tended
    to support those propositions in the First-tier Tribunal and  there  is
    insufficient medical evidence to back up his claim that he would suffer
    a serious deterioration in his physical health if he were  returned  to
    Bangladesh. This was  the  sort  of  evidence  that  may  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome but, having had an opportunity to  file  that
    evidence in advance of the appeal before  the  Immigration  Judge,  the
    appellant failed to file any such evidence.

10.  Therefore, I am not satisfied that had  the  appellant  been  given  an
    oral hearing it would make any difference  to  the  outcome  given  his
    failure to comply with the directions that had been given.

Summary and conclusions

11.  Before the Upper Tribunal the respondent has adopted a largely  neutral
    stance, but I have concluded that the respondent was right to say  that
    the appellant's absence was immaterial to the dismissal of the  appeal.
    The appellant had an opportunity to present all his evidence in support
    of his appeal but did not provide that evidence. Even he had  done,  he
    would have found it difficult to surmount the hurdle presented  by  the
    Re N case to any article 3 claim, as that case establishes in order  to
    surmount the hurdle of showing that the appellant's removal from the UK
    would contravene his article 3 rights. His illness must  be  fatal  and
    must have reached such an advanced stage that his  death  would  be  an
    inevitable  consequence  of  his  removal.  As  far  as  article  8  is
    concerned, the respondent had to balance the appellant's health  needs,
    which may well have been better met within the U.K.'s  National  Health
    Service,  with  the  needs  of  the  wider  population  to  ensure  the
    affordability of public services  and  that  such  benefits  were  only
    allocated to UK nationals. The Immigration Judge was required to  apply
    the overriding objective in rule 2 of the 2014  Rules.  In  particular,
    the First-tier Tribunal had to deal with the case  fairly  and  justly.
    The overriding objective was served by dealing  with  cases  in  a  way
    which was proportionate to their importance, complexity of  the  issues
    and anticipated costs and resources of the parties. I am satisfied that
    the appellant was given the opportunity of fully participating  in  the
    proceedings and that  the  Immigration  Judge  applied  the  overriding
    objective in deciding this appeal.

12.  In those circumstances the judge was entitled to  come  to  the  robust
    decision which he came to. It is irrelevant that another judge may have
    reached a different view. In all  the  circumstances,  I  can  find  no
    material error of law.

13.      No anonymity direction is made.

Decision

14.  The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 5 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 5 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


