
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06248/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2018                           |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    F A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Albert Isaiah Corban, Solicitor from Corban
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moore (the judge), promulgated on 26 October  2018,
    by which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    refusal, dated 26 February 2018, of his human rights claim.

 2. In essence, that claim had been  based  upon  the  Appellant's  claimed
    relationship with his two children, L and R.  The  Appellant  had  also
    asserted that he was no longer in a relationship  with  the  children's
    mother.  The Respondent appeared to accept the Appellant's relationship
    with the children but concluded that they could all return to Ghana, as
    could the children's mother.




The judge's decision

 3. Despite concerns with aspects of the Appellant's  evidence,  the  judge
    found that he did indeed have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with the two children [14].

 4. The  judge  was  not  impressed  with  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    Appellant's relationship with the children's mother.  At [18] he  found
    that the Appellant remained in a relationship with the mother  and  had
    not, as had been claimed, separated from her.  The  judge  was  of  the
    view that in any event, the children's mother had no leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom and could return to Ghana if she wished.

 5. The judge assessed the older child's (L) best interests in view of  the
    fact that she was, by the time of the  hearing,  a  "qualifying  child"
    under section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, having been born in this country in 2010.  It was concluded  that
    the best interests lay in L remaining with  both  of  her  parents  and
    staying in the United Kingdom as well.

 6. With reference to section 117B(6), the judge goes on  to  consider  the
    issue of reasonableness.  In doing so, he applied the guidance set  out
    in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  and  that  contained  in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ874.

 7. With reference to the various factors in  the  case  and  wider  public
    interest considerations the judge concluded that it would be reasonable
    for L to leave the United Kingdom.  There was nothing else in the  case
    which justified the Appellant being able to succeed and the appeal  was
    duly dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The grounds assert that the judge failed to assess the  best  interests
    and reasonableness issues adequately. In particular,  it  is  said  the
    judge failed to have reference to the qualifying child's education  and
    other ties established in the United Kingdom.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 20 November 2018.  The grant suggests that there may not  have  been
    adequate consideration and reasoning given to the position of the older
    child, L.




The hearing before me

10. Mr Corban relied on the grounds of appeal.

11. I indicated that in light of KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53,  which  had
    been handed down some two weeks after the date of  the  hearing  before
    the judge, there was an error in the decision under appeal.  It was now
    clear that when assessing the issue  of  reasonableness  under  section
    117B(6) (or indeed paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the  Rules),  the  wider
    public interest considerations should not be taken into  account,  thus
    overturning what was said by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan).

12. I was interested to hear from Mr Corban as to whether, in light  of  my
    indication,  the  judge's  decision  was  materially  flawed.   Perhaps
    unsurprisingly, he submitted that it was.  He suggested that the  judge
    would have been swayed by the wider public interest considerations  and
    it was difficult to separate the error from the rest of the assessment.
     It could not be said that the error made no difference to the outcome.



13. Mr Tufan submitted that the older child's  best  interest  had  clearly
    been considered by the judge.  He pointed me to  the  consideration  of
    appellant NS within the judgment of KO (paragraphs  46  onwards).   The
    judge was entitled to have taken account of the fact  that  neither  of
    the children's parents had leave to remain in this country,  and  there
    was nothing else by way of  the  evidence  to  show  that  the  judge's
    decision would have been any different if he had applied  the  approach
    set out in KO.




Decision on error of law

14. I conclude that the judge has erred in law in  his  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness issue, but that  this  error  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the Appellant's appeal.

15. As stated previously, the judge was not to know that a short time after
    he made his  decision  the  Supreme  Court  was  to  change  the  legal
    landscape by way of KO (see in particular, paragraphs  16-17).   It  is
    clearly the case that the  judge's  reliance  on  the  guidance  in  MA
    (Pakistan) was erroneous.

16. The question is whether, looking at the judge's  decision  holistically
    and sensibly and  stripping  out  the  reliance  on  the  wider  public
    interest considerations (specifically the Appellant's overstaying), his
    overall decision would likely have remained the same?

17. The judge clearly gave adequate consideration  to  the  oldest  child's
    best interests [17] and [20].  He had in mind the  fact  that  she  had
    been born in the United Kingdom and had lived here for the entirety  of
    her life.  He took account of social and educational ties here and  the
    disruption and distress that relocation to Ghana would entail.  Indeed,
    he in fact concluded that the best interests lay not only in  remaining
    with her parents but also in remaining in the United Kingdom.

18. The judge quite properly goes on to consider the  reasonableness  issue
    bearing in mind that the best interests  consideration  was  a  primary
    factor but not a decisive one.  He emphasises, rightly, the  fact  that
    her residence in the United Kingdom represented a "powerful factor"  in
    favour of it being unreasonable for her to leave the United Kingdom.

19.  At  this  stage  the  judge  factors  in  the  wider  public  interest
    considerations, something that he should not have done in light of  KO.
    However, he was entitled to, indeed he was bound to, consider the "real-
    world" situation of the parents: neither  of  them  had  any  leave  to
    remain in this country.  This fact had to  be  seen  in  light  of  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant and the children's  mother  remained
    in a relationship, despite their claim  to  the  contrary.   When  this
    "real-world" scenario is combined with the judge's consideration of the
    older child's best interests, it is in my  view  very  likely  that  he
    would have reached the same ultimate conclusion on  the  reasonableness
    issue  even  if  he  had  hypothetically  directed   himself   to   the
    authoritative guidance in KO.

20. A further point should be made here.  The grounds do  not  allege  that
    the judge had failed to take any relevant evidence relating to  L  into
    account.  There was no expert evidence on the impact  of  L  having  to
    leave the United Kingdom, or  any  other  evidence  of  any  health  or
    developmental problems experienced by her.

21. Therefore, in my view the error unwittingly committed by the  judge  in
    respect of MA (Pakistan) and KO did not make a material  difference  in
    this case.

22. I would add that if I were to have concluded that there was a  material
    error on the basis that I was not sure  enough  as  to  the  effect  of
    excising the error from the judge's decision as a whole, and if I  were
    to remake the  decision  in  this  case,  I  would  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that it would be  reasonable  for  L  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom in any event.  I say this based upon the findings of the  judge
    and the evidence submitted to the First-tier Tribunal as a whole.

23. Finally, there  is  nothing  in  respect  of  the  younger  child,  the
    Appellant's own particular circumstances,  or  those  of  his  partner,
    which had been identified as constituting any error by the judge.

24. In light of the above, the judge's decision shall stand.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.  That decision shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed        [pic]        Date: 24 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 24 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

