
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06301/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            Bashir Mohamoud roble
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Somalia, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Hembrough sent on  19  June
    2017 dismissing on human rights grounds his appeal against  a  decision
    of the respondent to make a deportation order on 28 April 2017  and  on
    29 April 2017 and 11 May 2017 respectively, to refuse  the  appellant's
    human rights and protection claims.

2.   Before me the appellant was unrepresented.  I explained  that  I  would
    do my best to assist him present his case.  Shortly before the  hearing
    the appellant produced a witness statement dated 15 August 2017 stating
    that he was gay and would be at risk on  return  to  Somalia  for  that
    reason.  There was also a witness statement dated 28 July 2017  from  a
    Mr Sanchez Marley Weaver stating that he was the appellant's boyfriend.
     There was  also  produced  a  survey  of  COI  sources  regarding  the
    situation of gays in Somalia.  I explained to the appellant that as the
    evidence was not before the FtT judge I could not have regard to it  in
    deciding whether the judge erred in law.  I could only have  regard  to
    it if I decided to set aside the judge's decision for a material  error
    of law.

3.   I then heard submissions from Mr Staunton (who agreed to  go  first  in
    order to assist the appellant know the case he had  to  meet)  and  the
    appellant.  Leaving  aside  the  new  evidence  identified  above,  the
    submissions of both parties broadly covered  the  same  ground  as  the
    appellant's written grounds of appeal  and  the  respondent's  Rule  24
    notice.

4.   I am satisfied that the FtT judge did not materially err in law.

5.   The first ground on which the appellant relies is that the judge  erred
    in holding that there was an "economic boom" in Mogadishu, given recent
    reports of a Third Famine and a  WHO  assessment  that  more  than  6.2
    million in Somalia need urgent humanitarian aid.  I find this ground is
    not made out.  There are two  aspects  to  this.   First  of  all,  the
    appellant was represented at the hearing before the FtT judge  and  his
    representative (Mr Dhanji) expressly stated that he placed no  reliance
    upon asylum or humanitarian protection grounds and it is clear from his
    submissions that he did not  seek  to  argue  Article  3  ECHR  grounds
    either.  The appellant has failed to demonstrate that Mr Dhanji did not
    act on instructions in choosing to confine the  grounds  to  Article  8
    related matters.  Second, in assessing factual matters of relevance  to
    deciding whether there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Somali society, the judge's assessment  of
    the likely economic circumstances  the  appellant  would  encounter  if
    returned to Mogadishu  was  based  squarely  on  the  Tribunal  country
    guidance given in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (Rev 1)  (CG)  [2014]
    UKUT 442 (IAC) at [344]- [349].  The appellant's representative did not
    seek to challenge the findings of fact set out in MOJ and the appellant
    did not adduce evidence capable of causing the judge to depart from the
    findings of fact in MOJ.  (As regards the  COI  sources  the  appellant
    cites in his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  they  relate  to
    Somalia and not specifically to Mogadishu and the  backdrop  of  severe
    drought  and  consequent  hardships  for  many  in  Somalia   was   not
    significantly different when the UT in MOJ heard that case.)

6.   The  appellant's  second  ground  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering that he  had  significant  connections  with  Somalia.   In
    particular the grounds state  that  the  appellant  disavows  what  was
    recorded in his completed Clan Questionnaire in 2010 when he wrote that
    he was a member of the Hawiye  clan.   I  consider  this  ground  seeks
    merely to disagree with the judge's findings and to ignore as well that
    there was a decision by the First-tier Tribunal in 2011 dismissing  his
    asylum appeal in which that Tribunal noted in  paragraph  26  that  the
    appellant's claimed clan was Hawiye.  This ground also founders. on the
    fact that the judge was clearly unimpressed by the appellant's evidence
    and that of his brother and sister regarding the appellant's linguistic
    and  cultural  connections.   The  same  goes   for   the   appellant's
    disagreement over whether  he  would  have  any  family  connection  in
    Somalia.   The  judge's  finding  regarding  these  were  set  out   at
    paragraphs 54-56 as follows: -

         "54. Similarly having grown up in a large Somali household  I  find
             that that (sic) the Appellant continues  to  have  a  cultural
             connection to his  country  of  origin.   It  is  in  my  view
             reasonable to anticipate that the  food,  cultural  norms  and
             traditions of Somalia will all be familiar to him.  In passing
             I note that the female family members who were  in  attendance
             at the hearing wore traditional attire.


         55.  Whilst I accept that having come to the UK as a young  boy  he
             may not be entirely familiar with the clan culture of  Somalia
             I reject the assertion that this has never been the subject of
             discussion in the household.  He was aware when completing his
             Somali clan questionnaire in 2010 that he was a member of  the
             majority Hawiye clan.


         56.  I also note that his mother returned to that country  in  2009
             and there is a suggestion in the 2011 appeal decision that she
             had purchased property.  The Appellant's evidence was that she
             had lived  on  the  border  between  Somalia  and  Kenya  with
             extended family members.  It was not explained why  she  would
             travel to the border area when she and her  family  come  from
             Mogadishu although I accept that the  security  situation  was
             somewhat different then.  Be that as it may I find that it  is
             reasonable  to  infer  from  her  conduct  that  there  was  a
             family/clan connection in Somalia from whom she  was  able  to
             access assistance.  It (sic) find it unlikely that an  elderly
             woman in poor health would go there to live on her own without
             any kind of support.  Given what I find to be  unreliable  and
             less than candid nature of the evidence given by the Appellant
             and his witnesses as regards his antecedents in the UK and his
             flight to Kenya I reject  that  assertion  that  there  is  no
             continuing family/clan connection in  Somalia  from  whom  the
             Appellant could seek assistance upon return."

7.   I consider the judge's findings in the above paragraphs  were  entirely
    within the range of reasonable responses.

8.    The appellant's written grounds further cited that the judge erred  in
    failing to take into account the European Directive  on  Rehabilitation
    of Drug Addicts and Criminals. However,  this  Directive  had  at  best
    peripheral relevance to the assessment the judge had to make  regarding
    the issue of whether there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's returning to Mogadishu.

9.   The grounds also contend that the judge  should  have  understood  that
    even if the appellant won his  appeal  he  would  still  be  liable  to
    deportation which would be a 'sufficient deterrent'.   That  submission
    is,  with  respect,  nonsense.   Liability  to  deportation  may  be  a
    precondition for its lawful exercise but the conditions imposed by  the
    Immigration Rules and the NIAA 2002 must still be met and one does  not
    satisfy such conditions by merely asserting a precondition.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly the judge's decision must stand.

Notice of Decision

11.  As I explained to the appellant at the end  of  the  hearing,  I  could
    only have regard to his new evidence if I found an error of  law.   Not
    having found such an error I cannot have regard to it.  It is a  matter
    for him whether he  wishes  to  make  further  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State based on this new evidence.  It is then a matter for
    the Secretary of State whether she considers such evidence to amount to
    a fresh claim or otherwise to justify reconsideration.   It  is  not  a
    matter for the Upper Tribunal.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date: 7 September 2017

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

