
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/06406/2016

                                                   HU/06413/2016

                                                   HU/06417/2016

                                                   HU/06422/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 April 2018                         | On 11 May 2018                        |
|                                         |                                       |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          B A A (First Respondent)
                          M A A (Second Respondent)
                         A A P A (Third Respondent)
                         O A A A (fourth Respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Imperium
Chambers


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both to the Appellants
and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the parties as they appeared in the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. By a decision of mine promulgated on 30 November 2017, I concluded that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  these  four  linked  appeals
    contained material errors of law and should therefore be set aside.  My
    error of law decision is annexed to the re-making decision (see below).
     In summary, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  effectively  conflated
    the  best  interests  of  the  two  children  (the  third  and   fourth
    Appellants) with that of the reasonableness  assessment  under  section
    117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
    amended.  The approach adopted by the judge had been  contrary  to  the
    guidance set out in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 3. Having found material errors of  law  and  setting  aside  the  judge's
    decision, I retained these appeals in the Upper Tribunal.  The  appeals
    were all adjourned in order for  a  case  management  hearing  to  take
    place.  This was because the third Appellant had a pending  application
    before the Respondent in respect  of  her  registration  as  a  British
    citizen under section 1(4) of the British  Nationality  Act  1981.   As
    confirmed by the certificate of registration dated 3 December 2017 (now
    on file) the third Appellant is now a British citizen.

 4. In light of this material development and given the fact that the first
    and second Appellants have and always have had a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with their two children,  the  primary  issue  in
    these appeals is now whether it would be reasonable to expect the third
    Appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  with  reference  to  section
    117B(6)(a)(ii) of the 2002 Act.

 5. On 27 April Mr Jarvis confirmed via e-mail that the Respondent had  now
    reviewed the family's circumstances, in particular those of  the  third
    Appellant.  The text of his e-mail is as follows:

         "... it is now apparent that A3 ... was granted (sic) as a  British
         citizen on 5th  December 2017 (having applied on the accrual of  10
         years residence from birth in the UK).  Having taken account of the
         immigration history of A3's parents (which is poor)  the  SSHD  has
         taken the view that their conduct does not amount to  the  kind  of
         conduct envisaged in the exception to the general policy in respect
         of British children  in  the  SSHD's  guidance:  Family  Migration:
         Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or  Parent)  and
         Private Life: 10-Year Routes (Version 1.0) (22nd February 2018)  at
         pages 76-77.

         On that basis the SSHD does not oppose the UT allowing the  appeals
         of the Appellants on the basis of that concession or  alternatively
         asks that the UT allow the SSHD to withdraw her  case  (that  being
         the refusal decisions under appeal) [rule 17 of the UTPRs 2008]  on
         the basis that the Appellants will be granted 30  months  Leave  to
         Remain on the 10 year route to settlement."



The hearing before me

 6. At the outset Mr Jarvis confirmed that the Respondent stood by what was
    set out in the e-mail quoted above (a hard copy  of  which  is  now  on
    file).  Unsurprisingly, Mr Gajjar asked that I simply allow all of  the
    appeals on the basis set out in the e-mail.  Mr Jarvis did not  suggest
    that the alternative route of withdrawal of the decisions under  appeal
    was the more appropriate course of action.

The remake decision on all four appeals

 7. The concession made by the Respondent, as set out in the  e-mail  dated
    27 April 2018, is properly made.  It is entirely in  keeping  with  the
    guidance cited.  In light of this and what  is  currently  the  correct
    legal position as set out in MA (Pakistan), I conclude  that  it  would
    not be reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom:
    section 117B(6) is satisfied in full.  This has  the  effect  that  the
    first and second Appellants succeed in their appeals.

 8. It of  course  follows  that  the  appeals  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants also succeed.

Anonymity

 9. Although no direction was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  have
    decided to make one now. This is in line with paragraphs 18-19  of  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No.1 of 2013.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and has been set aside.

I re-make the decision in respect of all four  appeals.   The  decisions  of
the Respondent to refuse the Appellants' human  rights  claims  is  unlawful
under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Therefore the appeals of all four Appellants are allowed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

FEE AWARD

No fees were paid or were payable. I therefore make no fee awards.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







































ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/06406/2016

                                                  hu/06413/2016

                                                  hu/06417/2016

                                                  hu/06422/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR B A A (1)
                               MISS M A A (2)
                             MASTER A A P A (3)
                              MASTER  A A A (4)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Imperium
Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

10. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent and Mr  A  and
    his family members are once more the Appellants.

11. This is a challenge by the Respondent to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coutts (the judge), promulgated on 14 February 2017,  in
    which he allowed  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 4 February 2016, refusing their human rights  claims.   The
    appeals were based primarily on the fact  that  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants had been born in the United Kingdom and had resided here all
    of their lives.

The judge's decision

12. The judge's core findings and reasons are contained in paragraphs 18 to
    23 of his decision.  The first three of those paragraphs relate to  the
    first and second Appellants (the parents).  The  judge  finds  that  in
    light of their immigration history and overall circumstances there  was
    what he describes as "little merit" in their claims.  There  would  not
    be significant obstacles to them reintegrating into Nigerian society.

13. In respect of the third Appellant, (the eldest child)  the  judge  says
    the following at paragraphs 22 and 23:

         "22. The reality is that the third Appellant has  been  here  since
             birth which is nearly nine and a half years ago.   He  attends
             school here, is doing well academically and also  participates
             in activities outside of school.  This is the only  life  that
             he knows.  He has never been to Nigeria, he does not speak the
             language and is not aware of the culture there.  He  also  has
             no wider family remaining in Nigeria.

         23.  I find therefore that it would not be reasonable therefore  to
             expect him to have to return to Nigeria with his parents.  His
             best interests are served by allowing him to continue with his
             life here in the United Kingdom.  He has had no  part  in  the
             poor choices that have been made by his parents, the first and
             second Appellants."

14. On the basis of the above passages  the  judge  in  effect  allows  the
    appeals of all the Appellants.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

15. The Respondent puts forward two grounds.  The first  of  these  suggest
    that the judge has failed to identify  any  "unique"  features  of  the
    case, and that he has failed to make specific findings.  There is  also
    an assertion that "too much weight" had been placed upon the children's
    education in the United Kingdom.

16. Ground 2 asserts that the  judge  has  failed  to  properly  apply  the
    guidance in MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  in  respect  of  the
    reasonableness assessment.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin on 1 September 2017.



The hearing before me

17. Mr Clarke submitted  that  in  paragraphs  22  and  23  the  judge  had
    conflated the best interests' assessment and  that  of  reasonableness.
    Although the judge had  noted  the  poor  immigration  history  of  the
    parents in previous paragraphs, it was clear that when considering  the
    third Appellant in particular he had failed to  properly  differentiate
    between best interests and the  wider  public  interest  considerations
    involved in assessing reasonableness.

18. Mr Gajjar relied upon his Rule 24 response and submitted that the judge
    had in fact had regard to the wider considerations.

Decision on error of law

19. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that the judge
    materially erred in law, specifically in relation to what  is  said  in
    paragraphs 22 and 23.

20. Whilst it is correct that the judge dealt with the parents'  particular
    circumstances in paragraphs 18 to 20, when it came to the  position  of
    the third Appellant there is in  my  view  a  conflation  of  the  best
    interests' assessment and that of reasonableness.  It  is  well-settled
    that these are distinct issues and a finding that the best interests of
    a child lay in remaining in the United  Kingdom  does  not  necessarily
    mean that it would  be  unreasonable  for  that  child  to  leave  this
    country.  Wider public interest considerations including those set  out
    in section 117B of the 2002 Act come into play at the second  stage  of
    the overall assessment of what is, or is not reasonable.   In  my  view
    and with all  due  respect  to  the  judge,  the  wording  of  the  two
    paragraphs quoted above indicate that the conclusion on  reasonableness
    has followed, if not automatically then something close to it, from the
    preceding conclusion that the best interests of the third Appellant lay
    in remaining in the United Kingdom.  The use of  the  word  "therefore"
    twice in the first sentence  of  paragraph  23  goes  to  emphasise  my
    concern as to the judge's approach.  If the correct approach  had  been
    adopted it is by no means certain that the judge would necessarily have
    reached the same conclusion as to the third Appellant.

21. In light of the above I find that the error in approach is material and
    I set aside the judge's decision.




Disposal

22. Having set aside the decision I  invited  the  representative  to  make
    submissions on the basis that I could remake this decision myself based
    upon the evidence before me.  Part of Mr  Gajjar's  case  is  now  that
    there has been an application  on  the  third  Appellant's  behalf  for
    registration as a British citizen  pursuant  to  section  4(1)  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981.  Evidence of this application is included
    in the new bundle (served in compliance with Rule 15(2A) of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules).  That application was made in September this
    year and remains outstanding.  Mr Gajjar submitted that it is extremely
    likely that the application will  be  successful  and  that  the  third
    Appellant will obtain British nationality.  That, he  submitted,  would
    have a significant effect on his claim and those of his family members.



23. Mr Clarke submitted that the application had not yet been decided and I
    was  being  asked  to  reach  conclusions  based  upon  a  hypothetical
    situation.

24. I reflected on the situation and indicated that this  matter  would  be
    best dealt with by adjourning for a Case Management hearing  before  me
    in due course, at which stage I could be provided with an update as  to
    the third Appellant's application.  Once this  application  is  decided
    the overall circumstances will be much clearer and both parties will be
    able to take a view as to where their respective cases stand.   Neither
    representative opposed this course of action.  Therefore I adjourn  the
    appeals for them to be relisted before me for a Case Management hearing
    in due course.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

I set it aside the decision.

I adjourn these appeals for an oral Case Management  hearing  to  be  listed
before me in due course.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 22 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


