
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/06778/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th March 2018                            |On 4th April 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                             mr panashe chimhina
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd sitting at  Birmingham  on  12th  January
    2017.  The  decision  was  promulgated  on  5th  September  2017.   The
    Appellant had sought entry clearance to join his  mother  here  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She is Alice Chimhina. The grant of permission in this
    case was by First-tier Tribunal Judge C A Parker  dated  29th  December
    2017.  It is said within that grant of permission as follows:-

      "The appeal is on human rights  grounds.   The  Judge  concluded  that
         there were no 'compelling  circumstances'  warranting  a  grant  of
         entry clearance outside of the rules to  the  appellant  under  the
         Respondent's policy, to the dependent child of  a  sponsor  present
         with discretionary leave.  However, the Judge did not then go on to
         consider Article 8 outside of the rules, following  the  steps  set
         out in Razgar.  The Judge referred to the  social  work  report  at
         paras 19 and 20 but  made  no  reference  to  the  social  worker's
         opinion that it would be in the appellant's best interests to  join
         his mother nor did the Judge himself reach a finding on that issue.
          The Judge referred to s117B considerations but did not  set  these
         out and factor them into a proportionality exercise."

2.    The grounds of appeal were drafted by the Appellant's  solicitors  and
    it is right to observe that they are not in the clearest of terms,  but
    Mr Swain of Counsel  who  appears  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  (now
    instructed by Tann Law Solicitors) has greatly assisted me  to  explain
    the grounds of appeal within the constraints of the way in  which  they
    were drafted.

3.    Insofar as ground 1 is concerned, Mr Swain says is that there  was  an
    independent social worker's report and that had set out various details
    following a specific visit to the Appellant and his living arrangements
    in Zimbabwe and that the failure to  consider  the  independent  social
    worker's report in the correct form lead to a material error of law.

4.    More specifically, it is said that whereas at paragraph 20  the  judge
    had said the  following,  it  was  an  incorrect  finding  because  the
    independent social worker's report had said the  opposite.   The  judge
    had said:-

         "The report does not go into detail regarding the accommodation nor
         does it set out the detail of  why  the  Sponsor  states  that  the
         accommodation would now be overcrowded, or in what way the aunt  is
         specifically limited any more so than she had been in the past."


5.    In fact, at various places the  Independent  Social  Worker's  report,
    for example at A32 of the Appellant's bundle at paragraph 19 dealt with
    these matters, and then where it is said,  for  example,  "There  is  a
    significant risk of instability and disruption  of  Panashe's  life  at
    time he need support (sic) as  he  is  still  in  education  and  at  a
    critical point of transition into adulthood", and then A34 said more.


6.    At paragraph 20 at A33 the report said as follows:-

      "Panashe has expressed  his  worry  about  the  uncertainty  over  his
         future which is why it is important that he be  reunited  with  his
         mother in the UK where [he] hopes to relaunch  himself.   Panashe's
         mother ... has had some regular contact  with  him  throughout  his
         minority years via telephone as well as  sending  him  presents  on
         birthdays and Christmas.  This enabled a strong bond and attachment
         to develop between Panashe and his mother who is now settled in the
         United Kingdom."

7.    I then turn to the next ground of appeal.  Again, not clearly  drafted
    but it states in effect that the  independent  social  worker's  report
    which had dealt with  the  Appellant's  best  interests  had  not  been
    properly or adequately dealt with by the judge and the references  here
    are in particular to A34  of  the  bundle  where  the  expert  said  as
    follows:-

         "She is also concerned that Panashe will not cope if he was to live
         on his own and that will affect his further studies since he passed
         his A' (sic) levels.  It is  my  considered  view  that  it  is  in
         Panashe's best interest that he is assisted and allowed to join his
         mother's (sic) in the UK where his needs are most likely to be met.
          In fact - this should have happened a while ago, as Panashe has no
         family in Zimbabwe."

8.    Then turning to the next ground that can be summarised  to  read  that
    the judge failed to deal with the reasons why the Sponsor took so  long
    to seek to have her son come and join her here in the  United  Kingdom.
    It was clear that there were three  aspects  which  caused  the  delay:
    Firstly, that the Sponsor herself was going through as the judge called
    it "a very traumatic period in her life here in  the  United  Kingdom".
    That, without going into too much of the detail, refers to difficulties
    that she went through with her partner  here  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Secondly, there was a serious issue in relation to her own  proceedings
    for another child here in  the  United  Kingdom  (half-sibling  of  the
    Appellant). Thirdly, being able to obtain the appropriate evidence  and
    to make the ultimate application which included the independent  social
    worker's report and the obtaining of other evidence.

9.    In my judgment even if the judge was going to  reject  these  reasons,
    he needed to set them out and then to explain why they were going to be
    rejected.   In  reality,  there  is  very  little  reference   to   the
    difficulties which were caused in making the appropriate application.

10.   When permission was granted it is said that there was no reference  to
    the five stage test expounded by the House of Lords in Razgar and  that
    insofar as Section 117B is concerned there was really no  more  than  a
    passing one-line reference to that.  In my judgement,  insofar  as  the
    Razgar issue does raise a significant point, and in my judgment if  the
    judge had evaluated the evidence which was before him he may well  have
    come to a different conclusion if he  had  undertaken  the  five  stage
    Razgar test and he may have been assisted by going through the  Section
    117B considerations.

11.   In the circumstances I conclude cumulatively that there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the judge.  It means that the  decision
    has to be set aside, there will have to be a rehearing  on  all  issues
    and that rehearing will take place at the First-tier Tribunal.  For the
    avoidance of doubt the "all issues" relates to Article 8 only.  This is
    not a case that can succeed under the  Immigration  Rules,  and  indeed
    that was conceded at the First-tier and  there  was  no  permission  to
    appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules.

12.   There was also a  concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Appellant is indeed the son  of  the  Sponsor  because  there  was  DNA
    evidence.  I see  no  reason  to  go  behind  that  concession  either,
    therefore the rehearing will be on Article  8  issues  as  between  the
    Appellant and his mother.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  give  such
    further directions as  appear  appropriate,  but  it  does  not  appear
    necessary for there to be an interpreter for the hearing.

13.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Abid Mahmood                         Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

