
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06838/2017
                                                               HU/07192/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2019                       |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                             mahmid idris alamin
                              adil idris alamin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Thirmaney, Solicitor, Shervins Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this matter the Appellants had sought entry clearance to join  their
    uncle here in the United Kingdom.  The  matter  had  come  for  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg at Taylor  House  on  11  February
    2019.  On 19 February 2019 she dismissed the appeals, relating both  to
    the Immigration Rules and in respect of Article 8 ECHR.

2.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J McCarthy.  He said in his grant of permission  dated  15  April
    2019 in part as follows:-

         "2.  The Appellants state that their aunt gave evidence during  the
             appeal hearing and the judge has failed to have regard to  her
             evidence.  I note  that  the  Appellant's  bundle  contains  a
             witness statement from their aunt even though at paragraph  11
             the judge says there was no witness statement from her.  I  am
             aware that the judge's notes of the hearing do  not  refer  to
             evidence from the aunt, but it is  arguable  she  was  present
             given the fact that she had prepared a witness  statement  and
             was in the  UK,  having  joined  the  Appellant's  uncle  (her
             husband) in May 2017.


         3.   The failure to consider what might be very  material  evidence
             has the potential to undermine the outcome and for that reason
             I find this ground is made out.  Although I am less  confident
             that the other grounds identify arguable legal errors on their
             own, I acknowledge that they should not be restricted  because
             they overlap with the second ground."

3.   Miss Thirmaney in her oral submissions said she relied on  the  grounds
    of appeal and the grant of permission to  appeal.   She  said  the  key
    point was whether or not  these  minor  Appellants  were  part  of  the
    Sponsor's family. The Sponsor having been granted  refugee  status  and
    whereby he had clearly mentioned  the  two  Appellants  as  well.   She
    invited me to look at paragraphs 8 and 11 of the judge's  decision  and
    also at paragraph 20.  She said when looking to the bundle of documents
    that was presented to the First-tier Tribunal it  was  clear  from  the
    index and the contents that indeed there was a witness  statement  from
    Selma Saleh and indeed paragraph 2 of the witness statement I  observed
    that the witness statement  refers  to  the  Appellants  as  being  "my
    children".

4.   Mr Tufan in his submissions said that there does appear to be an  error
    at paragraph 11 of the judge's decision, namely that it  was  incorrect
    that there was no  witness  statement  from  the  aunt,  but  that  had
    actually referred to the issue of funds and whether or not they had  or
    had not been sent.  It was that context that the  judge  was  referring
    to.  The Sponsor's wife was not saying anything  more  than  that.   Mr
    Tufan said that therefore his initial view was that there was an  error
    of law but that it was not material and the issue was whether paragraph
    35 of the Immigration Rules was met. Was the family pre-flight or  not?
    Could they be children of the Sponsor legally or not?  Insofar  as  the
    adoption order is concerned there was a guardianship letter.  Mr  Tufan
    said that the translation of that was within the Appellants' bundle but
    it did not appear that the original was submitted and it was not  clear
    why not.  It was not known whether it was a court order or just a stamp
    by the  interpreters.   Overall  there  was  a  lack  of  provision  of
    documentation.  It was to be noted that at paragraph 16 the judge  also
    referred to the lack of a death certificate.  There was a complete lack
    of documentary evidence.  At paragraph 17 the  judge  had  applied  the
    relevant standard of proof and had arrived at the conclusions that  she
    did.  Mr Tufan said that therefore although there was an error  of  law
    it was not material.

5.   I then heard from Miss Thirmaney  in  reply.   She  said,  as  she  did
    previously, that although  not  specifically  referred  to  within  the
    grounds, some of the matters raised by the judge in the  decision  were
    not within the scope of the initial  refusal  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and nor indeed were those issues  raised  during  the  hearing.
    Miss Thirmany said she had attended the hearing before the judge.   She
    also confirmed earlier that the aunt was present at the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and indeed she gave evidence, albeit  she
    only had to adopt her witness statement and no questions were asked  of
    her.  Similarly, she said that the aunt  was  in  attendance  today  as
    well.

6.   Having considered the matter, I go back first  to  the  refusal  letter
    itself.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 10 May  2017  has
    one bullet point and it says as follows:-

         "You do not meet the requirements of this paragraph of the Rules as
         you are not the biological child of a person with refugee status".

7.   The  relevant  Immigration  Rule  was  paragraph  352D  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer referred to only 352D(i).  352D(i) states as follows:-



         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or  remain  with  the
         parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:


         (i)  is the child of a parent  who  currently  has  refugee  status
             granted under the Immigration  Rules  in  the  United  Kingdom
             ...".

8.   Therefore, what Mr Tufan says in terms of the materiality of the  error
    of law has a significant bearing. Namely that even if the judge had not
    properly considered the evidence which was presented, how might  it  be
    that the Appellants would be able to meet paragraph  352D(i),  i.e.  in
    terms of the children of the  uncle?   Having  reflected  on  this  and
    having noted that the judge refused the appeal, not only in respect  of
    the Immigration Rules but also in respect  of  Article  8,  I  am  just
    persuaded that the error of law is material.

9.   The Appellants will have to understand though that the  evidence  which
    needs to be submitted will have to be  significant.   It  will  not  be
    sufficient to rely on a translation and photocopies  alone.   The  case
    law in respect of adoption from abroad is a significant matter and  the
    Tribunal must be made aware of the case law in respect of it when  this
    matter is reheard. I am concerned however  that  the  judge  materially
    erred. She said that there was no evidence form the aunt, but  in  fact
    not only was there a witness statement, the aunt had been  tendered  in
    evidence. The judge's error was significant on any  assessment.  It  is
    not safe to assume that the judge might have come to the same  decision
    had she considered that evidence presented  to  her.   In  my  judgment
    there is no alternative but to conclude that there is a material  error
    of law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

9.   As the Appellants have not had  a  proper  hearing  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it is appropriate for this matter to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for there to be a rehearing.  The rehearing  will  be  on
    all issues.  None of the findings currently made shall stand.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   A Mahmood                               Date: 28 5 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood









