
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06940/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 March 2019                     |On 1 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  UMAIR [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, instructed Berwicks, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 31  July  1988  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He entered the United Kingdom in April 2011 as a student.  He
    was subsequently granted leave to remain as a spouse. That marriage was
    ended by a decree absolute in the Family Court in  Liverpool  dated  20
    February 2019. The appellant applied, outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  [RK]
    (hereafter referred to as the sponsor). By a  decision  dated  5  March
    2018, the Secretary of State refused that  application.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    3 July 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that he was the victim of  domestic  violence  in
    his marriage but had not formally sought leave form  the  Secretary  of
    State to remain on that basis. He also argued that  the  sponsor  is  a
    Portuguese citizen exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom;  the
    appellant claims that he is in a durable relationship with the sponsor.
    The judge found that the appellant had failed to make an application on
    the basis of domestic violence and he attached little weight to medical
    evidence regarding the appellant's mental difficulties arising from his
    marriage. The judge gave reasons  for  not  considering  the  claim  of
    domestic violence is a significant factor  in  the  Article  8  appeal.
    Further, the judge did not accept that the appellant was in  a  durable
    relationship with the sponsor but, in the alternative, found that, when
    the relationship had lasted for 2 years, he would, very soon after  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, be able to apply for a residence  card  in
    the normal way. As at the date of the hearing, any right to remain as a
    family member of an EU failed to outweigh the public interest concerned
    with the appellant's removal. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed  on
    Article 8 grounds.




    EU: Durable relationship

 3. The appellant challenges the decision  on  the  basis  that  the  judge
    failed to carry out any proper evaluation of the oral evidence which he
    heard regarding the nature and durability of the  relationship  between
    the appellant and sponsor. The appellant also  claims  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to all the written evidence of  cohabitation.  At
    [59], the judge wrote:

         "At the hearing, I noted that the sponsor is a Portuguese  national
         and that the appellant may have rights under EU law. However,  when
         reviewing the papers, I noted that the sponsors passport  was  only
         issued on 30 June 2016. As she has been living with  the  appellant
         as an EU national fullest in two years. In any event, the appellant
         has not provided sufficient evidence to show that he is her durable
         partner and he cannot rely on any rights under EU law."

 4. Whilst I agree with Miss Wilkins, who appeared for the appellant before
    the Upper Tribunal, that it is inherently  unlikely  that  the  sponsor
    became a Portuguese citizen on the same date on which her passport  was
    issued, I find that it was open to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    couple, whilst they were living together as at the date of the hearing,
    had failed to show that their relationship as at that date  capable  of
    being described as durable in the sense that it had lasted for at least
    two years. At [28], the judge discussed the supporting evidence of  the
    relationship and concluded that there was  a  'potential  family  life'
    between the couple. The point which the judge  makes  is  that,  whilst
    accepting the  sponsor  and  appellant  live  together  and  are  in  a
    relationship,  they  had  failed  to  show  that  that  was  a  durable
    relationship. That was a finding which was open to the judge on all the
    evidence. I acknowledge that judge has not discussed in detail the oral
    testimony of the appellant but I am satisfied that he has had regard to
    all the evidence in reaching his findings. Further, I do not agree that
    the judge has ignored documentary evidence, namely  a  letter  dated  8
    July 2016 which the appellant claims confirms the length of the claimed
    cohabitation. The judge was not required to refer  to  each  and  every
    item of evidence in his decision. I am  also  not  satisfied  that  the
    letter in question would have compelled the judge  to  make  a  finding
    that a durable relationship existed as at the date of the hearing. As I
    have said, I am satisfied that the judge has considered both  the  oral
    and written evidence before reaching his findings.




    Domestic Violence

 5. The judge found that the appellant had  not  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence although  he  observed
    that the Tribunal should consider the  circumstances  which  surrounded
    the breakdown of  the  appellant's  marriage  as  part  of  the  'wider
    proportionality assessment.' The appellant challenges  that  conclusion
    on the basis that the judge should have made a finding  as  to  whether
    the appellant was the  victim  of  domestic  violence.  The  judge  has
    carried  out  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's mental health and at [48] attached  little  weight  to  the
    therapist's report. He treated with caution the appellant's claim  that
    his family had  disowned  him  on  account  of  the  breakdown  of  his
    marriage. It is significant that the judge found that the  only  source
    of evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  the  abuse  at  the
    hands of his former wife had caused him  mental  difficulties  was  the
    very therapist's report which the  judge  found  offered  only  limited
    assistance. I agree that it would have been helpful following this part
    of the analysis which concludes at [55] if the judge had summarised his
    findings in respect of the domestic violence claim. However, the  judge
    correctly found that the appellant did not satisfy the rule as  regards
    domestic violence but I find that his  analysis  is  adequate  for  the
    purposes of his evaluation of proportionality in the Article 8 appeal.

 6. Finally, the grounds of appeal complained that  the  judge  incorrectly
    referred to the appellant being returned to Gambia; he is a citizen  of
    Pakistan. Ms Wilkins did not press this point in her  oral  submissions
    and she was right not to do so. It would have been helpful if the judge
    had proof read his decision more carefully but  I  do  not  regard  the
    error as significant or in any way undermining of the judge's analysis.

 7. In conclusion, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  considered  all
    relevant evidence in reaching his determination of this appeal. It  was
    open to the judge, for the reasons he has given, to give limited weight
    to the allegations of domestic violence. It was also open to the  judge
    to find that the appellant had failed to prove that he was in a durable
    relationship with an EU citizen. Since it was  the  durability  of  the
    relationship rather than its existence which was of importance  in  the
    appeal, I do not accept  that  the  judge  has  made  contradictory  or
    irrational findings. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
