
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06637/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 June 2017                           |On 21 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                      Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this  case  has  two  young  children,  who  are  both
    vulnerable.   It  is  accordingly  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction and I do so.  Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant, who was born in January 1965, is a national of Pakistan.
     He completed a Bachelor of Science degree in accounting and  marketing
    from Winona State University, Minnesota, USA in 1992 and the  following
    year he married his wife, who is a US citizen of Pakistani origin,  who
    was born in 1970.  They have twin sons, X and Y, who were born  in  May
    2000.  Both children are citizens of the USA and have  never  lived  in
    Pakistan.

 3. In 2004 the family came to the UK.  The  appellant's  wife  came  as  a
    student and  the  appellant  and  his  sons  came  as  her  dependants.
    Thereafter the appellant returned briefly to Pakistan in order to apply
    for entry clearance for entry to the UK as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant
    and in December 2009 he was granted leave to  enter  in  that  capacity
    until December 2011.  Before the expiry of that leave, he  applied  for
    further leave to remain which was granted and following  extensions  of
    that grant he was subsequently  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    along with the rest of his family, on 9 December 2013.

 4. Shortly after  entering  into  the  UK,  the  appellant  worked  as  an
    accountant and in that capacity, from May 2012 he worked one day a week
    as the accountant for a small charity.   Over  the  course  of  several
    months he stole �46,000 odd from this charity.  The background to  this
    offence (or at any rate the explanation he gave at the time)  was  that
    his mother was seriously ill with cancer in Pakistan  and  in  need  of
    expensive  treatment  and  his   sister,   who   was   suffering   from
    schizophrenia,  also  had  expensive  medical  bills.    However,   the
    appellant [and] his wife owned three properties at the time,  including
    a flat in London, which was in addition to the home they lived in,  and
    whatever money might have been needed for  the  medical  bills  of  the
    appellant's  family,  this  could  have  been  raised  elsewhere.   The
    appellant was arrested for this very  serious  offence  in  April  2014
    following which his wife and children returned temporarily to the  USA,
    where they remained for about a year before returning to the UK.

 5. The appellant pleaded guilty to one count of fraud in July  2014,  when
    sentence was deferred for three months to allow him the opportunity  of
    repaying the sums which he had stolen.  He did this by selling the flat
    in London.

 6. On 8 October 2014  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  sixteen  months'
    imprisonment, the judge having given him credit both for the  repayment
    of the sum stolen and also for his guilty plea.   The  judge  indicated
    that had the appellant not pleaded guilty  and  not  repaid  the  money
    stolen, his sentence would have been one of three years'  imprisonment.
    This is the appellant's only conviction.

 7. Having served the appellant with notification as to  his  liability  to
    deportation and considered the representations made on  his  behalf  in
    response, on 7 July 2015 the respondent made  a  deportation  order  in
    respect of the appellant.  The appellant was  served  with  this  order
    along with accompanying reasons dated 8  July  2015.   A  supplementary
    decision letter was issued on 26 November 2015.  By  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007, the respondent was obliged to make this  order
    under the automatic deportation provisions, as the appellant  had  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months, unless
    one of the exceptions set out within Section 33 of  that  Act  applied,
    which exception includes that deportation  would  be  in  breach  of  a
    potential deportee's rights under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 8. It is the appellant's case that in the particular circumstances of this
    case, for the reasons which will be discussed  below,  the  deportation
    order is in breach of his (and more importantly his family's) Article 8
    rights.

 9. The respondent also certified the appellant's human rights claim  under
    Section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  in
    consequence of which the appellant was only entitled  to  exercise  his
    right of appeal outside the UK, and he departed from  this  country  in
    March 2016.  The respondent did not, when certifying  his  claim,  have
    the benefit of the Supreme Court decision in Kiarie and Byndloss [2017]
    UKSC 42, which was handed down on the Wednesday following  the  hearing
    of this appeal, but before this decision has been promulgated,  and  it
    may be that had the decision been made  today,  the  appellant's  claim
    would not have been so certified.   Certainly,  in  light  of  what  is
    discussed below, this Tribunal cannot be  confident  that  irreversible
    harm has not been caused by the enforced removal of the appellant  from
    the UK pending hearing of this  appeal;  also  it  proved  logistically
    impossible for him to give evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    the manner in which he was able to give evidence to this  Tribunal,  as
    will be discussed below, was not entirely satisfactory.

10. In any event, after leaving the UK, on 16  March  2016,  the  appellant
    lodged notice of appeal, which was eventually listed for hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 9 August 2016,  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Traynor.

11. At this hearing, because of logistical difficulties which are explained
    within Judge Traynor's decision, it was not possible for the  appellant
    to give live evidence, but since it was considered  important  (because
    of the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  children,  which  will  be
    considered   below)   to   expedite   the   hearing   the   appellant's
    representatives chose not to apply for  an  adjournment.   Following  a
    hearing, in a decision promulgated on 4  October  2016,  Judge  Traynor
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

12. Subsequently, permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Allen and in a decision sent to the parties on 25 April 2017, following
    a hearing on 10 March 2017, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  found  that
    Judge Traynor's decision had contained a material  error  of  law  such
    that the decision must be remade, and ordered that the rehearing should
    be in the Upper Tribunal, with no findings preserved.

13. A transfer order having been made, the appeal was relisted before me.







    The Hearing

14. Judge Gleeson had directed that arrangements be put in place to  enable
    the appellant to give his evidence by video link, and  this  was  done.
    Because of the anticipated expense and difficulties  of  the  appellant
    availing himself of these facilities, the  Tribunal  was  requested  to
    allow the appellant's evidence to be given via Skype, but  having  made
    enquiries, I directed that in the event that the appellant chose not to
    avail himself of the facilities which had been put in place  to  enable
    him to give evidence via video link, but to rely on Skype instead, if a
    Skype connection proved unworkable, it was unlikely that an adjournment
    would then be granted.  Having considered the expense  which  would  be
    incurred in order to enable the appellant to avail himself of the video
    link facilities, contrasted with the continuing effect  which,  on  the
    appellant's case, his continued removal from the UK was having  on  his
    children, I did not consider that it  would  be  in  the  interests  of
    justice to  delay  these  proceedings  any  longer  than  was  strictly
    necessary.

15. In hindsight and with the benefit now of having seen  the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in Kiarie and Byndloss, a  decision  not  to  adjourn
    might have been wrong, but in the event, the appellant was able to give
    his  evidence  via  video  link,  although   this   was   not   without
    difficulties.  Although those present within the hearing were  able  to
    see and hear the appellant, he was only able to hear what was  said  at
    the Tribunal end,  and  there  appeared  to  be  a  two  second  delay.
    However, the appellant gave his evidence and he was also cross-examined
    by Mr Wilding on behalf of the respondent.

16. The video link was only maintained while the appellant  gave  evidence,
    and the  Tribunal  also  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife.
    Although it had been hoped that one of the appellant's  children  would
    give evidence, it was considered that neither of them was  well  enough
    to do so.

17.  I  also  heard  submissions  from  the  appellant's  Counsel  and  the
    respondent's Presenting Officer, to both of whom I am grateful for  the
    concise and persuasive manner in which they  presented  their  parties'
    respective positions.  I was also assisted  by  the  skeleton  argument
    prepared by Mr O'Callaghan on behalf of the appellant.




    The Law

18. As already noted, by Section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  the
    respondent was required to make a deportation order in this  case,  the
    appellant having been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
    twelve months, unless she felt that  one  of  the  exceptions  set  out
    within Section 33 of that Act,  which  includes  that  the  deportation
    would be in breach of his rights under the European Convention on Human
    Rights applied.  As noted, the challenge to  the  decision  is  on  the
    basis of the Article 8 rights of his family.

19. When considering whether or not the removal of this appellant would  be
    in breach of his right to respect for his family life under  Article  8
    (and as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act  1998),  regard  must  be  had  to  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (inserted  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014) headed "PART 5A Article 8  of  the  ECHR:  public
    interest considerations", and also to the relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules, being paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A.

20. Although it is traditional in appeals such as this for the judge to cut
    and paste the relevant extracts from the Immigration Rules and Part  5A
    into his or her decision, this is not necessary in this case, as  there
    is no issue as  to  what  the  effect  of  Part  5A  and  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules is.

21. It is accepted on behalf of the appellant that because the children had
    been in the USA for about a year before the deportation order was made,
    they are not "qualified children" as defined in Section  117D(1)(a)  of
    the 2002 Act.  However, the appellant's wife is a "qualifying  partner"
    within Section 117D(1)(b) because she is settled in the UK.

22. By Section 117C(3) it is set out that the public interest would require
    the appellant's deportation "unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies"
    (because he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  over  12
    months but under four years).  Exception 2 is  set  out  at  subSection
    117C(5) as applying

         "where [an applicant] has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  [his  or
         her] deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh".

23. Although this does not appear to have been conceded at the time of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was made clear  before  this
    Tribunal that the respondent  accepts  (rightly  in  my  judgment,  for
    reasons which I will give below) that in the circumstances of this case
    it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  or  require  the  children  to
    relocate to Pakistan.  The appellant's  wife,  as  the  sole  remaining
    carer of her children could not be expected to leave  them  behind  and
    relocate herself to Pakistan without her children; it follows therefore
    that the  effect  of  deportation  on  this  family  would  be  one  of
    separation, unless they were able to locate as a family to the USA.   I
    can deal with this possibility very shortly.  I heard evidence, which I
    accept as true, that the appellant made enquiries  through  lawyers  in
    the USA as to whether or not he would be likely to be granted admission
    and was told that in the circumstances of his case he would not.  As he
    is a Pakistani Muslim with a serious conviction for fraud,  I  entirely
    accept, beyond the balance of probabilities, this it is  very  unlikely
    indeed that he would be allowed now to  return  to  the  USA  with  his
    family, should they choose to go back.  Accordingly, he will either  be
    allowed to return to the UK, or he will be separated from his wife  and
    children.

24. The question of whether or not the effect on the appellant's wife would
    be "unduly harsh" requires this Tribunal to undertake a proportionality
    exercise, as indeed is the case when considering  whether  or  not  the
    permanent removal of this appellant is  in  breach  of  his  Article  8
    rights, having considered the best interests of his children.  For this
    purpose it is necessary to have in mind what is agreed by both  parties
    as a correct statement of the  current  law,  as  set  out  within  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  the  2002  Act,  and  explained   by   current
    jurisprudence.

25. My starting point must be that  there  is  a  very  significant  public
    interest in the deportation of this appellant.  Although  he  was  only
    sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment, which is at the lower end of
    the scale between one year's imprisonment and four years' imprisonment,
    and although the money was eventually repaid, this  is  a  professional
    man who, from a position of trust, stole a significant amount of  money
    from a charity.  The revulsion rightly felt by members  of  the  public
    towards such offences is very great indeed and it is also important  to
    deter  other  foreign  citizens  from  committing   similar   offences.
    Accordingly, the effect upon the  appellant's  wife  of  deporting  the
    appellant can only be said to be "unjustifiably (my emphasis) harsh" in
    the circumstances of this case or his deportation  disproportionate  if
    there are very compelling reasons indeed which could be said to  be  so
    weighty as to outweigh the very great public interest which  exists  in
    the appellant  being  deported.   It  is  only  where  there  are  such
    extremely compelling reasons that exceptionally a decision can properly
    be taken  that  notwithstanding  the  very  great  public  interest  in
    deportation, that course would nonetheless be disproportionate.

26. Accordingly, I turn now to consider the evidence on the basis that  the
    public interest in deporting this appellant is very high and that it is
    only if he can establish  that  the  countervailing  factors  are  very
    compelling indeed  that  his  deportation  could  be  said  not  to  be
    proportionate, such that Exception 2 would apply.

27. As already noted, I heard evidence from  both  the  appellant  and  his
    wife, who both adopted the witness statements they had previously  made
    and were cross-examined.  I say at the outset that I found both of them
    to be truthful witnesses, whose  evidence  remained  consistent  during
    cross-examination, and I make my findings on that basis.  What I  found
    particularly impressive about their evidence was that at  no  time  did
    either the appellant or his wife  even  attempt  to  suggest  that  the
    offence was not deplorable and nor did either of them attempt to excuse
    it.  The appellant in particular, when asked who  was  responsible  for
    the situation his children now found themselves in (which is  discussed
    below) said that no-one was to blame  but  himself,  and  I  found  his
    remorse genuine.  He acknowledged that given  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, were it not for the effect on his children, his  appeal  would
    be hopeless.  He acknowledged also that in light of his conviction,  he
    would clearly be unable to obtain any work as an accountant again,  but
    he believed that he would be able to use  his  other  qualification  in
    marketing.  He is not a man who has any other convictions, and  on  the
    basis of all the evidence in this case,  I  do  not  consider  that  he
    presents any real risk of reoffending.  Of course, his  deportation  is
    still very much in the public interest (primarily because of  the  need
    to deter others and to give effect to the revulsion felt by members  of
    the public towards offences of this kind) but his continued presence in
    the country will not carry with it, in my judgment, any  real  risk  to
    the public at large.

28. Mrs Z's evidence was consistent with that of her husband, and I believe
    that the appellant's primary concern is to try  to  take  care  of  his
    children, and to repair the damage they have suffered as a  result,  he
    believes, of his own criminal activities.

29. One factor which appears to have  influenced  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in reaching his decision (see for example at paragraph 71 of  his
    decision)  was  the  possibility  that  X's  mental   health   problems
    (discussed below) in particular may not have been as a  result  of  the
    threatened and then actual removal of his father  but  could  have  had
    genetic causation (the judge at paragraph 71 referred to  the  "history
    of other family mental health illness, in which regard I refer  to  his
    sister who suffers from schizophrenia").   During  the  course  of  the
    hearing, I heard evidence which has  convinced  me  that  whatever  the
    cause of the difficulties currently faced by the two  children,  it  is
    not related to any genetic factors on their father's  side.   Following
    discussion during the hearing, it was agreed by both  parties  that  it
    would not be necessary for me to set out my reasoning in reaching  this
    conclusion, save to say that it is founded upon evidence which I  heard
    and which I accept.

30. I turn then to consider the position of the appellant's children, which
    is, in my judgement, tragic.  Prior to the appellant's arrest, all  the
    evidence suggests that this was a happy,  close  family  in  which  the
    children  both  thrived  at  school.   Academically,  they  were  doing
    exceptionally well, and barring unforeseen  developments  (such  as  in
    fact occurred) both would have been predicted  to  go  on  to  complete
    GCSEs  and  A  levels  successfully  and   gain   admission   to   good
    universities.

31. Regrettably that situation has now changed.  X's psychiatric history is
    summarised by Dr Willis in his report of 27 July 2016 and includes  the
    following:

         "X's admission [to hospital] was precipitated by aggression towards
         his mother when she was trying to get him to attend  an  outpatient
         appointment.  There had been a  significant  deterioration  in  his
         mental state since October 2015 [which  is  after  the  deportation
         order had been made] associated with social  withdrawal,  worsening
         of school  performance  plus  suspension  from  school,  aggression
         towards family members requiring  police  involvement,  eating  and
         drinking excessively since January 2016  and  talking  to  himself.
         These changes are completely out of character for  X,  particularly
         the aggression.  It started a short while after  he  returned  from
         living in the US for one year.  There was a significant assault  on
         his brother in January 2016 which led to his brother moving out  to
         stay with a family friend and around this time the excessive eating
         and drinking started.  An additional family  stress  occurred  when
         his father was deported in March 2016".

32. As a result of X's deteriorating behaviour, he had to  be  admitted  to
    Cygnet Hospital  Woking,  for  assessment  and  treatment  after  being
    sectioned under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983.   He  remained
    there  for  some  four  months  before  being  transferred  to  another
    institution under Section 3 of that Act.  The institution to  which  he
    was transferred is a secure  mental  health  service  accommodation  to
    which he had to be referred by a psychiatrist.  He  has  returned  home
    and is responding to some extent to treatment which he has received, in
    particular his drugs, but his current prognosis is as set  out  in  the
    report of Dr Crespo, consultant psychiatrist, dated 26  May  2017,  the
    contents of which are summarised from  paragraph  43  of  the  skeleton
    argument.  The  summary  contained  within  the  skeleton  argument  is
    accurate, and I set out below what is summarised at paragraph 45 of the
    skeleton argument:

         "X has been diagnosed with suffering from a mental  disorder  terms
         first case psychosis.  His symptoms are:

       . hallucinations;
       . delusions;
       . slow cognitive processing and responses;
       . extreme violent tendencies particularly towards family members;
       . lapses in memory and extreme difficulty in concentrating;
       . confused thinking;
       . socially withdrawn and difficulty  in  understanding  normal  daily
         activities;
       . compulsive eating and drinking water;
       . talking and laughing to himself and making strange head and  facial
         gestures".

    In his skeleton argument, Mr O'Callaghan cited the relevant parts of Dr
    Crespo's report, which I now repeat below.  Dr Crespo's opinion was  as
    follows:

         "...  A strong, stable and consistent family support  significantly
         improves the long-term prognosis of young  people  with  psychosis.
         X's continued separation from his father, and the impact  of  [his]
         deportation on the entire family had a significantly adverse effect
         on X's mental health as well as on his development...

         X's mental health is still very serious as he is  on  antipsychotic
         drugs, showing delay in cognitive processing, lapses in memory  and
         difficulty in concentrating.  I have  recently  referred  X  to  an
         outpatient forensic psychiatrist as I believe [his] serious  mental
         condition merits a higher level of specialised care...

         X's  current  mental  health  is  very  fragile  too  and  is  very
         susceptible to a  relapse.   It  is  extremely  important  for  his
         recovery that there are no  pressures,  worries  and  uncertainties
         around [him] and [that he] has unwavering support from his family".

33. Dr Crespo then set out his views regarding the separation of X from his
    father, as follows:

         "X was unable to comprehend the family  situation  and  was  coping
         badly with the  imminent  deportation  of  his  dad,  demonstrating
         extreme  violent  behaviour,  slow  cognitive   responses,   speech
         impediment, compulsive eating and drinking disorder and  unable  to
         attend school.  The actual deportation of X in March [2016]  caused
         additional stress for X.  Such stressors and life events are  well-
         recognised to trigger and  worsen  psychotic  episodes  and  it  is
         likely to have been the case for X as he had no history  of  mental
         illness.

         The situation  deteriorated  significantly  immediately  after  Z's
         departure in March [2016] and  Mrs  Z  and  her  other  son  Y  was
         subjected to physical abuse by X and police had to be called on two
         occasions.

         X's continued separation from his father, and  the  impact  of  his
         deportation on the entire Z family is having an adverse  effect  on
         X's mental health and his long-term prognosis.

         X has been regularly  discussing  with  CAMHS  about  his  father's
         absence, how it is creating anxiety, worries, raises question marks
         on his schooling and life in general, and  how  he  longs  for  his
         father's presence, support and help.

         It is very important  and  vital  for  X's  well-being  and  better
         prognosis that his father is able to join him soon in [the] UK  [my
         emphasis]".

34. Regarding Y, although his symptoms are not as severe as X's he has also
    been very badly affected by  the  absence  of  his  father.   Like  his
    brother, he too has been unable to fulfil his potential at school  that
    he had previously shown and he has failed some of his mock examinations
    (which  would  have  been  a  considerable  surprise  but  for  present
    circumstances).  He was also referred to  CAMHS  having  lost  about  a
    stone in weight and having been very depressed and  anxious,  and  been
    subject to fits of anger, problems with concentration, lack  of  energy
    and the like.  He has  also  repeatedly  expressed  suicidal  ideation,
    which has been detailed in Dr Crespo's report.

35. The evidence of both the appellant and his wife was entirely consistent
    with the expert evidence which was before the Tribunal, and I  entirely
    accept that the concern which the appellant  had  expressed  about  his
    children's prospects and their need of his support is genuine.   Mrs  Z
    told me, and I accept, that she has very limited contact now with other
    members of their family who are in the UK because of shame  about  what
    the appellant has done.  Also, it is very difficult for the children to
    have any kind of social contact with the rest of the family now.

36. Of course, this Tribunal is required, by Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have  regard  to  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of the appellant's children and their
    best interests are a primary consideration, but they are not  paramount
    and there will be many cases where even though it can properly be  said
    that the best interests of children are to have a parent remain  within
    the UK, those interests do not outweigh the very large public  interest
    in removing that person.  It is only when the factors weighing  against
    the deportation of a foreign criminal are so very compelling that  they
    outweigh the very  large  public  interest  in  removing  that  foreign
    criminal (which will be rare) such that, exceptionally, deportation can
    properly be said to be disproportionate.

37. In my judgement, this is such a case, and it is right to record that on
    the facts of this case, I do not regard this decision even to be finely
    balanced.  The evidence which is before the  Tribunal,  both  from  the
    appellant and his wife (and the witness  statements/letters  from  both
    children, who were said to be too  ill  to  give  evidence  in  person)
    coupled with the consistent psychiatric evidence and evidence from  the
    children's  school,  is  so  compelling  as  to  make   his   continued
    deportation from the  UK  disproportionate,  notwithstanding  the  very
    great  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  commit
    offences such as this appellant has.  The children have gone from being
    model students with excellent prospects to being in a situation  where,
    at 17, they have yet to sit for  their  GCSEs,  and  both  of  them  in
    different ways are exhibiting severe indications of mental illness  (in
    the case of X, very severe).  Although X's behaviour has been  improved
    to a limited extent (as acknowledged by Z in his evidence) it is  quite
    clear from the expert evidence that the  prospects  of  both  boys  (or
    either of them) regaining their prospects in life and indeed, arguably,
    their sanity, will be improved hugely if their father is now allowed to
    return.  The difference his  return  would  make,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, is so huge, in my judgement, as  to  outweigh,  by  some
    considerable margin, the public interest in maintaining his deportation
    now, even though, as  I  have  stated  repeatedly  above,  that  public
    interest is very great indeed.  The appellant and his  family  (and  in
    particular his children, who are blameless) have paid a very high price
    indeed for the serious crime which the appellant committed,  and  which
    would, all other  things  being  equal,  have  led  inevitably  to  his
    deportation.  But all other things are not equal in this case, and  for
    the reasons I  have  given,  I  find  that  his  deportation  would  be
    disproportionate, and therefore in  breach  of  his  and  his  family's
    Article 8 rights.

38. It follows that his appeal against the respondent's decision to  deport
    him must be allowed and I so find.



Decision

I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  deport  him
(having refused his article 8 claim) is allowed.

Postscript

In my judgment, on the evidence I have heard,  the  continued  exclusion  of
the appellant from the UK,  pending  final  determination  of  this  appeal,
carries with it the very real risk  of  further  irreversible  harm  to  his
children.  In these  circumstances,  even  should  the  respondent  wish  to
consider lodging an appeal against this decision, it is to be hoped that  in
the meantime she will permit the return of the appellant to the UK,  without
further delay.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 20 June 2017

