
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
HU/06681/2016

                                                    HU/06690/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th March 2018                        | On 9th April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     miss Sanju Chand (first Appellant)
                    miss Sanjita Chand (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are sisters and  they  are  born  respectively  on  11th
    October 1987 and 24th June 1989.  They are both citizens of Nepal.  The
    Appellants made application  seeking  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the adult dependent children of Dipak Kumar Chand  a  former
    Gurkha soldier.  Their applications were refused by Notice  of  Refusal
    dated  respectively  16th  and  24th  February  2016.   The  Appellants
    appealed and their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Rahman sitting at Taylor House on 29th June 2017.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 17th July  2017  the  Appellants'  appeals  were
    allowed pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.

 2. On 17th July 2017 the Secretary of State lodged grounds  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 18th  January  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cruthers granted permission to appeal.  To quote verbatim from
    Judge Cruthers' grant:

         "In my assessment it is arguable, as per the grounds on  which  the
         Respondent seeks permission to appeal,  that  the  judge  may  have
         erred in at least the following respects:-

           - As per paragraph 1 of the Respondent's grounds, I consider  it
             arguable  that  the  judge  may  have  treated  'the  historic
             injustice argument' (which is common to most Gurkha  dependent
             entry clearance cases) as some sort of trump card  outweighing
             any such factors as could be taken  to  militate  against  the
             Appellants' case for entry clearance ('the Ghising point')




           - As per paragraph 3 I consider it arguable that the  judge  may
             have erred when he found that 'family life' (for the  purposes
             of Article 8) exists between the Sponsor  and  the  Appellants
             ('the Kugathas point')



           - As per paragraph 6 it is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  not
             appropriately factored in potential 'Part 5A factors'  -  such
             as whether the  Appellants  speak  English,  and  whether  the
             Sponsor is in a position to maintain the Appellants in the  UK
             without recourse to public funds."

    Overall Judge Cruthers therefore concluded that  there  was  sufficient
    weight within the grounds to make a grant of permission appropriate.

 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Wilford.  Mr Wilford is familiar with  this  matter  having
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Respondent appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow.  I  note  that  this  is  an
    appeal by the Secretary  of  State.   For  the  purpose  of  continuity
    throughout the appeal process Miss Sanju and  Miss  Sanjita  Chand  are
    referred to herein as the Appellants and the Secretary of State as  the
    Respondent.

 4. Mr Wilford has produced to me a very helpful skeleton argument which he
    asks stands both as his skeleton and in response as a  Rule  24  reply.
    Mr Tarlow has no objection to it being admitted in evidence.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Tarlow relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He  submits  that  the  key
    findings in these appeals are to be found at paragraphs 67 and  68  and
    that what the Tribunal has done is find that the  historical  injustice
    argument  trumps  all  other  elements   within   the   proportionality
    assessment and within Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Further he submits
    that the Tribunal has started on the wrong foot by assuming that it  is
    an objective fact that  all  Gurkha  children  remain  in  a  state  of
    absolute dependence upon their parents until the child gets married and
    that is not supported by the facts of this case which  shows  that  the
    Sponsor and his wife came to the UK in 2013 and 2014  and  consequently
    if there had been a dependence as stated then this separation would not
    have happened.  Further he submits that the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Appellants  were  emotionally  dependent  upon  their  parents  due  to
    frequent contact.  He submits that this does not demonstrate  emotional
    dependency to the Kugathas standard and points out that the Appellants'
    case is consequently not made out.

 6. He acknowledges that the Entry Clearance Officer does not dispute  that
    a family life exists simply that the evidence does not show elements of
    dependency beyond the normal emotional ties.  Further he considers that
    the judge has not made appropriate factual findings pursuant to Section
    117B regarding public interest considerations and  that  there  are  no
    findings for example on the Appellants' ability to  speak  English,  to
    maintain their financial independence  or  to  integrate  into  British
    society.

 7. Mr Wilford addresses the points as set out by Judge Cruthers  in  turn.
    Firstly he turns to what he calls the Ghising issue.  He notes that the
    Secretary of State's grounds assert that the judge  gave  inappropriate
    weight to  the  historic  injustice  albeit  that  he  notes  that  the
    Respondent does  not  dispute  the  fact  that  the  family  have  been
    subjected to historic injustice.  Further he points out that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge accepted the evidence  of  the  Appellants'  father
    that he would, had he been able, have applied to settle in the UK  upon
    discharge.  He submits that there has been no  reference  made  to  the
    finding of the Upper Tribunal  in  Ghising  and  Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs;
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) and the fact that in such
    circumstances there is usually a finding  in  the  Appellant's  favour.
    Secondly he turns to what he describes as the Kugathas  issue  and  the
    point that the Secretary of State  asserts  that  the  judge  erred  in
    finding at paragraph 63 that Article 8(1) was engaged  founded  upon  a
    fundamentally flawed conception of the  relevant  principles  governing
    the issue: namely that "absolute dependence" is the basis of  existence
    of family life such as to engage Article 8(1)  between  adult  children
    and their parents.  He suggests that there has been a mistake herein by
    the Secretary of State and that the test for Article 8 he reminds me of
    family life between adults  is  whether  "something  more  exists  than
    normal emotional ties" and that such relevant factors include  who  are
    the near relatives, the nature of the links, age, where and  with  whom
    the Appellant has resided in  the  past  and  forms  of  contract.   He
    submits that it is clear that the judge has at  paragraphs  60  and  61
    taken in all the relevant factors in the grounds and  has  gone  on  to
    reject the approach that was taken when the judge fell  into  error  in
    the Upper Tribunal in Rai that if the dependence had been as stated the
    separation would not have happened.

 8. Thirdly, Mr Wilford addresses what Judge Cruthers has  referred  to  as
    the Part 5A factors.  He submits that contrary to what  Judge  Cruthers
    suggests  the  judge  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal   acted   entirely
    appropriately  because  firstly  at  paragraph  68  he  has  explicitly
    referred to Part 5A of the 2002 Act and  that  secondly  the  only  two
    relevant subSections can possibly be  Sections  117B(2)  and  (3).   He
    refers me to them and points out that they do not prescribe outcome but
    process and he points out that Part 5A  is  codifying  legislation  and
    that it does not disturb the findings of the Upper Tribunal in  Ghising
    No. 2.  He submits that considerations under this  Rule  cannot  affect
    the outcome of this appeal and that the judge has  taken  into  account
    paragraphs 2 and 3 of Section 117B.  He asked me to dismiss the  appeal
    and to find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Case Law and Statutory Authority

11. In Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 567 (IAC) the court made the following findings:

         "(1) In finding that the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  historic
             wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as
             less than that to be accorded the historic wrong  suffered  by
             British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in  Gurung  and
             others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in  either  Gurkha
             or BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong is  to  reverse
             or otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies in Article
             8 proportionality assessments.




         (2)  When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
             and  the  decision  made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
             interference with it, the burden lies with the  Respondent  to
             show that a decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
             Appellants will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility  of
             adducing evidence that lies within their remit and about which
             the Respondent may be unaware).




         (3)  What concerned the Court in Gurung  and  others  was  not  the
             burden of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a
             proportionality assessment.  The Court held that,  as  in  the
             case of BOCs,  the  historic  wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-
             servicemen should be given substantial weight.




         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/ entry clearance officer consist solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.




         (5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha  (and  BOC)
             cases will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their
             family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows
             they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,
             but for the injustice that prevented the latter from  settling
             here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
             above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
             policy, which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight
             in the balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.   Thus,  a  bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side of the balance."

12. Further within that decision the Tribunal at paragraphs 59 and 60 said:

         "59. In other  words,  the  historic  injustice  issue  will  carry
             significant weight, on the Appellant's side  of  the  balance,
             and is likely  to  outweigh  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Respondent, where these consist solely of the public  interest
             just described.

         60.  Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be  appreciated
             that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will
             not succeed, even though their  family  life  engages  Article
             8(1) and the evidence shows they would have come to the United
             Kingdom  with  their  father,  but  for  the  injustice   that
             prevented the latter from settling here on completion  of  his
             military service.  If the Respondent can point to matters over
             and above the  'public  interest  in  maintaining  of  a  firm
             immigration policy', which argue in favour of removal  or  the
             refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given  appropriate
             weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour.  Thus, a bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side.  Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha
             ex-serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump card', in the  sense
             that not every application by such a  person  will  inevitably
             succeed.  But, if the Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the
             public interest described by the Court of Appeal at  paragraph
             41 of Gurung, then the weight to  be  given  to  the  historic
             injustice will normally require a decision in the  Appellant's
             favour."

13. Section 117B(2) provides:

         "It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English -

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society."

    Section 117B(3) provides:

         "It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent ..."

Findings on Error of Law

14. This is a judge who has given very careful consideration to  the  facts
    of this matter.  He has taken into account the relevant law  and  I  do
    not find that the argument set out by the Secretary of  State  that  he
    has purportedly misapplied the historical injustice as an element  that
    trumps all other elements  of  the  proportionality  assessment  to  be
    correct.  Quite simply, consideration and an analysis of what the judge
    says at paragraph 67 does not support such  contention  albeit  that  I
    acknowledge that therein the judge does make reference  to  the  phrase
    "historic  injustice".   He  cannot  however  be  criticised  for   his
    conclusions.

15. So far as the allegation made therein relating to the  suggestion  that
    the tie does not  demonstrate  emotional  dependency  to  the  Kugathas
    standard this is  I  conclude  wrong  as  a  basic  supposition.   What
    effectively this amounts to is a disagreement with the finding  of  the
    judge.  The judge has at paragraphs 60 and 61 considered in detail  the
    relevant factors in the appeal and has made findings thereinafter  that
    he was entitled to.  This is a judge  who  has  given  a  very  careful
    analysis to the authorities and to the factors to be taken into account
    such as being single, having no children, not finding a family of their
    own,   financial    dependence,    emotional    dependence,    cultural
    considerations and living together.  He has looked at  all  matters  in
    the round and has given his reasons quite properly as to  why  Kugathas
    can be distinguished.  Further the judge  has  gone  on  to  take  into
    account paragraphs 2 and 3  of  Section  117B  and  I  agree  with  the
    submission made by Mr Wilford that they do not  prescribe  outcome  but
    process.

16. Overall this is a very well-constructed and put together decision.  The
    decision discloses no material error of law and the submissions made by
    the Secretary of State amount to little more than mere disagreement and
    an attempt to challenge the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     In such circumstances I find that there is no material error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
