
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06696/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |On 30 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             miss grace adu-poku
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent is Miss Adu-
    Poku, a Ghanaian citizen born on 10  March  1986,  aged  32.   For  the
    purposes of this decision and reasons however I refer to the parties as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where  Ms  Adu-Poku  was  the
    appellant.

 2. Ms Adu-Poku appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of
    the respondent, dated 26 February 2016, to refuse the appellant's human
    rights application.  In a decision promulgated on 11 June  2018,  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Freer allowed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The respondent appeals with permission on the following grounds:

    Ground 1 - Although the judge directed himself at  [44]  that  although
    the appellant may have been able to claim  British  citizenship  at  an
    earlier point, this argument was  not  made  before  him  and  arguably
    required further investigation and was not relied upon, it  was  argued
    that the judge went on to rely on this factor as a ground for  allowing
    the appeal and it was submitted this was an inconsistent finding.

    Ground 2 - It was submitted that the judge  found  that  the  appellant
    would have succeeded in her  application  of  British  nationality  but
    there was no evidence referred to in the judge's consideration  and  it
    was submitted that the judge gave weight to  immaterial  considerations
    in his assessment.

    Ground 3 - It was submitted the judge's  findings  run  counter  to  MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797 at paragraphs 38, 39, 41, 42 and 44  and
    given that Article 3 was conceded it was  submitted  that  the  reasons
    given for why the appellant succeeded under Article 8 on the  same  set
    of facts, were inadequate.

    Ground 4 -  It  was  submitted  that,  including  at  [77],  the  judge
    attempted to dilute the public interest by  stating  that  the  limited
    weight provisions do not apply to the  period  of  residence  when  the
    appellant was a child; there was no basis  for  this  finding  and  the
    judge had failed to take into account  material  matters  in  assessing
    proportionality.  The judge further did not address the  issue  of  the
    appellant having carers or a home  help.   There  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest why, if the appellant became self-employed, she could not  seek
    a carer.

Error of Law Discussion

Grounds 1 and 2

 4. Mr Melvin was unable to  identify  where  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision the judge had gone on to rely on the issue of whether  or  not
    the  appellant  might  have  succeeded   in   a   British   nationality
    application.  Although Mr Melvin submitted that it  appeared  to  be  a
    weighty consideration in the proportionality exercise conducted by  the
    judge he accepted that he was unable to identify any further references
    which suggested that the judge relied on  the  appellant's  ability  or
    otherwise to apply for British citizenship.

 5. Although it was his submission that where the judge,  at  [77(i)]  when
    considering that there was  not  particularly  strong  weight  for  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control by the  respondent,  noted
    that the appellant would surely have gained leave to remain  under  the
    ten or fourteen year Rule this implied that the judge was giving weight
    to the fact that he felt that the appellant might have succeeded  under
    the British nationality application, that is not the case.   There  was
    nothing in the findings of the First-tier Tribunal to  support  such  a
    speculative submission.

 6. It is a misrepresentation of the judge's findings to  suggest  that  he
    gave any weight to the issue of  British  nationality.   There  was  no
    error in the judge identifying on his review of  the  facts,  at  [44],
    that the appellant might have  been  able  to  claim  but  he  properly
    directed himself but "this argument was not made  to  me  and  arguably
    required considerable investigation.  I do not rely upon it".

 7. Similarly, although Mr Melvin  attempted  to  rescue  the  respondent's
    grounds by attempting to reframe grounds 1 and 2 into an attack on  the
    judge's findings in respect of the previous ten year and fourteen  Rule
    applications, there is no merit in this argument.   Although  ground  1
    asserted that the judge erred by relying  on  the  near-miss  principle
    again that is a  mischaracterisation  of  the  judge's  findings.   The
    judge, at [77(i)], made reference to the possibility that the appellant
    might have gained leave to remain in terms of the public  law  doctrine
    of legitimate expectation but was very clear in reminding himself  that
    this was not an alternative near-miss argument.

 8. The argument of legitimate expectation was only considered in terms  of
    the judge's findings that in  this  case  there  was  not  particularly
    strong weight for the maintenance of effective immigration controls  in
    part due to the fact that the appellant  might  have  gained  leave  to
    remain.   The fact that an applicant may be able to say that their case
    is a 'near miss' in relation to  satisfying  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules is  not  sufficient  for  'compelling'  circumstances
    requiring a grant  of  leave  outside  of  those  Rules.   However,  if
    compelling circumstances already exist, the fact that the case is  also
    a 'near miss' may be a relevant consideration which  tips  the  balance
    under Article 8 in their favour (see paragraph  56  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387).  There was no error in the judge's reasoned approach and
    no material error made out in grounds one and two.

Ground 3

 9. Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  run  counter  to  MM
    (Zimbabwe) and further relied on the Court of Appeal decision in SL (St
    Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 which reiterated that MM (Zimbabwe) and  GS
    (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40
    was unaltered by Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Mar 867.

10.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  there  is  adequate  treatment  for   the
    appellant's medical condition (lupus) in  Ghana.   Although  the  judge
    accepted that he was not a medical expert, Mr Melvin submitted that  he
    then went on to make detailed findings in relation to  the  appellant's
    medical  conditions.   Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  it  can   only   be
    exceptional circumstances that an Article 8 case can succeed  where  an
    Article 3 case would not and it was noted that the Article 3  case  had
    been conceded by the appellant.

11. As highlighted in MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] and in GS (India), the Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 had this to say in relation
    to Article 8 medical cases:

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance  with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article  8.   Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependants
         and the family here  for  support,  together  established  'private
         life' under  Article  8.   That  conclusion  would  not  involve  a
         comparison between medical facilities here and those  in  Zimbabwe.
         Such a finding would not offend the principle expressed above  that
         the United Kingdom was under no Convention  obligation  to  provide
         medical treatment here when it is not available in the  country  to
         which the appellant is to be deported."

12. I am not satisfied that this is not a case that can be characterised as
    one where the judge found that the case succeeded on Article 8  medical
    grounds alone.  Rather this was an additional factor which  weighed  in
    the balance.  The judge at [69] concluded that the appellant  satisfied
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) on private  life.   Paragraph  276ADE  provides
    including as follows:

         "276ADE(1)    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                    to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
                    that at the date of application, the applicant:

                    ...

                    (vi)   subject to sub-paragraph (ii), is aged  18  years
                        or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less
                        than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period   of
                        imprisonment) but there would be  very  significant
                        obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the
                        country to which he would have to go if required to
                        leave the UK.

                    ......"

13. The judge's primary finding was that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated
    that very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  in  Ghana.   In
    reaching that finding the judge took into consideration the appellant's
    relationship with her family, including her father, in the  context  of
    considering what the obstacles were to the appellant  integrating  back
    into life in Ghana.  The judge accepted that the appellant  had  no-one
    in Ghana and there has been no challenge to that finding.

14. In reaching the findings he did, the judge  quite  properly  considered
    how the appellant's life-long cancer diagnosis of lupus (and the  judge
    made findings which were not  disputed  that  the  specialist  evidence
    shows that eh appellant  has  been  diagnosed  with  not  one  but  two
    varieties of lupus) would affect her ability to integrate in Ghana.  In
    reaching that finding the judge took into consideration  the  issue  of
    affordability.  The judge also took into consideration  the  impact  of
    the appellant's life-long condition on her ability to work on return to
    Ghana including that the evidence indicated that sometimes  there  will
    be extreme exhaustion, depression and  flu-like  symptoms  rendering  a
    patient unable to work and that there could be cognitive problems.

15. The judge at [60] found as follows:

         "The respondent may not rationally rely on  the  appellant's  dance
         skills, because they cannot be used when lupus flare ups, so it  is
         impossible for her to have a career in dance or as a dance teacher.
          The same may equally be said of her intellectual  skills,  due  to
         foreseeable periods of lethargy, brain fog and depression."

16. Again there was no challenge to those findings before  me.   Similarly,
    the judge made findings, that  were  available  to  him  and  were  not
    properly challengeable before me, at [61] that the appellant would  not
    be likely to hold an employed position for long in Ghana, nor would she
    be able to set up her own business or sustain it.  The judge went on to
    make adequate findings in relation to the difficulty for the  appellant
    in residing in Ghana due to the likelihood of  sun-induced  rashes  and
    extreme sensitivity to UV light, relevant to the  diagnosis  of  lupus.
    These were factors that the judge  considered  would  amount  to  undue
    harshness and again, there was no challenge  to  those  findings.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant could speak English and Twi and  that
    her family could send her money although  the  judge  noted  that  this
    ability would be "far from infinite" ([64]).   However  the  judge  was
    satisfied that that was not enough to enable the appellant integrate in
    Ghana.

17. It is significant that, contrary to the grounds of appeal which attempt
    to frame the judge's findings as an "Article 8 medical case", the judge
    at [65] confirms that  "the  core  point  I  make  is  that  employment
    prospects are very poor, for health  reasons,  taken  in  a  cumulative
    manner, despite the obvious education and talent on record".

18.  The  judge  reached  reasoned,  evidence-based  findings  which   were
    available to him, that the appellant would face destitution and  severe
    ill-health.  These findings were based on the combined factors  of  her
    health, the lack of family support in Ghana where such as is  available
    in  the  UK  and  the  lack  of  adequate   employment   opportunities,
    exacerbated  by  her  lifelong  health  condition,  together  with  the
    exacerbation of her condition in a tropical climate such as Ghana.

19. Although Mr Melvin criticised the judge  for  making  findings  on  the
    appellant's condition, despite confirming that he  was  not  a  medical
    expert, such a  criticism  is  unfounded.   The  judge  quite  properly
    directed himself and indicated at [67] that he had made findings on the
    basis of independent materials in the appeal  and  that  he  had  taken
    judicial knowledge of commonly known  facts  about  cancer  and  lupus.
    None of the respondent's four grounds of appeal amount to  a  challenge
    to those findings.

20. The findings that the appellant succeeds under 276ADE(1)(vi) must  also
    be seen in the context of the judge's wider findings  under  Article  8
    that  the  appellant  enjoys  family  life  with  her  extended  family
    including her father ([73(v)]) and  that  these  extend  to  more  than
    normal emotional ties in line with Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31,  taking
    into consideration the appellant's medical vulnerability together  with
    her closeness to her family.  The judge clearly had that in mind in his
    findings under the Immigration Rules that it was relevant the appellant
    would not have family support in Ghana (at [53]).  Again,  although  Mr
    Melvin in his wide-ranging submissions attempted to take issue with the
    family life finding this was not in the grounds of appeal before me and
    in any event the judge's finding was more than adequately reasoned.

21. No material error of law is disclosed in ground 3.

Ground 4

22. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge failed to give appropriate weight to
    the fact that the appellant had been fourteen years in  the  UK  as  an
    adult without leave and that the judge had given  inappropriate  weight
    to the fact that she had made a number of  applications  and  that  the
    judge had overstated the positive factors in the appellant's favour  at
    [73].  Mr Melvin submitted that it was bordering on irrational for  the
    judge to reach the findings he  had  in  respect  of  Section  117B  in
    minimising as it did the appellant's  significant  period  of  fourteen
    years without leave  as  an  adult  whilst  focusing,  in  Mr  Melvin's
    submissions, on "near-miss" ten or fourteen year Rule applications.

23. Mr Bellara referred me to the judge's  detailed  consideration  of  the
    evidence at [41] to [69] of the decision and reasons and similarly that
    the judge was very careful  not  to  attach  weight  to  the  near-miss
    argument or to  the  citizenship  issue.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant succeeded under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and then went  on  to
    consider Article 8 outside of the Rules,  carefully  reminding  himself
    that the appeal could not be allowed under the  Immigration  Rules  but
    that the fact that the appellant does meet the Rules is a strong factor
    in her favour in the balancing exercise (Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60).

24. He further submitted  that  consideration  of  Article  8  can  involve
    considering medical evidence without offending  the  principles  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe) and he submitted that this appellant's appeal would never an
    Article 3 case (at [35] the judge noted that the Article  3  claim  had
    been withdrawn).  Mr Bellara submitted that this was not just a medical
    treatment case but also one where the appellant required the support of
    her family  and  the  judge  had  taken  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant's father had stated in evidence that he could not assist  her
    in Ghana and the judge had taken all of this into account.

25. The specific challenge under ground 4 was limited to submission in  the
    written grounds that the judge  had  attempted  to  dilute  the  public
    interest by stating that the little weight provisions do not apply  for
    the period of residence when the appellant was  a  child.   However  Mr
    Melvin did not dispute that a child cannot be blamed for the fact  that
    she was under the  control  of  her  parents  and  that  there  was  no
    deterrent effect in relation to minors as stated  at  [77(ii)]  of  the
    judge's findings.

26. The judge was entitled to take into consideration  that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    and that this is a factor in the appellant's favour  in  the  balancing
    exercise.  The judge also properly directed himself that  in  order  to
    succeed under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules the  appellant
    needed to demonstrate that the consequences of the decision would cause
    very  substantial  difficulties   or   exceptional   circumstances   or
    unjustifiable harshness (Agyarko v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11).   The  judge
    gave more than adequate reasons as to why that threshold was reached in
    terms of the  overall  factors  applicable.   The  judge  set  out  the
    provisions under Section 117B and it was clear  that  he  had  this  in
    mind.  Whilst his reasoning at [77] to [79] might have been  structured
    differently there was no material error in the judge, for  the  reasons
    he gave, finding that the public interest in this case  was  outweighed
    by  the  factors  in  the  appellant's  favour.   The  "little  weight"
    provisions involve consideration of a spectrum.  The judge was entitled
    to find as he did that the  substantial  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    appellant's private life outweighed the public interest.

27. No error of law is disclosed in ground 4.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and shall stand.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  22 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award of the First tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  22 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
