
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06161/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TARIQ ISMAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Imperium
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Thus, the Secretary of State is once more the Respondent and
    Mr Ismail is the Appellant.

 2. This is a challenge by the Respondent to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Loke (the judge), promulgated on  1  November  2018,  in
    which she allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 12 February 2018, which in turn had refused an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom (this constituting
    the refusal of a human rights claim).

 3. The Appellant had originally come to the United Kingdom in  2006  as  a
    student.  Thereafter he applied for, and  was  granted,  extensions  of
    leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  On  14  June  2016  he  made  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain in this country on the basis
    of having accrued ten years' continuous lawful residence.  In  refusing
    the application the Respondent asserted that when  making  his  Tier  1
    application on 20 May 2013  the  Appellant  had  deliberately  provided
    false information about his income, either  to  the  Respondent  or  to
    HMRC.  In light of this, paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    applied, which in turn meant that the Appellant was unable  to  satisfy
    all the requirements of paragraph 276B of the  Rules,  with  particular
    reference to subparagraphs (ii) and (iii).

The judge's decision

 4. At [17] the judge concludes that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    evidential burden in respect of the deception issue.  At [18] and  [19]
    the  judge  goes  on  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  provided   a
    sufficiently  plausible  explanation  by  way  of   rebuttal   to   the
    Respondent's allegations  so  as  to  shift  the  burden  back  to  the
    Respondent.  With reference to the legal burden, the judge then goes on
    to consider the core factual issues in the case.

 5. Following the 2013 application, the Appellant had subsequently  amended
    the relevant tax return on two occasions:  first  in  2014  (the  first
    amendment); and a second in March 2016 (the second amendment).

 6. In respect of the first amendment,  the  judge  makes  reference  to  a
    letter from the Appellant's accountant which  accepted  that  they  had
    made an error. On this basis, and on this basis alone, the judge  finds
    that the Appellant was not dishonest in respect of that first amendment
    to the relevant tax return.

 7. As regards the second amendment, the judge found that it related to tax
    relief for a vehicle.  In [22]-[24] the judge  sets  out  a  number  of
    concerns  about  the  Appellant's  evidence  relating  to  the   second
    amendment.  At [25] the judge states:

         "Thus  I  do  find,  albeit  narrowly,  that  the  Respondent   has
         discharged the legal burden with respect of the  second  amendment,
         to the limited extent that there was a  dishonest  irregularity  in
         the Appellant's tax relief claimed.  Once he realised his  car  was
         being used for personal use there was no reason why his tax  return
         was not amended sooner.  However, I accept that this was  rectified
         in  2016,  probably  in  anticipation  of  this  application  under
         appeal".

 8. At [26] the judge sets out  relevant  passages  from  the  Respondent's
    guidance on the application of paragraph 322(5) of the Rules.  At [27]-
    [29] she has regard to matters which she  regarded  as  mitigating  (my
    word, not hers) the Appellant's misconduct in  respect  of  the  second
    amendment.  I shall return to these in more detail, below.




 9. Paragraph 30 reads as follows:

         "My findings being limited in this way, I am not satisfied that the
         Appellant has engaged in conduct  of  the  kind  envisaged  in  the
         guidance.  The guidance provides examples of the  type  of  conduct
         envisaged, and the list is not exhaustive,  however,  they  give  a
         flavour of the kind of conduct that is  required  before  paragraph
         322(5) will be relevant.  In my view the  conduct  alleged  in  the
         Appellant's case falls well  short  of  that  contemplated  by  the
         guidance".

10. In the next paragraph the judge concludes that all of the  requirements
    of paragraph 276B of the Rules had  in  fact  been  met  and  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. She then goes on to consider Article 8 in  its  wider  context,  noting
    that the satisfaction of the relevant Rule (that being paragraph  276B)
    was a "significant factor" in the assessment of  proportionality.   The
    appeal was duly allowed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

12. There are two grounds of appeal put forward by the Respondent.  In  the
    first, it is said that the  judge  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to
    relevant factors relevant to the  conduct  of  the  Appellant  and  his
    overall character, particularly in view of the fact that the judge  had
    found him to be dishonest in respect  of  the  second  amendment.   The
    second ground asserts that the judge's  reliance  on  the  accountant's
    acceptance of blame was wrong.  It  is  said  that  responsibility  for
    accurate tax returns ultimately lay with the Appellant  and  the  judge
    had failed to take this into account.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 5 December 2018.

The hearing before me

14. Prior to the hearing  Mr  Turner  had  submitted  a  detailed  Rule  24
    response, contained in a skeleton argument.

15. Mr Wilding relied on the grounds of appeal.  He accepted that paragraph
    322(5) of the Rules is discretionary in nature and therefore the  judge
    was  entitled  to  substitute  her  own  discretion  for  that  of  the
    Respondent.  However, in doing so Mr Wilding  submitted  that  she  had
    fallen into error.  She had failed to  recognise  that  dishonesty  was
    dishonesty, as it were, and that this was an important starting  point.
    Mr Wilding emphasised the use of the word "normally" in the preamble to
    paragraph 322(5).  He submitted that the factors stated by the judge in
    [27]-[29] were misconceived and, in  any  event,  she  failed  to  have
    regard to matters weighing on the Respondent's side of the scales.

16. It was submitted that reliance on the guidance was  erroneous  in  part
    because it was guidance only and did not represent the  type  of  "only
    one outcome" as might be  the  case  in  respect  other  guidance,  for
    example that relating to whether British children should be expected to
    leave the United Kingdom. The  judge  had committed an error because in
    [30] she appears to be concluding that conduct such as that  undertaken
    by the Appellant was not capable of falling within the scope of 322(5):
    that was wrong.

17. Turning to ground 2, Mr Wilding submitted that the  single  reason  for
    concluding that the Appellant was not dishonest in respect of the first
    amendment was flawed.  She had ignored the issue of the Appellant's own
    responsibility and had not provided any reasons as to why, if this  had
    been considered, she was accepting that there was no fault on his part.
     Mr Wilding referred me to subparagraph (iv) of the head note of R  (on
    the application of Khan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384  (IAC).  The
    judge had in effect  treated  the  accountant's  letter  as  being  the
    complete answer.

18.  Mr  Turner  relied  on  his  Rule  24  response  and  emphasised   the
    discretionary nature  of  paragraph  322(5).   He  submitted  that  the
    Respondent was attempting to mount what was  in  effect  a  rationality
    challenge to the judge's decision.  He emphasised the  judge's  comment
    that her finding on dishonesty was only made by a  narrow  margin.  The
    judge had taken the relevant factors into account, and these pointed in
    the Appellant's favour.  On the Respondent's side  of  the  scales  the
    finding of dishonesty was the sole factor.  There was no other  adverse
    immigration  history  and  no  dishonesty  in  respect  of  the   first
    amendment.

19. In respect of ground 2. Mr Turner submitted that the decision  in  Khan
    did not say that an accountant's letter would never be  sufficient.   I
    was asked to read [20] in the context of what is said in [18].

20. In reply, Mr Wilding confirmed that  he  was  not  seeking  to  make  a
    perversity challenge in this case.  The fact of dishonesty  was  highly
    relevant to any exercise of discretion within the overall assessment of
    proportionality and  the  judge  had  failed  to  approach  this  issue
    correctly.

My decision on error of law

21. After careful reflection in this case I conclude  that  the  judge  has
    materially erred in law, but in respect of

22. I deal first with ground 1 of the Respondent's  challenge,  as  it  was
    developed by Mr Wilding in oral submissions.  The first thing to say is
    that the judge was  fully  entitled  to  reach  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant had been dishonest in respect of the second  amendment.   The
    reasons set out in [22]-[24] are entirely adequate.

23. This finding of dishonesty was clearly extremely  important.   I  agree
    with Mr Wilding that dishonesty is dishonesty.  Paragraph 322(5) is  of
    course a discretionary ground for refusal and it was open to the  judge
    in principle to revisit that exercise of  discretion  when  considering
    the Appellant's case.  However, in my view the judge  has  fallen  into
    error when carrying out this  task.   I  say  this  for  the  following
    reasons.

24. First, the finding of dishonesty meant that the application  under  the
    Rules would "normally" fall  to  be  refused.   Dishonesty  effectively
    created a presumption against the Appellant.  With  respect,  I  cannot
    see that the judge has had that in mind when going on to consider other
    factors.

25. Second, in respect of [27] it is true that the figure  of  �11,944  was
    that presented both to the HMRC and to the Respondent in the 2013  Tier
    1 application.  Thus, this was not a case in which discrepant levels of
    income had been stated to the two different authorities.  However, this
    appears to ignore the fact that the Appellant  has  been  dishonest  in
    respect of his dealings with the HMRC,  at  least  in  respect  of  the
    second amendment.  Dishonesty towards the HMRC is, in  principle,  just
    as serious a matter as dishonesty  towards  the  Respondent,  something
    made clear in paragraphs 25 and 25 of the decision of the  Outer  House
    Court of Session in Collins and Ishoma [2018] CSOH 127.

26. Third, in respect of [28] it is true that the judge had at  that  point
    found there to be no dishonesty in  respect  of  the  first  amendment.
    Once again, this appears to ignore the finding that the  Appellant  had
    been dishonest towards HMRC as regards the  second  amendment.   It  is
    difficult to see why the absence of dishonesty  to  the  one  authority
    would significantly ameliorate the impact  of  dishonesty  towards  the
    other.

27. Fourth, it was indeed the case that HMRC had not imposed any  penalties
    or instigated criminal proceedings against the Appellant in respect  of
    the second amendment.  As far as I can see, there  is  nothing  in  the
    case law as it stands to suggest that this is entirely irrelevant,  but
    in my view it simply cannot attract very much weight at  all.   Nothing
    before the judge appears to  have  provided  any  relevant  information
    about processes undertaken by HMRC in respect of amendments to  returns
    and when penalties should be imposed or resources put into pursuing  an
    individual further.

28. Fifth, the judge clearly placed  a  good  deal  of  reliance  upon  the
    Respondent's guidance (see [30], with reference back to  [26]).   There
    are, with respect, difficulties  with  the  judge's  approach  to  this
    particular issue. Guidance is clearly just that: it is the Rules  which
    are of  primary  relevance  when  considering  the  overall  Article  8
    considerations.  It is right that guidance can be highly significant to
    the outcome of a statutory appeal, but this is  only  really  where  it
    provides clear indication of only one outcome, that being in favour  of
    an Appellant (the example cited in argument before me was that  of  the
    Appendix FM guidance relating to British children  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom and how that was dealt with by the Upper  Tribunal  in  SF  and
    others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120(IAC). To  that
    extent, I agree with what Mr Wilding has said.

29. The guidance in relation to  paragraph  322(5)  is  very  different  in
    nature.  It is broad and non-exhaustive.   When  considering  the  very
    same guidance, the Court of Session made it very clear that it did  not
    restrict the scope of the provision (see paragraph 26).  The Court also
    made it clear that dishonesty in respect  of  information  provided  to
    HMRC or the Respondent as regards income was capable of falling  within
    the ambit of paragraph 322(5) (see paragraph 25).

30. I have read and re-read [30]  of  the  judge's  decision.   It  remains
    unclear to me whether she was concluding that dishonesty  of  the  type
    practised by the Appellant in this case  was  not  capable  of  falling
    within the scope of paragraph  322(5)  at  all  (and  not  simply  with
    reference to the guidance), or whether she was saying that whilst  such
    conduct could in principle come within its ambit, the particular  facts
    of this case meant that  it  did  not.   Whilst  the  latter  view  may
    (depending on the approach to the other factors being correct) would be
    permissible, the former view would not.

31. Sixth, Mr Turner has submitted that there were other  features  of  the
    Appellant's overall circumstances  which  might  have  counted  in  his
    favour when the discretion was being considered.  He  pointed  out  the
    otherwise unblemished  immigration  history  and  character  references
    contained in the appeal bundle.  However, none of this has  been  cited
    by the judge in support of her purported  exercise  of  discretion.   I
    cannot read such consideration into her decision.

32. Seventh, I agree with Mr Wilding that there has not been a sufficiently
    balanced approach  to  the  consideration  of  relevant  factors  under
    322(5).  The only points raised by the judge in [27]-29] refer  to  the
    "mitigation" of the dishonesty.  There is nothing about the  timing  of
    the amendment (which was only a couple of months before the  indefinite
    leave  to  remain  application  was  made),  the  significance  of  the
    dishonesty itself, or indeed an answer to the question of  whether  the
    dishonesty towards HMRC was potentially of itself enough  to  make  his
    presence in the United Kingdom undesirable.

33. I turn to ground  2.   The  sole  reason  provided  by  the  judge  for
    concluding that the Appellant was not dishonest in respect of the first
    amendment is the accountant's letter (this can be found at  page  5  of
    the Appellant's bundle).

34. With reference to the decision in Khan (which had been  published  many
    months before the hearing before the judge and provides guidance  which
    I regard as being relevant in  statutory  appeals,  notwithstanding  it
    being delivered in the context of judicial review), it  is  problematic
    for a judge simply to rely on the accepted error  on  the  part  of  an
    accountant without more.  I appreciate that  Khan  does  not  expressly
    rule out the sufficiency of such evidence, but paragraph  (iv)  of  the
    head note does make the valid point that whilst professionals  may  act
    for an individual, it is the responsibility of the individual  taxpayer
    to check that figures set out in a tax return are accurate.

35. It is very difficult for me to discern whether  this  particular  issue
    was addressed at the hearing before the judge, but [20] of her decision
    does not engage with the subsidiary question,  namely  the  Appellant's
    responsibility.  I note that this issue was raised by the Respondent in
    the penultimate paragraph of page 4 of the reasons for refusal  letter.
    Although my conclusion on ground 2 is by  a  narrower  margin  than  in
    respect of ground 1, the judge has nonetheless erred by failing to deal
    with a material point.

36. A further point raised by Khan in relation to errors by accountants  is
    the question of whether the claimed mistake is in  fact  plausible.  In
    the present case, the judge has not provided any reasons as to why  she
    found the accountant's explanation to be at least capable of belief.

37. In light of the above I set the judge's decision aside.

Disposal

38. Given my conclusions, this appeal must be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

39. In taking this course of action I am acutely  aware  of  the  potential
    difficulties in preserving findings of fact made by the previous judge.



40. However, in this appeal I am satisfied  that  the  judge's  finding  of
    dishonesty by the  Appellant  in  respect  of  the  second  tax  return
    amendment can and should be preserved. It is not vitiated by any  error
    and its presence in the remitted case  will  not  in  my  view  produce
    artificiality or a 'straight jacket' for the First-tier Tribunal. After
    all, the judge felt able to reach differing findings on  dishonesty  as
    regards the two amendments and there is no particular  reason  why  the
    Tribunal could not ultimately  conclude  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    dishonest  in  respect  of  the  first  amendment  notwithstanding  the
    preserved finding against him on the second.

41. I will issue directions to the First-tier Tribunal, below.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains material errors  of  law  and  I
set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1)     This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;

   2)     The remitted appeal shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Loke;

   3)     Judge Loke's finding that the Appellant was dishonest  in  respect
      of the second tax amendment is preserved;

   4)     An important factual issue to be determined on remittal is whether
      the  Appellant  was  also  dishonest  in  respect  of  the  first  tax
      amendment;

   5)     The discretionary element of paragraph 322(5) of the Rules will be
      a relevant aspect of the overall Article 8 assessment.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 8 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
