
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 April 2018                        |On 23 April 2018                 |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               mrs Jiaojiao Ma
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, counsel, instructed by Woodford Wise
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holms, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zahed,
    promulgated on 10 May 2017.

2.   The issue relates to an application under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The judge,  in  a  disturbingly  brief
    determination, came to the conclusion that the TOEIC  certificate  upon
    which the appellant relied had been obtained fraudulently.   The  judge
    said this at paragraph 7

         "I had an opportunity to see and hear her give  evidence.   I  find
         that although the appellant could get by with her  English  ability
         it is not at the level stated in her TOEIC  certificate  where  she
         has scored full marks for speaking, reading and listening and  only
         scored 10 points less than full marks for writing."

    And at paragraph 8 the judge continues:

         "I find that given she was unable to  answer  the  above  questions
         without the assistance of an  interpreter  the  appellant  did  not
         genuinely obtain the test certificates showing  that  she  obtained
         nearly 100% on all the elements I find that  the  test  certificate
         was obtained fraudulently."

3.   The grounds of appeal were extensive but at their core was  the  simple
    proposition that rather than addressing whether the Secretary of  State
    had demonstrated deception or fraud, the judge purported to  carry  out
    his own forensic assessment of the appellant's capacity to  communicate
    in English on the basis of her evidence to him in  the  course  of  the
    hearing and the fact that she had  the  assistance  of  an  interpreter
    during an earlier 'marriage interview'.

4.   Although there is no Rule 24 response, Ms Holms for  the  Secretary  of
    State fairly concedes there is a  fundamentally  flaw  in  the  judge's
    approach.

5.   It is inevitable that this appeal must be allowed and the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed.

6.   Mr Coleman, who acts for the appellant, argues that  I  should  re-make
    the decision today in the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  there  has
    been  substantial  noncompliance  by  the  Secretary  of   State   with
    directions made prior to the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Secretary of State,  he  argues,  has  had  repeated  opportunities  to
    marshal her evidence to make the case that the  TOEIC  certificate  was
    obtained by deception and has  not  done  so.   He  points  me  to  the
    overriding objective  and  the  Practice  Direction  which  effectively
    advocated a presumption for matters to be disposed of within the  Upper
    Tribunal unless there is good reason to the contrary.

7.   Ms Holms on the other hand argues that so fundamental  are  the  errors
    exhibited in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  justice
    requires that the matter be remitted so that a different judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal can determine the appeal adopting the correct legal
    approach, from which there would be an appeal to the  losing  party  on
    the basis of error of law.

8.   In this case, the balance of justice lies  with  the  arguments  of  Ms
    Holms. The scanty and inadequate decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    wholly flawed. The process must start again with evidence taken  orally
    and careful credibility findings made. That is not the function of  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The only proper  course  is  for  this  matter  to  be
    remitted and that there can be  fresh  determination  made  by  another
    judge other.  Inevitably that will occasion delay and  expense  to  the
    appellant and that is unfortunate, but a remittal is necessary so  that
    a proper decision can be made.

Notice of decision

      1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         is set aside.


      2) The matter is remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross
         for a fresh decision to be made by a judge other than Judge Zahed.


      3) No findings of fact are preserved.


      4) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



