
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06112/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 August 2020 by Skype Hearing            |On 26 August 2020             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr Rajasekar Ganesan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors


                                ERROR OF LAW


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision issued
    on 2 September 2019 of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fitzgibbon  QC  which
    allowed Mr Ganesan's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Ganesan  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that  Mr  Ganesan  is  a  national  of
    India, born on 25 July 1987.  He came to the UK on  23  September  2017
    with leave as a Tier  4  student  and  retained  that  leave  until  30
    November 2019. He did not pass all of his  modules,  however,  and  his
    university did not allow him to re-sit those modules. On 29 August 2019
    he made an application for further leave to remain on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds as he wanted time to either win his appeal to be able to re-sit
    his modules at his original  university  or  complete  his  studies  at
    another institution.   The respondent refused that  application  on  16
    March 2019.

 4. The appellant appealed the refusal of leave and the appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC on 14 August 2019. By the  time
    of that hearing, it is undisputed that the appellant had been  accepted
    for studies at a new university.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal said this on the appellant's  ability  to  meet
    paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  sets   out   the
    respondent's policy as to when an  Article  8  ECHR  private  life  can
    succeed:

         "7.  The appellant has not lived in the UK long  enough  to  comply
             with the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  -  (v).   He
             maintains that he has  established  family  and  private  life
             since his arrival here in September 2017, through friendships,
             his work as a carer, and as a  student.   Returning  to  India
             would be extremely difficult and  would  cause  hardship  (A3,
             paragraphs 12 - 15).  He has given scant details of his social
             life in the UK, and has not particularised  the  hardships  he
             says he would face on return.

         8.   There is insufficient evidence in my  view  to  show  that  he
             would face significant difficulties in integrating  back  into
             Indian society.  I bear in mind that he  came  as  a  student,
             presumptively with the intention of returning home once he had
             completed his studies.

         9.   His claim under paragraph 276ADE is hopeless."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider whether the appellant
    could succeed under Article  8  ECHR  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    requiring an assessment of whether  the  respondent's  decision  was  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's private  life.   The
    judge said this in paragraphs 10 to 18 of the decision:

         "10. The real focus of this  appeal,  however,  is  on  whether  he
             should be permitted to continue his studies, and  whether  the
             consequences of the Secretary of State's decision would  be  a
             disproportionate interference with  his  private  life,  which
             should include the ability to complete a  course  of  studies.
             He has adduced evidence from the head  of  admissions  at  the
             University of South Wales, who wrote on 23 July 2019 to inform
             him that he has secured a place on an MSc course  in  business
             studies for one year, commencing 16 September 2019.   As  this
             is a human rights appeal for the purposes of Section 82(1)  of
             the 2002 Act, I am entitled under Section 85(4)  to  'consider
             any matter which I [I think] relevant to the substance of  the
             decision, including a matter arising after  the  date  of  the
             decision'. I  can,  therefore  and  do  take  account  of  the
             evidence from the university.

         11.  The Secretary of State's stance that he  had  sufficient  time
             between July 2018 and March 2019 to find a  college  place  is
             intelligible.  It would be wrong,  however,  in  my  view,  to
             overlook the fact that he is now in a position to  resume  his
             studies.

         12.  In CDS ... Brazil [2010] UKUT  305  IAC,  Blake  J  held  that
             Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights does  not
             give an Immigration Judge a  freestanding  liberty  to  depart
             from the Immigration Rules, and it is unlikely that  a  person
             will be able to show an Article 8 right by coming into the  UK
             for temporary purposes.  But  a  person  who  is  admitted  to
             follow a course that has not yet ended may build up a  private
             life that deserves respect, and the public interest in removal
             before the end of the course may be reduced  where  there  are
             ample financial resources available.

         13.  The appellant suffered a temporary  setback  in  his  studies,
             which he can now continue.  I  accept  that  he  has  shown  a
             commitment  to  studying  by  first  appealing   against   the
             assessment of his marks and then by securing a  place  at  the
             university.  I accept, following CDS ... Brazil, that in doing
             so he has built up a private life that deserves respect,  even
             though he does not comply with the Immigration Rules.

         14.  Applying the reasoning prescribed by Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27, I am  satisfied  that  he  has  established  a
             private life sufficient to engage Article 8 of the Convention;
             the only issue is whether the consequences of the Secretary of
             State's decision would be proportionate to the legitimate  aim
             of maintaining effective immigration controls, in  the  public
             interest.

         15.  Following the  'balance  sheet'  approach  prescribed  by  the
             Supreme Court in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60,  I  approach  the
             requirements for assessing proportionality in Section 117B  of
             the 2002 Act as follows:

         16.  The factor that indicates the public interest lies against the
             appellant's case is the generic public interest in maintaining
             effective immigration controls.

         17.  In his favour are the following:

                  .    The appellant speaks English.

                    . He has not been a burden on taxpayers, as he has been
                      employed and has contributed to the  economy  through
                      his tuition fees, and he will continue to do so.




                    . He is financially independent.


                    . While the establishment of his private  life  may  be
                      said to  be  precarious,  it  is  inherently  so  for
                      foreign students, and their presence  in  the  UK  is
                      considered to be of benefit to the country.


                    . The termination of his leave will deprive him of  the
                      opportunity to resume and  conclude  his  studies  at
                      masters level.


         18.  Putting these factors in the balance, I am satisfied that  the
             damaging consequences of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
             outweighed the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
             control in this appellant's case."

 7. There was consensus before me that the respondent's grounds encompassed
    a rationality challenge. The second ground also argued that the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not apply correctly  the  ratio  of  Agyarko  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11. In paragraph 47 of Agyarko, the Supreme Court said:

         "47.  The  Rules  therefore  reflect  the  responsible   Minister's
             assessment, at a general level, of the relative weight of  the
             competing factors when striking a fair balance  under  Article
             8.  The courts can review that general assessment in the event
             that  the  decision-making  process  is  challenged  as  being
             incompatible with Convention rights or based on  an  erroneous
             understanding of the law, but they have to bear  in  mind  the
             Secretary of State's constitutional responsibility for  policy
             in this area, and the endorsement of the Rules by  Parliament.
              It is also the function of the courts to consider  individual
             cases which come before them on appeal or by way  of  judicial
             review, and that will require them to consider how the balance
             is struck in individual cases.  In doing so, they have to take
             the Secretary of State's policy into  account  and  to  attach
             considerable weight to it at  a  general  level,  as  well  as
             considering  all  the  factors  which  are  relevant  to   the
             particular case.  This was explained in Hesham Ali at paras 44-
             46, 50 and 53."

 8. As above, the respondent's policy here was reflected in the  provisions
    of paragraph 276ADE. The judge  found  the  appellant's  case  in  that
    regard to be "hopeless". Following Agyarko, he  was  required  to  take
    that failure to meet the  legitimate  expression  of  the  respondent's
    policy on Article 8 ECHR  into  account  and  "to  attach  considerable
    weight to it at a general level". Nothing  shows  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took into account in the assessment  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules that the appellant's case under those Rules was  "hopeless".  The
    absence of any consideration of  the  legitimate  statement  of  policy
    reflected in the Immigration Rules amounts to a  material  error  on  a
    point of law requiring the decision to be set aside to be remade.

 9. Further, the judge states in paragraph 13  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant's private  life  deserves  respect.  That  is  uncontentious.
    However, the judge did not anywhere apply the provision in section 117B
    (v) of the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 for  little  weight  to
    attract  to  that  private  life  in  the  proportionality  assessment,
    however. Nothing in the evidence suggests that there was a  significant
    factor capable of showing that the private life that the appellant  had
    established was deserving of more weight. This is  also  sufficient  to
    make the assessment irrational, unsustainable and require remaking.

10. In addition, in paragraph 48 of Agyarko, the Supreme  Court  identified
    that if the Immigration Rules setting out the  respondent's  policy  on
    Article 8 were not met but:

         "... the refusal of the application would result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences, such that refusal would not  be  proportionate,
         then leave will be granted outside the  Rules  on  the  basis  that
         there are 'exceptional circumstances'".

    For this  case  to  succeed,  there  had  to  be  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences".  The  respondent  is  correct  to  submit  that  it  was
    irrational for the judge to find for the appellant given that his  case
    under the  Immigration  Rules  was  "hopeless"  and  his  private  life
    attracted little weight.

11. Further, the case of CDS (PBS: "available": Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]
    UKUT 00305 (IAC) concerned a student who could not meet  the  Rules  as
    the definition of a sponsor therein changed during her course of study,
    the Rule change being outside her control.  That is a different factual
    scenario to that of this appellant who  failed  to  pass  the  required
    modules for his course, something within his control.

12. Further still, CDS (Brazil) was issued prior to  the  learning  of  the
    Supreme Court on the correct approach to a free-standing Article 8 ECHR
    assessment in Patel and others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 72. The Supreme Court said this at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  Rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such.  The opportunity for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8."

13. In addition, in paragraph 17 of the decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge places positive weight on the appellant's profile as someone  who
    speaks English and is financially independent of the taxpayer,  factors
    arising from s.117B.  The case of Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 58  indicates  at  [57]  that  this  is  an
    incorrect approach. These factors did not add weight to the appellant's
    side of the balance but were neutral.

14. For these reasons, the Article 8 ECHR assessment in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is shown to be in error and must be set aside to be
    remade.

15. The appellant did not put forward further evidence and the appeal could
    therefore be re-made on the basis of the evidence that was  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  after  hearing  the  submissions  of  the   legal
    representatives.

16. The reasons set out above for finding an error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal also show that the appellant cannot  succeed
    in an assessment of his circumstances under Article 8 ECHR outside  the
    Immigration Rules. His case under the Immigration Rules was "hopeless".
    This  has  to  be  given  considerable  weight  in  the   free-standing
    assessment. There must be unjustifiably harsh consequences to  outweigh
    the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the  Immigration   Rules.   The
    appellant's private life is based  upon  his  studies  with  the  usual
    social contacts established during a limited period in the  UK.  It  is
    unexceptional. The evidence does not show that it can attract  anything
    other than "little weight" as provided in s.117B (5). The fact that the
    appellant speaks English and is independent financially and  so  not  a
    burden on taxpayers are neutral factors. The decision does not  deprive
    him of the right to continue tertiary level studies in the UK.  He  can
    reapply. He can return  to  India  and  reapply  or  continue  tertiary
    studies there. Having obtained the offer of a place at a new university
    is not a factor capable of outweighing the public interest side of  the
    balance.

17. It is therefore my conclusion that there  is  little  weighing  on  the
    appellant's side of the balance and nothing showing unjustifiably harsh
    consequences such that the decision could amount to a  disproportionate
    beach of the appellant's private life. The Article 8 ECHR  appeal  must
    therefore be refused.


Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material error on a
    point of law and is set aside to be remade.

19. The Article 8 ECHR appeal is refused.


Signed: S Pitt                               Date: 25 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

