
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06009/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2019                  |On 25 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 Zeeshan [W]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Akhtar, solicitor from SBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing on human rights grounds an appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing the appellant leave to remain.

 2. At its heart this is a case of a person who is alleged  to  be  an  ETS
    cheat and who wishes to remain on the basis of his marriage.  The First-
    tier Tribunal made unsatisfactory findings of fact.  The  evidence  did
    not support the conclusion and I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I then have to decide what to do next.  There is an application by  the
    Secretary of State to adduce the generic evidence which in simple terms
    ought to have been before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Akhtar  opposed
    the application. Clearly Mr Akhtar would prefer it if that evidence was
    not admitted.  It is to his client's disadvantage because  it  prevents
    him taking advantage of a hole in the evidence that  the  Secretary  of
    State had created, but there has to be a rehearing and both  sides  can
    apply to adduce further evidence and I find it is right  to  admit  the
    evidence that ought to have been produced on the first  occasion,  even
    though it will no doubt cause vexation to the  appellant.   It  is  not
    unfair that the case is determined on  the  available  evidence  and  I
    therefore admit that evidence.

 5. I then have to decide what to do  with  it.   The  case  was  heard  at
    Newport but the appellant identifies himself as the husband of a person
    whose case is to be heard at Hatton Cross on related matters on  a  day
    in October. I  direct  the  case  be  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. I invite the First-tier Tribunal to note that the appellant's  wife  is
    named Zehra [Z] and her appeal number is [~] and her case is listed for
    a CMR hearing at Hatton Cross on 10 October 2019.

 7. I direct that these papers be sent to Hatton Cross  and  I  invite  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider linking them at or before that  hearing
    for everyone's convenience, but that is not a matter for direction.

 8. Mr Akhtar asked for costs.  I do not propose to rule on  the  costs  at
    this stage, but I record the fact that the  application  was  made  and
    encourage both parties to give thought to presenting  it  in  the  best
    possible way when the case is heard again in the  First-tier  Tribunal.



    Notice of Decision

 9. To be clear I find the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set  aside
    the decision and direct that the case be heard again in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 October 2019                |


