
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06430/2018
     hu/08954/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2019                              |On 5 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                              mr Mohammed Riyaz
                               mrs Aniqa Riyaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Sharma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Judge Trevaskis (the judge) allowed the appellants' appeals against the
    respondent's refusal dated 28 February 2018  refusing  them  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge found  the  decisions
    by the respondent to refuse the applications  under  paragraphs  322(5)
    and 276B were not in accordance  with  the  Rules.   See  [50]  of  the
    decision.  Further,  that  the  refusal  of  indefinite  leave  to  the
    appellants was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their  private
    lives.

 2. The grounds claim the judge's findings were unclear.  From [45] of  the
    decision the judge mixed his own findings with submissions made by  the
    appellants' representative.  It was unclear where the submissions ended
    and the findings started.  For example, at [46]  the  judge  noted  the
    submission on the SSHD  guidance.   He  then  made  findings  based  on
    whether or not the appellant was a criminal.  That  was  not  the  SSHD
    guidance such that the judge's findings were misconceived.

 3. The judge's findings at [47] sustained the error  above.   Furthermore,
    the judge had particular regard to the penalties imposed by HMRC  which
    was irrelevant.  The actions of HMRC are of no interest in  immigration
    decisions because  they  are  separate  matters  which  should  not  be
    confused.  As a result, the judge reached unsustainable conclusions  on
    the decision under the Immigration Rules.

 4. Further, the judge's findings on Article 8 at [61] were unsafe as  they
    were based on the presumption the  appeals  should  have  been  granted
    under the Rules.  If the above grounds  were  correct  with  regard  to
    paragraphs [45] - [47] the Article 8 findings were also in error.

 5. Judge Keane granted permission on 8 February 2019.  He said inter alia:

         "It was submitted in the grounds that the judge did not  adequately
         separate his enunciation of submissions  made  by  the  appellants'
         representative with his findings of fact.  However,  it  was  plain
         upon a careful reading of the judge's decision that he outlined his
         reasons at paragraph 44 of his decision and his conclusion to which
         those  reasons  pointed  at  paragraph  45.   In   the   succeeding
         paragraphs of his decision he embarked upon  an  assessment  as  to
         whether discretion should be exercised.  Nevertheless, a reading of
         the judge's decision revealed an obvious concern which amounted  to
         an arguable error of law but for which the outcome  of  the  appeal
         might have been different. Having outlined matters at paragraph  44
         which  individually  and  cumulatively  struck  against  the  first
         appellant's claim to have provided  an  innocent  explanation,  the
         judge went on to state at paragraph 45 of his decision,

             'My conclusion is that I am  not  satisfied  to  the  required
             standard that the male applicant has not practised  deliberate
             dishonesty or deception on either HMRC or UKV1.'

         Notwithstanding the use of the double negative it was reasonably to
         be inferred that the judge was  finding  that  the  respondent  had
         established  to  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the   first
         appellant's prima facie innocent explanation fell to  be  rejected.
         But that was so was also arguably supported by the judge  remarking
         in the next sentence, 'the next question is whether that amounts to
         a reason which  should  justify  refusal  of  the  application  for
         indefinite leave.'  At paragraph  48  of  his  decision  the  judge
         considered whether the first appellant's behaviour:

             'Calls  into  question   his   character   and   conduct   and
             associations to the extent that it is undesirable to allow him
             to remain in the United Kingdom.  That is  a  high  threshold,
             and I do not find that  his  behaviour  reached  it.   He  has
             undoubtedly been careless and probably negligent, but  he  has
             not been criminal and he has taken the  appropriate  steps  to
             rectify the discrepancy.'"

         "2. The judge neglected to take into account his finding  that  the
         first appellant had practised deliberate  dishonesty  or  deception
         and it was arguably irrational for the judge not to have  done  so.
         Had the judge done so he might arguably have arrived at a different
         decision whether the respondent correctly exercised the  discretion
         with which he was endowed under  paragraph  322(5)  of  HC  395  as
         amended.  Such a finding might potentially materially have born  on
         the outcome of the judge's assessment of the proportionality of the
         decision under appeal and in time the Article 8  appeal.   Although
         the grounds did not disclose an arguable error of law but for which
         the outcome of the appeal might have been different, a  perusal  of
         the judge's decision revealed an obvious concern which arguably did
         so amount.  The application for permission is granted."

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. The Rule 24 response and skeleton was handed up  at  the  hearing.   Mr
    Sharma submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  and  decision  did  not
    disclose any material legal error.  The decision was legally sound  and
    sustainable  although  the  judge  clearly  misdirected   himself,   in
    particular at [45].

 7. Mr Tufan relied upon the grounds.

Conclusion on Error Law

 8. The judge's language is tortuous but it is clear at [45] that he  finds
    the appellant had  practised  deliberate  dishonesty  or  deception  on
    either HMRC or UKVI.  The judge's reasoning at [47] - [49] was perverse
    given his previous findings.

 9. The respondent was entitled to exercise his discretion under  paragraph
    322(5). The fact that the judge  reached  an  unsustainable  conclusion
    with regard to the Immigration Rules inevitably infected his Article  8
    analysis.

10. The decision reveals a material error  of  law  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety and will be remade in  the  First-tier  following  a  de  novo
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
