
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/06667/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th February 2019                    | On 13th March 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                           Chimax Emmanuel Adindu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Nicholas, Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor promulgated on 13th  November  2018  in  which,
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 29th October  2018,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's human rights appeal.   At
    the appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal today  the  Appellant  has
    been represented by Miss Nicholas of Counsel  and  the  Respondent  has
    been represented by Miss Ishwerwood, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 2. In the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision the Judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant had applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his
    parental relationship with his daughter, IW. The Judge noted how in the
    Secretary of State's original refusal the Secretary of  State  had  not
    accepted that the Appellant met the  suitability  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, as he has failed  to  provide  requested  additional
    information and failed to provide supporting letters from  the  child's
    school, nursery, GP or health visitor or a document with a signature of
    ZW, the child's mother.  The  Judge  noted  that  in  the  refusal  the
    Secretary of State he had also found that the Appellant had  failed  to
    meet the eligibility requirements, as he had failed to demonstrate that
    he either had sole responsibility for the child, lived with  the  child
    or  otherwise  or  had  agreed  direct  access.   The  Respondent   had
    considered paragraph EX.1. but found the paragraph did not apply as the
    Appellant had failed to provide sufficient  evidence  of  a  subsisting
    parental relationship with IW.  The Secretary of State  had  previously
    found that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE were  not  met  as  there
    would not be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration
    to return to Nigeria.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor noted that that  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented at the appeal hearing.

 4. In his findings at paragraph 13 the Judge properly  firstly  considered
    the  application  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    considered the  suitability  requirements  under  paragraph  S-LTR,  in
    particular S-LTR.1.7. which  the  Judge  noted  was  applied  where  an
    Appellant  had  failed  without  reasonable  cause  to  comply  with  a
    requirement to provide information. The Judge stated that the Appellant
    had accepted that he had been asked to  provide  various  documents  as
    stated in the refusal notice, but had  failed  to  produce  them.   The
    documentary evidence sought had been confirmation  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his oldest child by way of a school, nursery,  health
    visitor, GP or local authority letter. The  judge  upon  examining  the
    file found there was a letter from the GP submitted with  a  Notice  of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, that was  not  included  within  the
    Appellant's bundle dated 27th February 2017. That letter merely  stated
    that on one occasion the Appellant had attended the surgery  with  Miss
    ZW and the child. The Judge found that the letter  did  not  state  the
    Appellant attended the  surgery  on  an  ongoing  basis,  or  that  the
    Appellant had an ongoing relationship with the child. The  Judge  found
    that the letter was of limited evidential value in showing a subsisting
    parental relationship.  The  Judge  found  that  at  the  time  of  the
    application and  the  decision  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  any
    documents in support of his claimed parental relationship,  apart  from
    one GP letter, despite being requested to do so.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Taylor found therefore that the application had  been  properly
    refused on the grounds of suitability under the Immigration Rules.

 5.  The  Judge  then  went  on  at  paragraph  14  not  only  to  consider
    suitability requirements, but also the eligibility requirements of  the
    Rules when looking at the Article 8 claim initially through the lens of
    the Immigration Rules.  There the Judge found that  the  Appellant  did
    not  claim  to  fall  into  any  of  the  required   categories,   sole
    responsibility of the child, or living with the child or having  formal
    direct access to the child.  It was said that  the  Appellant  had  not
    claimed that he lived with IW and indeed IW was said to live in  Biggin
    Hill in Kent and the Appellant lived with friends in East London,  some
    22 miles away.  It was said that the child lived with  her  mother  and
    grandmother and the Appellant's evidence stated he occasionally visited
    and took the child to school.  It was said that the Appellant  had  not
    claimed that he had sole responsibility for the child and  he  had  not
    claimed that he had direct access to the child by court  order  or  any
    other means and therefore the Judge found that he was not able to  meet
    the requirements for leave as a parent under paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3. and
    2.4.

 6. Thereafter in paragraph 15 the Judge noted that the Respondent had been
    correctly  refused  under  grounds  of  suitability,   which   were   a
    prerequisite for the consideration of EX.1., but in any event  went  on
    to  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  a  genuine  subsisting
    relationship with his child IW, for the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.,
    thereby doing a "belt and braces" approach, so that all angles  of  the
    Appellant's appeal were properly considered by him.  In that regard the
    judge found at paragraph 15 that  there  was  very  little  documentary
    evidence of the relationship. The Appellant had submitted  the  child's
    birth certificate, on which he was named as the father.  That  was  not
    disputed by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  judge  stated  that  the
    Appellant and Miss ZW had given evidence that the Appellant  had  taken
    the child to school, although the frequency of visits was found  to  be
    unclear from the evidence.  It  was  found  that  the  child  had  only
    started school in  September  2018.  The  Judge  found  that  the  only
    supporting documentary evidence of the Appellant being with  the  child
    prior to going to school, was the one occasion when he attended the  GP
    with the child, as stated in the GP letter dated February 2017.

 7. The Judge found that in their written statements both the Appellant and
    Miss ZW had said that the Appellant took the child to  school  twice  a
    week, but in oral evidence that was amended to once or twice a week and
    not every week.  Miss ZW stated that the Appellant took  the  child  to
    hospital appointments, but not always and there  was  no  evidence  the
    judge found as to why the child needed to go to  hospital  appointments
    and no hospital letter has been provided to state  that  the  Appellant
    was in attendance.  It was conceded that there were no  school  letters
    to show the Appellant picked up the child from school or  took  her  to
    school as stated in oral evidence.

 8. The Judge further found that the credibility of the oral  evidence  was
    also damaged by the distance the Appellant lived from  the  child.  The
    Appellant's oral evidence  was  that  he  went  to  see  IW  by  public
    transport from the Romford area of East London to Biggin Hill in  Kent.
    On public transport this was said to be a journey of  about  two  hours
    and the Appellant, the Judge  found,  claimed  that  he  undertook  the
    journey in time to take the child to school for 8.45 a.m.  which  would
    require him to leave by 6.30 a.m. Additionally  he  did  not  have  the
    funds and would have to borrow the money for the fare.  The judge found
    that the Appellant had accepted that if he did not take  the  child  to
    school she would be taken by the grandmother and that  therefore  there
    was no necessity for him to  leave  home  at  6.30  a.m.  in  order  to
    undertake the journey. The Appellant's credibility was  found  to  have
    been damaged, as he could not remember that the week before the hearing
    was half-term and he did not take the child to school.

 9. The Judge found specifically that on the evidence available he was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant saw the child as often as claimed and  was
    not satisfied that he took the child to school as often as claimed  and
    there has been  no  supporting  evidence  submitted  that  he  had  any
    involvement with the upbringing of the child around  the  time  of  the
    decision, apart from one attendance at the GP.  The judge was therefore
    not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with his child IW.

10. The judge further found that although the Appellant and Miss  ZW  refer
    to each other as partners, that the appeal before him was  not  on  the
    basis of the Appellant having a relationship  with  Miss  ZW  and  that
    there was insufficient evidence  to  establish  that  they  were  in  a
    relationship for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

11. In paragraph 17 the Judge then went on to consider the case of Agyarko,
    R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2017]  UKSC  11  and  whether  or  not  there  were  any   exceptional
    circumstances which would cause substantial difficulties  or  harshness
    for the Appellant outside of the Immigration Rules and found that there
    were any no such circumstances in this case. In paragraph 18 the  Judge
    then went on to consider Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and took into account the relevant public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases in  which  Article  8  is  being
    considered.

    Grounds of Appeal, skeleton argument and submissions

12. The Appellant now seeks to appeal against that decision for the reasons
    set out within the Grounds of Appeal. That  document  is  a  matter  of
    public record and is not therefore repeated in its entirety  here,  but
    in summary it is argued that the  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.  It  is  said  that  the
    Appellant had explained why he did not stay with  his  partner  or  the
    child and that he did not apply for formal direct access to the  child,
    as he had an agreement with his partner ZW for the access to be granted
    without the need to go to court.  It is argued that the Judge concluded
    the Appellant's removal was in the public interest without  considering
    the best interests relating to the  child,  in  particular  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the child to live in another country.  In
    that regard consideration is given as to whether or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect IW to leave the UK within the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    various  cases  dealing  predominantly  with  whether  or  not  it   is
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK and consideration of the
    effect of the decision upon the family and the  reasonableness  of  the
    decision to refuse.

13. It is further argued that the Judge did not consider Article 8  outside
    of the Rules and that Appendix FM and paragraph 276 of  the  Rules  are
    not a complete code and that there are no countervailing strong factors
    to outweigh the best interests  of  the  child  and  that  pursuant  to
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    where a person is not liable to deportation public  interest  does  not
    require a person's removal where:-

      a) a person has a genuine, subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
         qualifying child, (meaning in this case under Section 117D a person
         who has lived who is under the age of 18 and has lived  in  the  UK
         for a continuous period of seven years or more) and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
         Kingdom.

          It is argued that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  IW  to
         leave.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    3rd January 2019. It was said that the Grounds of Appeal waste a lot of
    space setting out various authorities but fail to deal  with  the  most
    recent Supreme Court decision of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 which came
    out in October 2018.  It was stated that the Appellant is a father  and
    that that makes him a parent, but it was said by Judge Parkes that  the
    fact that the Appellant is a father would make him a  parent,  but  the
    Home Office's position now is  it  could  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    British citizen child to leave  the  UK.  Judge  Parkes  found  it  was
    arguable despite the lack of analysis in the Grounds the judge erred in
    the approach to the nature of the relationship and  failed  to  address
    the  issue  of  proportionality  in   the   Appellant's   removal   and
    reasonableness of expecting the child  to  leave  with  him,  i.e.  can
    family life reasonably be enjoyed abroad?

15. In addition I have also seen and fully considered the helpful  skeleton
    argument from Miss Nicholas and taken account  of  both  her  and  Miss
    Isherwood's oral submissions in reply.

16. Within the skeleton argument Miss Nicholas sets out reasons as  to  why
    it is said  that  documents  were  not  available  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and then sets out the statutory code under  Section  117B  and
    whether or not it was reasonable then to expect a child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom when they have been resident in the  UK  for  more  than
    seven years. It is argued that it is clear there is a qualifying child;
    the  Appellant  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the child  and  that  it  is  not
    reasonable for the child to leave the UK.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    issue to be determined is whether  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship.  In that regard  the  skeleton  argument  argues
    that evidence from the school could not be submitted because the child,
    IW, had only started school in September so the evidence  was  not  yet
    available by  the  date  of  the  request.   It  is  said  that  it  is
    unreasonable to expect a GP to be able to give evidence of  an  ongoing
    relationship.  It is further argued that the Judge erred  in  enquiring
    of formal direct access to the child rather than accepting the evidence
    regarding the Appellant's own evidence regarding contact.

17. Miss Nicholas has also sought  to  produce  today  some  further  fresh
    evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, in a supplemental
    bundle dated 15th February 2019.  At this stage of  this  appeal  I  am
    simply considering whether there has been a material error of  law  and
    in considering that I have to consider the evidence as it was as at the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

My findings on error of law and materiality

18. In making his findings in this case Judge S Taylor in a  very  thorough
    determination has  first  quite  properly  considered  the  Appellant's
    application through the lens of the Immigration Rule, both in terms  of
    suitability and the eligibility requirements, and has even gone  on  to
    consider whether or not paragraph EX.1.  would  have  applied,  if  the
    suitability requirements had been met.  The Judge went on  to  consider
    as part of that whether or not the Appellant did  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his child IW. The fact  of  father's  name
    name being on the birth certificate does not itself establish  that  he
    has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  child  for  the
    purposes  either  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  Section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 considered outside the Rules in general.

19. It is argued by Counsel on behalf of the  Appellant  that  he  was  not
    represented at the time of the hearing and that had he been represented
    the Judge may have made a different decision. However,  the  fact  that
    someone is unrepresented does not  in  itself  render  the  proceedings
    unfair. The Appellant did not seek an adjournment in  order  to  obtain
    representation.

20. Clearly the Judge having gone through the evidence before him has  made
    findings, which in my judgment, were open to him, both in terms of  the
    suitability and eligibility requirements. He  has  also  made  findings
    which were open to him in terms of  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and  his  daughter.   The
    judge has considered the case outside of the Rules for the purposes  of
    Article  8  and  has  considered  Section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

21. In respect of the Appellant's main argument that it is  not  reasonable
    to expect the child either to leave the UK, to which  the  predominance
    of the skeleton argument and the Grounds of Appeal go to as well as the
    question raised by Judge Parkes  is  whether  it  would  be  reasonable
    expecting the child to leave with him.  In that regard, under the Rules
    paragraph EX.1. would only apply anyway if the suitability requirements
    were met, which the judge was entitled to find were not  met.  Further,
    for the purposes of Section 117B(6), the subsection reads :

    "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation  the  public
    interest does not require a person's removal where:-

      a) a person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
         qualifying child; and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
         Kingdom."

22. Judge Taylor gave very clear reasons as to why he did  not  accept  the
    evidence that the Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his child.  He found there was a lack of  documentary
    evidence supporting the ongoing parental relationship and that the  one
    document from a GP simply said that  the  Appellant  had  attended  the
    surgery with Miss ZW and the child on one occasion and did not  provide
    evidence of an ongoing relationship. The Judge went on to  consider  at
    paragraph 15 the discrepancies in the evidence regarding  how often the
    Appellant took the child to school, the fact that there was no evidence
    to substantiate the need for him to take the child IW to  hospital  and
    the Judge also considered the Appellant's credibility  was  damaged  by
    the evidence of distance the Appellant lived from the  child  being  22
    miles away, travelling by public transport from  the  Romford  area  of
    East London to Biggin  Hill  in  Kent  and  that  being  a  journey  of
    approximately two hours,  in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  had
    claimed that he would undertake the journey in time to take  the  child
    to school for 8.45 a.m. which would require him to leave by  6.30  a.m.
    In addition, the judge found that he did not have the funds  and  would
    have to borrow money for that, and that if he was not taking the  child
    to school the grandmother would take her and there was no necessity for
    him to leave at 6.30 a.m. and borrow money to undertake the journey. He
    also noted that the Appellant could not  remember  the  fact  that  the
    previous week had been half-term and that he had not taken the child to
    school.  These were findings open to the Judge on the  evidence  before
    him.

23. The Judge had therefore given very clear reasons as  to  why  he  found
    that he was not satisfied the Appellant had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his child. The first limb of the test not being  met,
    the Judge did not have to go on to consider if  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave for the purposes of section 117B(6).

24. In those circumstances I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    made findings which were open to him and has  properly  considered  the
    evidence and properly applied the law in this  case.   The  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and is maintained.

    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    I do not make any anonymity direction in this case.  No such  direction
    was sought before the First-tier Tribunal and  no  such  direction  has
    been sought before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
