
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06484/2015
                                                               HU/06480/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   HASTA BAHADUR GURUNG (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                      SAMMAR GURUNG (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Jesurum of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
     (19-20 Chambers)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is the Secretary of State's appeal  I  will  continue  to
    refer to the original  appellants  as  the  appellants  herein.   Their
    father, the sponsor, is Mr Damber Hasta  Bahadur  born  in  1951.   Mrs
    Gurung is their mother. She was born in 1962.  They have  a  third  son
    (Prithibi), born in 1993, who is present and settled in the UK with his
    parents.  The sponsor and Mrs Gurung are citizens  of  Nepal  and  have
    been present and settled in the UK since April  2011.   The  appellants
    were born on 4 January 1988 and 19 May  1991  respectively.   They  are
    also citizens of Nepal.

2.   On 7 August 2015 the appellants applied for entry clearance  to  settle
    in the UK as the dependent sons of  the  sponsor.   These  applications
    were refused on 27 August 2015.  The appellants  appealed  against  the
    decision on Article 8 grounds and their appeal  was  heard  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 11 January 2017.

3.   The facts as asserted by the appellants were summarised by  the  First-
    tier Judge as follows:

         "3.  The sponsor served in the Brigade of Gurkhas from 24  November
             1969 until his discharge on 24 October 1984.   During  his  15
             years' service he served in many countries including Malaysia;
             Hong Kong; Brunei; Australia; and the  UK.   When  discharged,
             the sponsor was 33 years of age; held the  rank  of  Corporal;
             and was discharged with a certificate of exemplary conduct and
             character.


         4.   The sponsor and Mrs  Gurung  were  married  on  3  July  1984,
             shortly before the sponsor's discharge from the British  Army.
             Had  they  been  permitted  to  do  so,  upon  the   sponsor's
             discharge, they would have chosen to settle in the UK.   Their
             3 sons (the appellants and Prithibi) were all  born  in  Nepal
             after the sponsor's discharge.


         5.   Following his discharge from army service, the sponsor went to
             live in Nepal with his wife.  His  household  income  was  his
             army pension which he supplemented by farming a small piece of
             land which he owned.  Thereafter, the sponsor provided for his
             family by working abroad in Saudi  Arabia  and  Iraq.   Whilst
             working away from home, the sponsor was only able to visit his
             family in Nepal once a year; but Mrs Gurung remained in  Nepal
             caring for the children.


         6.   It is a matter of public record that it  was  not  until  2004
             that Gurkha veterans and  their  families  were  permitted  to
             settle in the UK upon discharge from service.   In  2004  this
             applied only to former Gurkhas who had been discharged  in  or
             after July 1997.  In 2009 the right to settle was extended  to
             all Gurkha veterans with 4 or more years' service.  The  right
             to settle extended to family  members  including  spouses  and
             children under the age of 18.  The right does  not  extend  to
             children over the  age  of  18.   Other  than  in  exceptional
             circumstances, to be permitted to settle with  their  parents,
             such children would be expected to qualify for leave to  enter
             and remain under the relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration
             Rules or under Article 8 ECHR.


         7.   As  promptly  as  he  reasonably  could,  following  the  2009
             changes,  the  sponsor  applied  for   entry   clearance   and
             settlement to the UK for himself; Mrs Gurung and Prithibi.  He
             could not, at that stage, include either of the appellants  in
             his application; they were at that time aged 23 and 19.  On  3
             March 2011, the sponsor's application for entry clearance  and
             settlement was granted; he had to take up settlement within  2
             years or the right would be lost.  He and his  wife,  together
             with Prithibi, arrived in the UK on 4  April  2011;  and  have
             resided here ever since.


         8.   Whilst resident in  the  UK,  the  sponsor;  Mrs  Gurung;  and
             Prithibi have returned to the Nepal at least once  each  year,
             for several weeks at a time, to maintain contact;  and  family
             life  with  the  appellants.   They  have  also   communicated
             regularly from the UK using electronic means.  The  appellants
             continued to live in the family home in Nepal  and,  on  their
             account, remain financially dependent  on  their  parents  who
             transfer money to them on a regular basis  and  also  withdraw
             cash to leave with them when in Nepal.


         9.   The 1st appellant secured employment as a researcher with  the
             Oasis Institute in Nepal from February 2012 to December  2014.
             However, during this period, he remained financially dependent
             upon his  parents  as  his  income  (�155.45  per  month)  was
             insufficient to meet his needs.  Since December 2014,  he  has
             been unemployed; and fully dependent on his parents.  When the
             sponsor came to the UK, the 2nd appellant was still  in  full-
             time education; he has since completed his education; but  has
             never been  able  to  secure  employment  in  Nepal.   He  has
             remained completely financially dependent on his parents since
             they settled in the UK.


         10.  The appellants each speak some English but they are  far  from
             fluent".

4.   The judge summarised the respondent's case noting that it was  conceded
    by Counsel (Mr Jesurum who also appears before me) that neither of  the
    appellants qualified for entry or settlement in the UK under the  Rules
    or policies.  The respondent argued there was no interference with  the
    family life of the appellants and they had been living  separate  lives
    for four years as at the date of  application.   The  family  had  been
    separated by the decision of the sponsor to settle in the UK  in  2011.
    In any event the decision was proportionate.  It was not  accepted  the
    appellants were financially or emotionally dependent but  were  leading
    independent lives and able to support themselves.  The judge noted that
    in 2014 that while employed by the Oasis Institute the first  appellant
    had applied for a business visit visa to enter the  UK  as  part  of  a
    research team and commented:

         "It is  ironic  that,  in  refusing  the  1st  appellant's  current
         application, the respondent relies, in part, on the 1st appellant's
         employment with the Oasis Institute as evidence  of  non-dependence
         on the sponsor; however, the 2014 application was  refused  by  the
         respondent on the basis that  she  did  not  accept  that  the  1st
         appellant was employed by the  Oasis  Institute  and  receiving  an
         income as claimed".

5.   The judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor,  Mrs  Gurung  and
    Prithibi and found their evidence to  be  wholly  consistent  with  the
    facts as summarised in the extract from the determination which I  have
    reproduced above.  The evidence of the sponsor had been subject, as the
    judge puts it, "to a  degree  of  mild  challenge"  by  the  Presenting
    Officer "only to the extent that she  queried  whether  the  appellants
    were truly financially and emotionally dependent upon  their  parents".
    The evidence of the other witnesses  was  not  challenged.   The  judge
    commented that the sponsor was a man of positive  good  character  with
    fifteen years' service in HM Forces  and  a  discharge  with  exemplary
    conduct.  He was satisfied that he was a man of the  highest  integrity
    and that he was a wholly credible, truthful and reliable witness.   The
    judge then turned to consider the law and authorities  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  He set out Section 117B in full at the start  of  paragraph
    18 of his determination.  He then reviewed the relevant authorities and
    stated:

         "From these decisions I distil the following legal principles which
         I have applied in this case: -


         (a)  The denial to Gurkha veterans, discharged before 1997, of  any
             opportunity, prior to 2004, to make application for settlement
             in the UK was a 'historic injustice'.


         (b)  When considering questions of family life, the decision  maker
             should consider the interests of the entire  family;  and  not
             simply the applicant or appellant.


         (c)  It is relevant to consider whether there are obstacles to  the
             continuation/resumption of family life outside the UK.


         (d)  Family life can exist without indispensable support - what may
             constitute  an  extant  family  life  falls  well   short   of
             'dependency'.


         (e)  Voluntary separation does not end family life.


         (f)  The attainment of the age of  majority  does  not  end  family
             life.


         (g)  Critical features in assessing the existence  of  family  life
             are continued presence in the family  home;  and  whether  the
             dependent has established a family of their own.


         (h)  Where a historic injustice is causative of  the  delay  in  an
             application for status that an appellant  would  already  have
             but for that  injustice  the  balance  of  proportionality  is
             arguably reversed.  In other words,  while  the  interests  of
             immigration control would in most  cases  outweigh  Article  8
             rights, in historic injustice cases the reverse is true".

     The judge then reiterated that he had accepted the facts as found.   He
    concluded that the position of Gurkha veterans and their  families  and
    the potential  effects  of  the  "historic  injustice"  did  amount  to
    compelling circumstances and it was appropriate to consider family  and
    private life outside the Rules - he referred to SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387.

6.   The judge concluded his decision as follows:

         "Family Life


         25.   I  must  first  consider  whether,  at  the  time  of   these
             applications in 2015 and now, there is an extant  family  life
             which might potentially suffer interference.   There  are  two
             significant factors which ordinarily may suggest  that  family
             life no longer existed in this case.  Those  two  factors  are
             the length of separation since the sponsor and  his  wife  and
             youngest son came to the UK  in  2011;  and  the  age  of  the
             applicants who by the date of application were 27 years and 24
             years respectively - ages at  which  in  many  cases  children
             would have achieved independence.


         26.  There are however special factors applicable to this  case:  I
             find that these two appellants remained living in  the  family
             home in Nepal after their parents departed for  the  UK;  and,
             but  for  the  existence  of  the  family  home,  they   would
             effectively have been homeless.  I further find that save  for
             the first appellant's  short  period  of  employment  (2012  -
             2014), they have remained wholly  financially  dependent  upon
             their parents.   And  I  accept  the  evidence  of  the  three
             witnesses  who  gave  oral  evidence  before  me,  which   was
             consistent with  the  written  statements  of  the  appellants
             themselves, that there  were  ongoing  strong  emotional  ties
             between these appellants and their parents and sibling.


         27.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied to the requisite standard
             of proof that at the time of the applications  for  entry  and
             settlement and today there is an extant, indeed strong, family
             life within the meaning of Article 8.


         Interference


         28.  It is arguable that the respondent's decision to refuse  entry
             clearance in this case  does  not  of  itself  interfere  with
             family life.  The interference arises by the decision  of  the
             sponsor; Mrs Gurung; and Prithibi; to settle in the UK in 2011
             well knowing that there was no guarantee  of  entry  clearance
             for the appellants.  Similarly, it is open to the sponsor  and
             the other members  of  the  family  to  return  to  Nepal  and
             continue family life there.


         29.  In my judgement, such arguments cannot be sustained: to uphold
             them would be undermine the right which has been conferred  on
             the sponsor to settle in the UK in recognition of his military
             service.  Accordingly, in my judgement, the focus  must  shift
             to  the  respondent's  decision;  which  has  the  effect   of
             separating the family upon the exercise by the sponsor of  his
             right.  Viewed in this way, the respondent's refusal to  allow
             entry and settlement to the appellants is a clear interference
             with their family life; and that of the other members of their
             family.


         30.  It cannot be argued that the respondent's decision is unlawful
             (other than by reference to Article 8  ECHR);  because  it  is
             conceded  that  her  decision  is  in  accordance   with   the
             Immigration Rules and statements of  policy.   Further  it  is
             conceded, and is clearly the case, that the respondent  had  a
             legitimate  aim  in  her  decision,  namely  that  of   proper
             immigration control; which is clearly in the public  interest.




         Proportionality


         31.  It is in assessing the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
             decision in the proper pursuit of her legitimate aim that  the
             question of the 'historic injustice' comes  into  focus.   But
             for that injustice, the sponsor  and  Mrs  Gurung  would  have
             settled in the UK upon the sponsor's discharge from the  Army;
             the appellants would have been born here; by now they would be
             British  citizens.   In  my  judgement,   it   cannot   be   a
             proportionate  response  in  seeking   to   properly   control
             immigration  to  deprive  the  appellants  from   what   would
             undoubtedly have been theirs but  for  the  injustice  visited
             upon their father.


         32.  In any event, my judgement is  that  the  separation  of  this
             family   effected   by   the    respondent's    decision    is
             disproportionate whatever the  circumstances  of  the  sponsor
             having acquired the right to settle here.  This is  clearly  a
             close family; each member  heavily  dependent  on  the  others
             emotionally;  and  all  of  them  dependent  on  the   sponsor
             financially.  Considering the right  to  family  life  of  the
             entire family, in my  judgement,  it  is  disproportionate  to
             enforce their separation".


7.   The judge accordingly allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

8.   The Entry Clearance Officer applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   The
    first ground argued that the Tribunal had not considered in any  detail
    the evidence before it and the three witness  statements  were  it  was
    said identical and it was asserted that there was no  evidence  in  the
    bundle to show that Hasta Gurung was no longer employed.  The  evidence
    had been accepted without question and the conclusions were unsafe.

9.   In relation to Article 8 it was submitted that the judge had  erred  in
    finding that the claimed "strong emotional ties" reached the  threshold
    in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  Both appellants were adults and it was
    for them to show that the emotional ties exceeded "normal"  levels  and
    the point had not been addressed.  No  regard  had  been  paid  to  the
    public interest as expressed in Section 117B of the  2002  Act.   There
    was no assessment of  financial  independence  or  access  to  adequate
    financial  provision  or  ability  to  integrate  by  being   able   to
    communicate in English.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  22
    September 2017.

11.  A response was filed drafted by Counsel on 9  December  2017.   It  was
    submitted there was no error in the factual challenge and no point  had
    been taken on the similarity of the witness statements before the First-
    tier Judge.  It was untrue that there was  no  evidence  to  show  that
    Hasta was no longer employed and Counsel referred to  evidence  in  the
    bundle and the sponsor's witness statement to that effect.

12.  In relation to the second ground the case on emotional  ties  had  been
    largely unchallenged before  the  First-tier  Judge,  the  evidence  of
    travel to Nepal had  been  unchallenged  and  the  judge  had  properly
    directed himself on the law.   There  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's summary of the legal principles which I have set out above.

13.  The ground that the  Kugathas  threshold  was  not  met  had  not  been
    supported by any reasons.  Reference was made to Rai v Entry  Clearance
    Officer Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at paragraph 36 -  the  question  the
    judge needed to pay attention to was the issue of "support".  The judge
    had noted at paragraph 26 of his decision that but  for  the  sponsor's
    support they would be homeless.

14.  Section 117B had been addressed  in  a  skeleton  argument  before  the
    First-tier Judge and no submissions had been  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer on the matter.  The judge moreover referred to Section 117B  at
    paragraph 18 of  his  decision  and  had  concluded  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality in paragraphs 31 and 32 of the decision.  Reference was
    made to the case of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer at paragraphs  55  to
    57.  The decision of the Court of Appeal had been  given  on  28  April
    2017, after the decision of the First-tier Judge the month before.

15.  Ms Fijiwala submitted that 117B had not been addressed by the judge  in
    paragraphs 31 and 32 of his determination.  She referred to Rai v Entry
    Clearance Officer at paragraph 15 and the need to reach a fair  balance
    between the Article 8 right and the public interest  in  maintaining  a
    firm immigration policy.  She acknowledged that the  other  ground  was
    not the strongest following Rai v Entry Clearance Officer.

16.  Counsel referred to Ghising [2013] UKUT  567  (IAC)  at  paragraph  60.
    Where reliance was placed upon the public interest  the  weight  to  be
    given to the historic injustice would normally require  a  decision  in
    the appellant's favour.  This case had been decided before Section 117B
    had come into effect.   Counsel  submitted  that  Section  117B  simply
    codified the position and would not affect the outcome.  There was also
    the question of the chain of causation which had  been  argued  in  the
    skeleton argument before the judge.  The  sponsor  would  have  applied
    when he had been discharged if he could have done.  He was a victim  of
    injustice which was causative of  the  present  circumstances  and  the
    appellants should be put in the position they would have been  but  for
    the injustice.

17.  In reply Ms Fijiwala maintained her point that the issue of the  public
    interest  should  have  been  considered  within  the   proportionality
    exercise which it had not been.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that the decision of the First-tier Judge must  stand  unless  I
    find a material error of law in it.

19.  The  first  ground  relied  upon  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  -
    essentially a factual and reasons challenge - was not developed  by  Ms
    Fijiwala.  The judge plainly gave the material before  him  appropriate
    scrutiny and he heard oral evidence which he  quite  clearly  accepted.
    He records the aspects of the evidence that were, as he puts it, mildly
    challenged.  As Counsel points out there was evidence  to  support  the
    judge's findings in respect of Hasta being no longer in employment.   I
    am  not  satisfied  that  these  points  go  further  than   expressing
    disagreement with the findings of fact. They raise no error of law.

20.  In relation to the ground based on Kugathas again this  point  was  not
    developed by Ms Fijiwala and as Counsel says,  the  case  on  emotional
    ties was largely unchallenged before the First-tier Judge.   The  judge
    had properly directed himself on the law and Counsel refers, as I  have
    said, to Rai v Entry Clearance Officer and the issue of  support.   The
    judge found the family to be a  close  one  with  each  member  heavily
    dependent on the others both emotionally and financially.

21.  The main issue was the question of Section 117B.  I  am  not  satisfied
    that the judge left Section 117B out of account, not least  because  he
    directed his attention to it in paragraph 18 of the decision as I  have
    said, setting out the relevant parts of the Section in full.  The judge
    had also referred to  the  interests  of  immigration  control  in  his
    distillation of legal principles which I have set  out  above  at  sub-
    paragraph (h).  The judge refers to the appellants speaking English but
    being far from fluent in paragraph 10 and the interests of  immigration
    control in paragraph 30 of the decision.  It is clear  that  the  judge
    assessed the issue of proportionality in  the  light  of  the  historic
    injustice.  I am not satisfied that the judge failed to take account of
    Section 117B when he reached his decision.

22.  As submitted in counsel's response to  the  grounds,  the  judge  would
    have  had  in  mind  the  submissions  on  Section  117B  made  on  the
    appellants' behalf as set out in the skeleton argument. There had  been
    no submissions in reply from the Home Office Presenting Officer. Viewed
    as a whole I find that it is apparent the judge did take  Section  117B
    into account but in the alternative it is clear that the  Secretary  of
    State's arguments are met  by  the  points  made  by  counsel  and  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai.

23.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred  in  failing  to  make  express
    reference to Section 117B in the concluding paragraphs of his decision.
     He plainly had the Section in mind.  I do not find that the failure to
    make an express reference raises a material error of law in this  case.
    Accordingly, the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer  fails  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

Anonymity Order

24.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made a fee award of any fee  which  had  been  paid  or
payable which I maintain.


Signed                                  Date 11 January 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

