
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers:  HU/06922/2019

                                                               HU/06928/2019

                                                             & HU/06929/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 May 2021                     |On 28 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                            SHARMARKE WASUGE OMAR

                              DEQO WASUGE OMAR

                           ABDULLAHI MOHAMED MUSE

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellants:    Mr A Hersi of Hersi & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The sibling appellants[1], who are Somali nationals with dates of birth
    given as 17.10.02, 1.11.01, and  5.7.01,  respectively,  have  appealed
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated 17.3.20  (Judge  Lever),  dismissing  on  all
    grounds their  linked  appeals  against  the  decisions  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, dated 13.3.19, to refuse their applications made  on
    10.1.19 for entry  clearance  to  the  UK  to  join  their  mother  and
    stepmother, Faduna Hussein Adanhile (the sponsor), a person with  leave
    to remain as a refuge limited until  8.5.23,  pursuant  to  the  family
    reunion provisions under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 27.8.20.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blundell granted permission on 5.11.20,  considering  it
    arguable that the judge "failed to consider whether there was a  family
    life between the appellants and the sponsor and that he overlooked what
    is said to be extensive evidence of financial support passing from  the
    latter to the  former."  Judge  Blundell  considered  as  arguable  the
    "headline complaint", that the judge's assessment of Article 8 ECHR was
    legally wrong or inadequate. However, Judge Blundell  added,  "On  full
    analysis, it might well be that the Upper Tribunal concludes  that  the
    unchallenged finding that the appellants have lived an independent life
    from the sponsor for some  years  was  dispositive  of  the  Article  8
    concerns raised in the grounds. That is necessarily a  matter  for  the
    hearing, however."

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. As the appellants were each over the age of 18 at  the  date  of  their
    applications, as the judge concluded at [25] to [26]  of  the  impugned
    decision,  it  is  unarguable  but  that  they  could  not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 352D of the Immigration  Rules.  Furthermore,
    it is highly significant to the argument in the grounds that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's finding at [26] that the appellants  each  failed
    to demonstrate that they  were  not  leading  an  independent  life  is
    entirely unchallenged by the grounds. There, the judge rejected as  not
    credible the sponsor's claimed circumstances of losing contact with the
    appellants in 2011. The judge noted discrepancies between the  accounts
    of the sponsor and her son in  the  UK,  Mr  Muse,  and  their  earlier
    statements. For example, when seeking  entry  clearance  in  2013,  the
    sponsor claimed to be the adult dependent relative of her  son  in  the
    UK, Mr Muse, and to have only this one child. In stating  that  he  was
    separated from his stepfather and siblings, Mr Muse's witness statement
    failed entirely to mention the  claim  that  his  stepfather  had  been
    killed in 2005. In reality, for the  cogent  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision the judge found the appellants' claim  to  be  minor  children
    incredible and concluded that they were adults living independent lives
    at the date of their applications for entry clearance.

 5. In the premises, whilst there may be a limited degree of 'family  life'
    between the sponsor and her adult children, the appellants,  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude it was not  family  life  such  as  to  engage
    article 8 ECHR, despite evidence of contact and financial support  over
    a period of around 13 months or so to the date of the  appeal  hearing,
    or even to two years as Mr Hersi submitted.

 6. More importantly, the only right of appeal was on  article  8  grounds.
    However, the judge explained at [28] of the decision, he had separately
    looked  at  all  the  article  8  criteria  but  found  no  exceptional
    circumstances that would indicate that a refusal of entry clearance was
    disproportionate in the proportionality balancing exercise.  I  do  not
    accept the submission that the judge  was  there  applying  a  test  of
    exceptionality but making reference to the requirement that  where  the
    Rules cannot  be  met  it  is  only  where  the  circumstances  are  so
    compelling that, exceptionally, entry clearance should  be  granted  on
    the basis that otherwise the decision would produce unjustifiably harsh
    consequences and,  therefore,  be  disproportionate  to  the  right  to
    respect for family life.

 7. Having carefully considered the submissions made to me in  the  context
    of the available evidence, I am not satisfied that the evidence  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal   was   sufficient   to   demonstrate   that,
    notwithstanding the other and unchallenged findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the judge erred in failing to consider and find  that  family
    life engaging article 8 ECHR existed between the sponsor and any or all
    of the  adult  appellants.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  disbelieved  the
    sponsor and her son in the UK as to the ages of the appellants, whether
    and when they lost contact with each other, and whether  and  when  the
    sponsor's husband passed away. Their evidence was neither credible  nor
    consistent. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge is criticised for  not
    making a specific finding whether the appellants are dependent  on  the
    sponsor, I note that dependency is not a requirement of paragraph 352D,
    though it may be a relevant factor when considering  the  existence  of
    family life.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  finding  that  the
    appellants have led independent lives "for some time separate and  away
    from  the  Sponsor  mother"  is  necessarily  inconsistent  with  being
    dependent on the sponsor as alleged, even if there  is  some  financial
    support. It follows that no error of law is disclosed by this ground.

 8. Neither do I accept the submission in the grounds that on the facts  of
    this case the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have considered  whether
    family life could be lived elsewhere. The findings in this case were to
    the effect that there was no family life sufficient to engage article 8
    or to otherwise render the decision of the respondent  disproportionate
    to the right to respect for such family life as the appellants and  the
    sponsor enjoy.

 9. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal dealt with the  article  8  family  life
    issue in relatively brief terms, the degree to which the Rules are  met
    was highly relevant to any  article  8  proportionality  consideration.
    Article is not  a  shortcut  to  compliance  with  the  Rules  and  the
    appellants are not entitled to entry to the UK regardless of the Rules,
    even if the sponsor provides them significant financial support  and/or
    has maintained contact with them as adults. The only  right  of  appeal
    was on human rights grounds and the appellants first had to demonstrate
    that any family life  with  their  sponsor  was  sufficient  to  engage
    article 8 ECHR. If that is not made out, the proportionality  balancing
    exercise of in the last stage of the Razgar stepped approach  does  not
    come into play and neither does the burden of proof on  the  respondent
    to demonstrate on the balance of probabilities  that  the  decision  is
    proportionate. Effectively, the family life claim  fell  at  the  first
    Razgar hurdle and in those  circumstances  the  appeal  was  doomed  to
    failure  once  the  judge  concluded  that  they   have   been   living
    independently lives as adults away from the sponsor  for  a  period  of
    some years.

10. Although it could have been spelt out in somewhat greater detail, I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  make  an  adequate
    consideration of article 8 family life. However, even if that  amounted
    to an error of law, as the judge granting permission anticipated  I  am
    also satisfied that the unchallenged finding that the  appellants  have
    for some years lived  their  lives  independent  from  the  sponsor  is
    effectively fatal and dispositive of the article 8 family life claim.

11. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

    The linked appeals of the appellants to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  each
    dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  of  each
    appellant remains dismissed on human rights grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    18 May 2021

-----------------------
[1] The sponsor is the biological mother of the first two appellants and
the stepmother of the third.


