
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06414/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|with parties attending by Skype      |                                     |
|On 6th October 2020                  |On 5th November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs. H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ibeneche, Syeds LawCare Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although no anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the
FtT"), it is appropriate for me to make an anonymity direction in order to
protect the interests of the children affected by the case. Unless and
until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, FO is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the  respondent  to  this  appeal  is  FO.
    However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I  adopt
    the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer  to  FO  as  the
    appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The hearing before me on 6th October 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
    appellant and his partner joined the hearing remotely. I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were
    open to the public. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly
    the same way as I would have been if the parties had attended the
    hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in
    open court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no
    party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
    proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
    and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
    in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
    complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
    resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
    that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
    proceedings.


 3. The appeal before me is an appeal from a decision of Judge Sangha ('the
    judge') sitting in the First-tier Tribunal. In his decision promulgated
    on 25th July 2019, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 27th March 2019  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain and refusing to  revoke  a  deportation
    order dated 6th December 2011.


 4. The appellant is a national of Ghana.  He arrived in the United Kingdom
    24th July 2001 with the  benefit  of  a  six  month  visit  visa.   The
    appellant failed to leave the  UK  when  the  visit  visa  expired.  In
    February 2006 he made an application for indefinite leave to remain  as
    a dependent of his partner, FE, a national of Ghana.   The  appellant's
    partner had arrived in the UK in April 2000, also with the benefit of a
    six-month visit visa.  She too, remained in the UK unlawfully when  her
    visit visa expired.  The appellant and his partner  were  by  then  the
    parents of two children born in the UK, AO born on 1st August 2002  and
    SO born on 28th September 2005. The application for indefinite leave to
    remain was refused on 19th   June  2007  and  an  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by the Tribunal in May 2007.


 5. The appellant applied for naturalisation on 26th  November  2007  using
    the name 'Frank Kojo Agyeman'.  That application was  refused  on  18th
    June 2009.  In January 2010, the appellant was arrested  in  connection
    with the application for naturalisation.  On  9th  April  2010  he  was
    convicted at  Wolverhampton  Crown  Court  of  'With  intent  knowingly
    possessing false/ improperly obtained/ another's  ID  document  and  of
    remaining in the United Kingdom beyond the time limit.  On  30th  April
    2010 he was sentenced to a total of 12 months imprisonment.


 6. The appellant and his dependents  were  notified  in  July  2010  of  a
    decision to make deportation orders against them on  the  grounds  that
    the appellant's removal would be conducive to the public good.  Appeals
    against  that  decision  by  the  appellant  and  his  dependents  were
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Andrew and Mr G Sandell for reasons  set
    out in a decision promulgated on  6th  October  2010.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal noted that the appellant and his partner have three  children,
    all of whom have been born in the UK.  The third child, EA was born  on
    7th October 2008.  The Tribunal found that the family enjoys a  private
    and family life in the UK, and noted that the appellant had been in the
    UK for some nine years, and his partner, longer.  At paragraph [64]  of
    its decision, the Tribunal said:


         "Whilst we accept the scales are  finely  balanced  in  this  case,
         because of the age, in particular, of the eldest child, the factors
         that tip them in favour of deportation is the complete disregard of
         both the appellant and Ms [FE] for both the  immigration  laws  and
         the criminal laws of the United Kingdom, in that Ms  [FE]  condoned
         the appellant's criminal activities, and  that  the  whole  of  the
         family would be removed to Ghana, will be find it is reasonable  to
         remove them."


 7. The appellant, his partner and their children were subsequently  served
    with deportation  orders,  but  nevertheless  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The eldest child, AO, became a British Citizen on 27th October
    2015 and SO became a British Citizen on 20th  April  2016.   In  August
    2016, the appellant's partner made an application for further leave  to
    remain in the UK.  The  appellant  was  listed  as  a  dependent.   The
    youngest child, EA became a British Citizen on 6th December 2018.  By a
    decision made on 28th February 2019, the respondent accepted  that  the
    appellant's partner is the primary carer of their three British citizen
    children, and the deportation orders  signed  against  the  appellant's
    partner and children were revoked on the same day.  On 27th March  2019
    the respondent made a decision refusing the appellant's application for
    further leave to remain and refusing to revoke  the  deportation  order
    signed in respect of the appellant.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha


 8. The appellant's immigration history is set out at  paragraphs  [3]  and
    [4] of the decision.  At paragraphs [5] to [15] of his decision,  Judge
    Sangha sets  out  at  some  length  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent as set out in the respondent's decision.  At paragraphs [19]
    to [21], Judge Sangha sets out what he considered to  be  the  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules and  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  Although there is no reference to paragraphs  390
    to 392 of the immigration rules, at paragraph [22] he said:


         "In the case before me, paragraph 399 and 399A are relevant because
         the appellant  before me was convicted of an  offence  or  offences
         for which he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than
         four years but at least 12 months (that is 12 months in total).  In
         this case, therefore, under the  immigration  rules,  in  order  to
         succeed, the appellant has to establish the criteria  specified  in
         paragraph 399(a) and or (b).  In particular, the appellant  has  to
         show that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in  the  UK  and  the
         child is a British citizen and that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
         the child to live in the country to which he would be deported; and
         that it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
         without him. Alternatively, the appellant has to  established  that
         he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  partner  who
         is in the UK and is a British  citizen  and  the  relationship  was
         formed at a time when he was in the UK lawfully and his immigration
         status was not precarious and that it would be unduly harsh for his
         partner to live in the country  to  which  he  is  to  be  deported
         because of compelling circumstances over and above those  described
         in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM and that it would be unduly  harsh
         for his partner to remain in the UK without him."


 9. The findings and conclusions of Judge Sangha are set out at  paragraphs
    [27] to [39] of his decision.   At  paragraphs  [29]  to  [36]  of  his
    decision, Judge Sangha  considered  whether  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules applies, having noted, at [27],  that  the  appellant
    has been convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than four years but at least 12  months.
    It was uncontroversial that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with his three children, all of whom are under the age  of
    18 and all of whom are now British citizens.  For reasons  set  out  at
    paragraphs [29] to [36], Judge Sangha found that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to live in Ghana and it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the children to remain in the UK without the appellant. In reaching
    that decision, Judge Sangha refers to a number of factors including the
    particularly significant and active role played by the appellant in his
    children's welfare, and in particular,  the  support  provided  by  the
    appellant that enables his  son  [SO],  to  further  his   ambition  of
    wanting to play football at the highest level  following  the  contract
    signed with Shrewsbury Town FC Academy.  Judge Sangha  found  that  the
    appellant's deportation from the UK would result in  the  breakdown  of
    the family unit and  would  impact  upon  the  children's  welfare  and
    development.  The  deportation of the appellant  would  also  deny  the
    children the opportunity to develop a secure attachment to their father
    and would have an adverse impact upon the children.  At paragraph [37],
    Judge Sangha concluded:


         "Having considered all the evidence before me in the round, I  come
         to the conclusion that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
         children to live in the country to  which  their  father  is  being
         deported to, or indeed for them to remain in the UK  without  their
         father. I come to this conclusion after  taking  into  account  the
         various factors referred to in  NA (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 662.  I note that  in  this  case,  the  appellant  received  a
         sentence at the bottom end of the scale (12 months).  I  note  that
         he has not offended since being sentenced for the offences in 2010.
         Whilst the appellant entered as a visitor initially and most of his
         presence in the UK has been unlawful, the fact remains that he  has
         now been resident in the UK for  some  18  years.  The  appellant's
         offences did not involve violence, drugs or sexual  matters.  I  am
         satisfied that if the appellant were to be deported from the UK, it
         would lead to further family difficulties given the support that he
         gives his wife and children. In view of the fact that I accept that
         the undue harshness test is met  in  this  case,  consequently  the
         appellant meets the rules. I then go on to consider  s117C  of  the
         2002 Act and I do find in this case that the public interest in the
         deportation of the appellant is at the lower end of the  scale  and
         that Section 2 of Section 117C of the 2002 Act applies and operates
         as the effects upon the  children  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Having
         considered all the evidence in the round, therefore, I come to  the
         conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant and  all
         the children to relocate to Ghana  in  the  circumstances  of  this
         particular case. Equally, I find that it would be unduly harsh  for
         the children to remain in the UK without the appellant if  he  were
         to be deported."


The appeal before me


10. The respondent advances two grounds of appeal.  First,  in  considering
    whether the deportation order made  against  the  appellant  should  be
    revoked, Judge Sangha failed to have any regard to the matters set  out
    in paragraphs 390 to 392 of the immigration rules and  failed  to  have
    any regard  to  the  previous  decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Andrew
    promulgated on 6th October 2010 in which the Tribunal had considered an
    appeal by the appellant against a decision of 14th July 2010 to make  a
    deportation order against the appellant on the grounds that his removal
    would be conducive to the public good.  The  respondent  submits  Judge
    Sangha gave undue weight to the period of time that has  elapsed  since
    the index offence and the lack  of  reoffending  when  considering  the
    public interest in circumstances where the respondent  is  entitled  to
    proceed on the basis that those unlawfully in the  UK,  will  leave  of
    their own accord.  Second, Judge Sangha erred in his self-direction  at
    paragraph [31] of his decision that the statutory duty contained within
    s55  of  the  2009  Act,  overrides  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(a)  of   the
    immigration rules.  The  respondent  submits  that  although  the  best
    interests of  a  child  are  a  primary  consideration,  they  are  not
    determinative.  The respondent submits Judge Sangha has failed to  give
    cogent reasons for his conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the
    children to relocate with their parents to Ghana, or for  the  children
    to remain in the UK without the appellant. The respondent  submits  the
    evidence  does not establish that the appellant's removal from  the  UK
    would be  detrimental  to  the  children  to  the  extent  required  to
    establish that the high threshold is met.


11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  on
    16th November 2019.  He noted:


         "It is arguable that the judge erred by  finding  at  paragraph  31
         that the test of "unduly harsh" in paragraph 399 of the Immigration
         Rules is overridden by the statutory duty to  have  regard  to  the
         best interests of the appellant's children. The unduly  harsh  test
         is found in section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 as well as in the immigration rules and,  arguably,  there
         is no basis in either statute  or  case  law  to  characterise  the
         requirement to  have  regard  to  the  child's  best  interests  as
         overriding the test of undue harshness.  Arguably,  the  judge  has
         failed to appreciate that it will frequently be the case  that  the
         effect of deportation on a child would not  be  unduly  harsh  even
         though it is not in the best interests of the child."


12. At the hearing before me I invited the parties to  address  the  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) and Others v  SSHD  [2020]
    EWCA Civ 1176.


13. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni adopts  the  grounds  of  appeal
    dated 6th August 2019, and submits Judge Sangha misdirected himself  at
    paragraph [31] as a matter of law.  She submits that although the  best
    interest of the children are a  primary  consideration,  they  are  not
    determinative.  They were one factor in considering the wider Article 8
    issues and the 'unduly harsh' test.  She submits Judge Sangha erred  in
    his application of the 'unduly harsh' test.  It is a high threshold  to
    be met and although Judge Sangha may have  been  entitled  to  find  it
    would be unduly harsh for the family to live in Ghana, the Judge  erred
    in finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain  in
    the UK without the appellant.  She submits Judge Sangha considered  the
    appellant's involvement in the children's  lives,  but  does  not  give
    adequate reasons for showing that the high threshold is met.


14. Mrs Aboni submits the recent decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  HA
    (Iraq) and  others,  supports  the  respondent's  case  that  the  best
    interests are a primary consideration, but the threshold  to  establish
    that  it would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the appellant is a high one.  The criterion of undue  harshness
    sets an elevated bar which carries a much stronger emphasis  than  mere
    undesirability.  She referred to paragraph [56]  of  the  judgement  in
    which Lord Justice Underhill said:

         "...the  test  under  section  117C  (5)  does  indeed  require  an
         appellant to  establish  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  a
         threshold "acceptable"  level.  It  is  not  necessarily  wrong  to
         describe that as an "ordinary" level of harshness, and I note  that
         Lord Carnwath did not jib at  UTJ  Southern's  use  of  that  term.
         However, I think the Appellants are right to point out that it  may
         be misleading if used incautiously. There seem  to  me  to  be  two
         (related) risks. First, "ordinary" is capable of  being  understood
         as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in any event rare.
         That is not the correct approach: see para. 52 above. There  is  no
         reason in principle why cases of "undue" harshness  may  not  occur
         quite commonly. Secondly, if tribunals treat the essential question
         as being "is this level of harshness out of the ordinary?" they may
         be tempted to find that Exception 2 does not apply  simply  on  the
         basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some  commonly-encountered
         pattern. That would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a
         parent's deportation will depend on an almost  infinitely  variable
         range of circumstances  and  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  a
         baseline of "ordinariness". Simply by way of example, the degree of
         harshness of the impact may be affected  by  the  child's  age;  by
         whether the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or separated
         father may still have a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         child who lives with the mother); by  the  degree  of  the  child's
         emotional dependence on the parent; by the  financial  consequences
         of his deportation; by the availability of emotional and  financial
         support from a remaining parent and other family  members;  by  the
         practicability of maintaining  a  relationship  with  the  deported
         parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of  the
         child."

15. Mrs Aboni submits Judge Sangha failed  to  make  any  findings  on  the
    relevant issues and fails to explain why it would be unduly  harsh  for
    the children to remain in the UK without the  appellant.   She  submits
    Judge Sangha made reference  to  the  appellant's  involvement  in  the
    children's activities but he does not consider whether  the  activities
    could continue in the absence of the appellant.


16. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Ibeneche submits Judge Sangha had proper
    to all relevant facts and the  respondent  simply  disagrees  with  the
    findings and conclusions reached by Judge Sangha.  Mr Ibeneche  submits
    Judge Sangha carefully considered the circumstances of the children and
    the children would not be able to do what they are doing at the moment,
    if  the  appellant  is  removed  to  Ghana.   The  appellant  plays   a
    fundamental role in their lives.  He submits  Judge  Sangha  found  the
    high threshold is met, and that was a conclusion that was open  to  the
    Judge.


Discussion


17. Although I accept there is no reference to paragraphs 390 to 392 of the
    immigration rules in the decision of Judge Sangha, that in my  judgment
    is immaterial.  Insofar as is relevant, the Immigration Rules state:


         Revocation of deportation order


         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:


             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;


             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


             (iii)  the  interests  of   the   community,   including   the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;


             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
         compassionate circumstances.


         390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.


         391. In the case of a person who has been deported ....


         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of  time  since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


         ...


18. Here, paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules  applied.   The  appellant
    claimed  that  his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   U.K.'s
    obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.   Equally,
    although there is no reference to the previous decision of  Immigration
    Judge Andrew and Mr G Sandell promulgated on 6th October 2010, and  the
    grounds on which the deportation order was made, that again  is  in  my
    judgment,  immaterial.   There   had   plainly   been   a   change   in
    circumstances, not only caused by the significant passage of time,  but
    also by the recognition of the appellant's children as British citizens
    and the respondent's acceptance in the decision made on  28th  February
    2019, that the appellant's partner is the primary carer of their  three
    British citizen children, and the revocation of the deportation  orders
    signed against the appellant's partner and children.


19. I reject the claim that at paragraph  [31],  Judge  Sangha  misdirected
    himself in law.  The paragraph must be read as a whole.  On its own, it
    would be  a  misdirection  to  say  that  "the  stated  statutory  duty
    contained within  Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  overrides  paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(a)",  however  Judge  Sangha  goes  on  to   say,   "because
    relocation to Ghana will not  promote,  or  safeguard,  the  children's
    welfare given their situation in the UK....".  He goes on to note  that
    he has to take into account the best interests  of  the  children,  and
    although I accept that the paragraph could have been better phrased, in
    my judgement, on a careful reading of what is said at  paragraphs  [31]
    to [37] of the decision, it is clear that Judge Sangha  had  regard  to
    the best interests of the children as a primary consideration, but  not
    one that was determinative.  He repeatedly considers  in  his  decision
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  children  to  live  in
    Ghana with their parents, and whether it would be unduly harsh for  the
    children to remain in the UK with their mother,  separated  from  their
    father.


20. The threshold is, I accept, a high one. A Tribunal is required to  make
    an  informed  evaluative  assessment  of  whether  the  effect  of  the
    deportation on the children would be "unduly harsh", in the context  of
    the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals  and
    requires a careful analysis of all relevant  factors  specific  to  the
    children.  The question how a child will  be  affected  by  a  parent's
    deportation can depend on a variable range of  circumstances  including
    their age, the living arrangements and family dynamics, the degree of a
    child's emotional and  practical  dependence  on  the  parent  and  the
    individual characteristics of the child. At paragraphs [31] to [36]  of
    his decision, Judge Sangha identifies the  factors  that  lead  to  his
    conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain  in
    the UK without the appellant.


21. In my judgment, in reaching his decision, Judge Sangha clearly applied
    the correct test.  Where a judge applies the correct test, and that
    results in an arguably generous conclusion, it does not mean that it
    was erroneous in law.  As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412, it is necessary to guard against the
    temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth no more
    than disagreements about the weight to be given to different factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage of
    hearing oral evidence. The assessment of such a claim is always a
    highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT judge was required to consider the
    evidence as a whole and he plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for
    his decision.  The findings and conclusions reached by the judge are
    neither irrational nor unreasonable.  The decision was one that was
    open to the judge on the evidence before him and the findings made.


22. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


 Notice of Decision


23. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sangha promulgated on 25th July 2019 shall stand.


Signed        V. Mandalia               Date     2nd November 2020

       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


