

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: HU/06772/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2019                         |On 8 March 2019               |
|                                        |                              |
|                                        |                              |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between

                               Mr JIA REN CHEN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ostadsaffar, Counsel (instructed by Lisa's Law
                          Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


        1. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Davidge on 1 February 2019 against the decision to  dismiss  the
           Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Mayall in a decision and reasons promulgated on 1 February
           2019.


        2. The Appellant is a national of the Peoples'  Republic  of  China
           ("China").  He entered the United Kingdom illegally during 2009.
            He claimed that he was the partner of Ms Hong Yun Chen and that
           they had two children, respectively born in the  United  Kingdom
           on 6 July 2010 and 22 November 2011.  The  Appellant  had  lived
           with them continuously since  January  2018,  following  earlier
           periods of discontinuity.  The  partner  and  the  children  had
           discretionary leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.    On  12
           July 2017 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  human
           rights grounds, after he had been arrested and  detained  as  an
           illegal entrant.


      3.     Judge  Mayall  found  that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner's
           relationship had been stormy but that the Appellant had  been  a
           regular visitor to the family home and had played a  large  part
           in the lives of the children, who  were  "qualifying  children".
           The judge found that  the  children  had  a  good  knowledge  of
           Mandarin, which was spoken in the home.  They  were  capable  of
           adapting  to  different  education  system  and  of  making  new
           friends.  The requirements of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
           Rules were not met. Similarly, paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
           Immigration Rules was not  satisfied.   The  judge  went  on  to
           consider Article 8 ECHR  family  life  outside  the  Immigration
           Rules, guided  by  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The  judge
           inadvertently cited that decision as  "MA  (Pakistan)"  but  the
           extensive quotation indicates that the decision was in  fact  KO
           (above). The judge found that on a "real  world"  assessment  it
           was reasonable for the  children  to  follow  their  parents  to
           China,  where  their  parents   had   lived   previously.    Any
           difficulties faced by the children in adapting to life in  China
           could be overcome and it was in the  children's  best  interests
           that  they  remained  with  their  parents.    There   were   no
           exceptional circumstances  and  there  was  no  Article  8  ECHR
           disproportionality. Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      4.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not correctly applied MA  (Pakistan)
           [2016] EWCA Civ 705 when considering whether it  was  reasonable
           for the children to leave the United Kingdom. The judge had  not
           explained why the best interests of the children, assessed to be
           to remain in the United Kingdom with both their parents, did not
           outweigh the public interest in removal.  It was  arguable  that
           the judge had penalised the children for their parents' lack  of
           immigration status.  (It should be noted that MA (Pakistan)  has
           been disapproved or at least doubted by the Supreme Court in  KO
           (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.)


      5.    Ms Ostadsaffar for the Appellant relied on the grounds submitted
           and the grant of permission  to  appeal.   In  summary,  counsel
           argued that the judge had paid too much attention to the lack of
           status of the parents and was in effect punishing the  children.
           MA (Pakistan) (above) indicated that there had  to  be  powerful
           reasons for not allowing qualifying children to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom.  The judge had not identified any such  powerful
           reasons.   The  private  life   of   the   children   had   been
           insufficiently considered.  They were  qualifying  children  and
           their best interests  assessment  was  inadequate.   The  appeal
           should be allowed and the decision  remade  in  the  Appellant's
           favour.


      6.    The onwards appeal was opposed by the Secretary of State for the
           Home Department.  It was not necessary to call on Ms Holmes.


      7.    The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's  view  a
           generous one.  The determination was full and careful,  prepared
           by a very experienced judge who applied KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
           53 and cited the key passages from Lord Carnwath's judgment.  As
           the judge noted at [39] of his determination, the judge had been
           given no real details of the  children's  lives  in  the  United
           Kingdom and by necessary implication there was nothing  to  mark
           them out.  He found that they spoke Mandarin and could adapt  to
           education and life  in  China,  findings  open  to  him  on  the
           evidence.  The judge  explained  his  "real  world"  assessment,
           bearing in mind "that the children of this age regularly  follow
           their parents abroad for various  reasons  and  that  this  will
           often entail a change  of  the  schooling  system."   The  judge
           continued "they are at an age  when  friendships  are  regularly
           disrupted for whatever reason and I have no reason to doubt that
           they would not readily adapt  and  make  new  friends."    Those
           conclusions are unimpeachable.


      8.    The judge went on  to  find  that  the  best  interests  of  the
           children were to stay with both their parents, neither  of  whom
           had the right to remain in the United Kingdom permanently.   The
           mother's status was precarious in  law,  the  Appellant  had  no
           status at all.  The judge had to look at the parents' status  at
           the date of the hearing, not on the basis of a  possible  future
           decision by the Respondent.  In no  sense  can  it  be  sensibly
           suggested that the judge was "punishing" the children by sending
           them to China because of their parents. The children are Chinese
           nationals,  brought  up  within  a  Chinese  home  and  Mandarin
           speaking.  Their education would continue in China  and  neither
           child was at a critical stage  in  their  education.  The  tests
           proposed in MA (Pakistan) have been  overtaken  or  modified  by
           that in [18] of KO (Nigeria) (above): "it seems to me inevitably
           relevant in both contexts to consider where the  parents,  apart
           from the relevant provision [paragraph 276ADE1(iv], are expected
           to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the child to  be
           with them."    That is precisely what the judge found  and  that
           finding was open to him, following a thorough evaluation of  the
           facts.


      9.    In the tribunal's judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge reached
           sustainable findings, in the  course  of  a  full  and  balanced
           determination, which securely resolved the issues. The challenge
           to the  judge's  decision  simply  expresses  disagreement.  The
           tribunal finds that there was no error of law  and  the  onwards
           appeal must be dismissed.






      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed                            Dated: 5 March 2019




      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell















































































































































































































































































































