
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06590/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 29th September 2020               |
|28th September 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     RS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  RS.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. FtT Judges Chohan  and  Groom  dismissed  RS'  appeal  against  the
         refusal of his human rights claim for reasons set out in a decision
         promulgated on 11th February 2020. Permission to appeal was granted
         by UTJ Owens on 1st May 2020. Directions for the further conduct of
         the appeal were sent on 8th July 2020  and,  in  the  circumstances
         surrounding COVID 19,  provision  was  made  for  the  question  of
         whether there was an error of law and if so whether the decision of
         the FtT Judges should be set aside, to be determined on the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions; the appellant sought  an
         oral face-to-face hearing "to ensure that there would  not  be  any
         problems with witnesses giving  evidence".  That  of  course  is  a
         relevant consideration if an error of law were  to  be  found,  the
         decision of the FtT set  aside  and  a  direction  made  that  oral
         evidence was required. In submissions in connection with  error  of
         law, the appellant submits that "In view  of  the  fact  the  human
         rights claim in the  case  was  raised  after  the  making  of  the
         deportation order and given the importance of the final outcome  to
         the Appellant, a hearing is  necessary".  This  submission  is  not
         elaborated upon save to state that any additional points raised  by
         the Tribunal can be addressed. The respondent has not  expressed  a
         view on whether the decision on error of law can be  taken  on  the
         papers.

      3. No significant reasons have been put forward why the decision on  a
         straightforward error of law in  a  deportation  appeal  cannot  be
         taken on the papers. Full grounds of appeal were submitted  by  the
         appellant and further detailed written  submissions  were  made  by
         counsel on  the  appellant's  behalf.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
         submissions made on behalf of  the  appellant  and  the  respondent
         together with the papers before me[1] are sufficient to  enable  me
         to be able to take a decision on whether there is an error  of  law
         in the decision of the FtT and if so whether the decision should be
         set aside, on the papers and without hearing oral submissions.

      4. For the sake of completeness I note that various  copy  emails  and
         letters were received by the Tribunal after the promulgation of the
         decision of the FtT. I have not read those letters/emails; they  do
         not form any part of my decision whether there is an error  of  law
         in the decision of the FtT judges, such  decision  being  taken  by
         them on the basis of evidence that was before them on the  date  of
         the hearing.

         Background

      5. On 2 August 2017 RS was convicted following  a  trial  by  jury  of
         possession with intent to supply  crack  cocaine  and  heroin.  The
         judge, in his sentencing remarks concluded that RS  had  a  leading
         role within a small business operation  and  sentenced  him  to  54
         months concurrent for each type of drug.  RS,  a  Jamaican  citizen
         date of birth 18th of December 1974,  had  8  previous  convictions
         none of which had resulted in a sentence of imprisonment in the UK,
         but he had received  a  sentence  of  18  months'  imprisonment  in
         Jamaica for supplying cocaine in 2002.

      6. RS arrived in the UK on 27th January 2008 with  a  two-year  spouse
         Visa to join his wife VS after having initially made an application
         for entry clearance in December 2005.  He  was  granted  indefinite
         leave to remain as a spouse on the 24th of February 2010. Following
         his conviction in August 2017  he  was  served  with  a  notice  of
         decision to deport letter dated the 16th of December  2017.  On  31
         January 2018 he gave reasons, through solicitors, why he should not
         be deported and made  representations  on  Article  8/human  rights
         grounds. A deportation order was signed on 22 March  2019  and  his
         human rights claim was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  letter
         dated the 25th of March 2019.

      7. RS married VS in  2005.  VS  has  five  children  from  an  earlier
         relationship who are all over aged 18. RS is the biological  father
         of two children with SS who  has  another  child  from  an  earlier
         relationship. RS also has  four  other  children  in  the  UK  with
         different mothers, all of whom save one were born in the  UK  after
         his marriage to VS. All the children are British citizens, five are
         aged under 18.

      8. The FtT judges concluded that the relationship between RS  and  his
         spouse was not genuine and subsisting, that  he  does  not  have  a
         genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  any  of  his
         children, with whom he does not live. The children do not rely upon
         him for their day-to-day welfare or  their  financial  support  and
         such arrangements as the children have with him  are  "informal  to
         the point of being transient, the details provided were vague." The
         judges concluded that RS was  neither  a  credible  nor  consistent
         witness and that although claiming to be scared for his life he had
         not made a protection  claim  and  had,  since  being  in  the  UK,
         returned to Jamaica.

      9. The judges concluded that having made a finding that  he  does  not
         have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife it follows
         that it could not be considered unduly harsh for her to  remain  in
         the UK if he were to be deported.

     10. The judges concluded  that  there  would  not  be  any  significant
         obstacles to his integration into Jamaica, that he does not have  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with any of his children or his
         wife and the interference in the right to respect for  his  private
         and family life was not disproportionate in the circumstances.  The
         appeal was dismissed.

         Error of law

     11. The application for permission to appeal was out of  time  by  four
         days, Time was extended and permission granted on the basis that it
         was arguable that the FtT Judges misdirected themselves in  law  on
         the issue of whether there was a "genuine and  subsisting  parental
         relationship" between  the  appellant  and  at  least  two  of  his
         children." Permission was also granted on the  basis  that  it  was
         arguable that the panel had failed to take into account the risk of
         reoffending which was a  relevant  factor  in  the  proportionality
         exercise. Other grounds were pleaded, and permission was granted on
         all grounds.

         Ground 1

     12. RS  submits  that  the  findings  by  the  first-tier  tribunal  in
         connection with the two children he had with SS were not  supported
         by evidence and was against the welfare and best interests  of  the
         children. The appellant submits that on the basis of  the  evidence
         that was before the first-tier judges, including the assessment  by
         the expert there was a close relationship  and  the  social  worker
         identified the likely impact on them if they lost contact with  RS,
         the judges' findings were unlawful. It  was  submitted  that  these
         matters had not been taken into account by the panel.

     13. The first tier Tribunal judges set out the evidence that was before
         them in relation to these two children. The judges  considered  and
         referred to the social work report and  referred  to  the  lack  of
         specific detail of the visits and contact that  the  appellant  has
         with the two children of SS. The judges refer to SS  providing  for
         the children's physical needs but that she would like the  children
         to grow up having a relationship with RS but that it was her mother
         who helped her with childcare and the  appellant  assisted  if  she
         needed him to. The judges  concluded  that  there  were  no  formal
         arrangements in place, that the bulk of the childcare  rested  with
         SS and her  mother  and  that  from  her  evidence  the  appellant,
         although having a biological relationship, was a mere  presence  in
         the children's lives.

     14. The appellant submitted  that  all  of  the  mothers  had  provided
         witness statements with evidence and that  the  judge  should  have
         found that it was in the best interests of the children for him  to
         remain in contact with them.

     15. The findings by the judge that he  does  not  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with any of  his  children  was  a
         finding that was clearly and plainly  and  obviously  open  to  the
         panel on the  evidence  before  them,  including  the  social  work
         evidence which the judges refer to in great detail. The submissions
         made in the grounds seeking permission to appeal and the submission
         made subsequent to directions are nothing more than a  disagreement
         with the findings made by the panel. There is no error  of  law  in
         the finding that there is no subsisting parental relationship  with
         any of the children and that it cannot  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         children to remain in the UK even  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
         deported given that the children have lived and  continue  to  live
         with their respective mothers, that it is in their  best  interests
         for the children to remain with their respective  mothers  and  the
         contact the appellant has with any of them is informal,  vague  and
         non-specific.

         Ground 2

     16. The appellant submitted that the panel had erred in three  respects
         with regard to the relationship between him and his  wife.  Firstly
         that the panel had erred in law in misconstruing the evidence  when
         he had lived apart from his wife at a different address because  of
         bail and probation issues; that the discrepancy in the evidence  of
         the appellant and his wife was insufficient to warrant  an  adverse
         finding in connection with their claimed relationship; and that the
         tribunal should not have held against him that he did  not  mention
         his wife as one of the reasons why he should  not  be  returned  to
         Jamaica when he had done so in his witness statement.

     17. The judges took into consideration in reaching their  findings  the
         whole of the appellant's  evidence  which  included  a  significant
         discrepancy in  terms  of  what  his  wife  knew  about  his  other
         children. The panel was entitled to weigh all the evidence  in  the
         context of the documentary  and  oral  evidence  before  them.  The
         ground relied upon does not identify an error of law and is  simply
         a  disagreement  with  the  conclusions  reached.  The  panel  were
         entitled to reach the findings they did on the  evidence  that  was
         before then.

         Ground 3

     18. The appellant submits that the judges failed to consider  the  risk
         of reoffending and that he had reformed himself in  real  terms  so
         that he was not a danger to the public.

     19. Although  the  panel  did  not  make  a  specific  finding  on  the
         likelihood of the appellant reoffending, such a lack of finding  is
         not material given that the  appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  2
         concurrent sentences of 54 months  of  possession  with  intent  to
         supply class A drugs ( and it seems was still  on  licence  at  the
         time of the hearing and there was  no  OASys  report  or  Probation
         report) . The public interest requires  removal  unless  there  are
         very compelling circumstances over and above those of  Exception  1
         and Exception 2. There  are  sustainable  and  adequately  reasoned
         findings that the appellant does not meet  either  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2; the issue before the tribunal was whether  there  were
         very compelling circumstances. They were  not.  The  issue  of  re-
         offending was not a matter that could impact upon  this  appellant.
         There is no error of law by the judges in failing to  consider  the
         risk of reoffending such as would merit the setting  aside  of  the
         decision of the first-tier tribunal.

         Ground 4

     20. The appellant submits that the judges lost focus  on  the  children
         and partner and that  there  was  no  requirement  to  balance  the
         severity of the parent's offence or show very  compelling  reasons.
         This ground is misconceived. The appellant has  been  convicted  of
         two offences  with  a  sentence  of  54  months  for  each  to  run
         concurrently. The issue before the judge  was  whether  there  were
         very compelling reasons.

         Ground 5

     21. The appellant submits that the use of the judges sentencing remarks
         as a basis for finding that he  was  not  a  credible  witness  was
         neither proper nor fair. The judges were entitled to take  note  of
         the sentencing judge's remarks in reaching their conclusion on  the
         appellants credibility. In reaching that conclusion the first  tier
         Tribunal judges considered the evidence that he had given  to  them
         and having reached a conclusion also confirmed that  the  jury  who
         convicted him did not believe him. The sentencing  judge  described
         the appellant's defence as "utterly ludicrous".  The  judge  stated
         that he had "repeatedly  lied  to  the  jury  and  it  was  quickly
         rejected by them." The tribunal reached a similar conclusion on the
         basis of the evidence before them and did not as submitted  in  the
         grounds appeal rely solely or primarily upon the judge's sentencing
         remarks.

         Conclusion

     22. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted are  of  no
         legal merit. They are nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the
         conclusions reached by the judges in finding that the  decision  to
         reject the appellant's human rights  plan  was  proportionate.  The
         appeal is dismissed.




    Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the appeal is dismissed. The  decision
    of the FtT stands.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 28th September 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a) the respondent's bundle; sentencing remarks and PNC record; (b) the
bundle filed on behalf of the appellant, witness statements of the mother
of two of his children (SS), witness statement of NO (friend), report by
Charles Musendo (social worker) and skeleton argument; (c) the decision of
FtT judges Cohan and Groom; (d) the application for permission to appeal;
and (e) the grant of permission to appeal.

