
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2019                      |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                             KHADIJA MOHAMUD ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Beg promulgated on 22 January 2019 in which the Appellant's appeal  was
    dismissed on human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 12 December 1951.  On  27
    November 2017 she made an application for entry clearance as an  'adult
    dependent relative'. The application was  'sponsored'  by  her  son  Mr
    Hassan [H] (d.o.b given as 1 January 1990),  a  British  citizen  ('the
    sponsor'). The sponsor is one of three siblings - the Appellant's adult
    children - present in the UK, all of  whom  gave  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


3.   In the application it was  indicated  that  the  Appellant  was  living
    illegally in Ethiopia; she had been at her current address for a  year:
    (see questions 16 and 23 on the visa application form).


4.   The application for entry clearance was refused  on  31  January  2018.
    The reasons for refusal are quoted at paragraph 1 of  the  Decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


6.   Subsequent to the lodging of the appeal the Respondent's  decision  was
    subjected to review by an entry  clearance  manager  ('ECM').  The  ECM
    upheld the decision for reasons that are quoted at paragraph 3  of  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


7.   The matter proceeded to hearing. The appeal was dismissed  for  reasons
    set out in the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated on
    22 January 2019.


8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buchanan  on  16  April
    2019. (Judge Buchanan also 'extended time' in circumstances  where  the
    application mission to appeal was made late.)


9.   Although the Appellant's appeal  is  a  human  rights  appeal,  relying
    before the First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds, it is pertinent
    to note that the application was brought and considered  in  the  first
    instance with reference to the Immigration Rules in relation  to  adult
    dependent relatives in Appendix FM of the Rules. In this context it  is
    apparent that the Respondent was not satisfied that the  Appellant  met
    the requirements of the Rules - "I am not satisfied that it as a result
    of age, illness or disability you require long-term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks. I am also not satisfied that  you  are  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of your sponsor,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in Ethiopia, because it is not available and
    there is no  person  who  can  reasonably  provide  it  or  it  is  not
    affordable". This was echoed in the ECM review  which  in  part  stated
    "... the appellant has either been unable  to  or  has  chosen  not  to
    submit supporting documents to address the issue raised by the ECO that
    there does not appear to be a lack of availability of live-in carers in
    Ethiopia to ensure the appellant receives appropriate personal care".


10.  Before the First-tier Tribunal, although it is  clear  that  the  Judge
    was cognisant of the scope of the  appeal  and  the  available  grounds
    (e.g. see paragraph 16), a significant amount of the evidence - and  in
    turn the Judge's analysis - related to the  medical  circumstances  and
    care needs of the Appellant. I note - non-exhaustively - the following:

         (i) The sponsor related that the Appellant was being "looked  after
         by a neighbour called Hamida" (paragraph 4), but that Hamida was to
         move to America; the sponsor's view was that the only options  were
         to bring the Appellant to the UK or "to find someone in Ethiopia to
         take care of her" (paragraph 4). It was claimed  that  no  suitable
         person had been found.

         (ii) When the Appellant attended hospital she did so in the company
         of Hamida or some other person to whom payments would  be  made  by
         the sponsor and his siblings (paragraph 5). Financial  support  was
         sent to the Appellant from the UK by the sponsor and his  siblings,
         who also paid the rent on her property - she occupied a room  in  a
         house, with Hamida occupying another room (paragraph 6).

         (iii) A medical report  from  about  November  2017  described  the
         Appellant complaining of headache, neck pain,  weakness,  shortness
         of breath, forgetfulness and dizziness, and related  that  she  had
         poly-urea and polydipsia, with a history of hypertension, diabetes,
         dementia and dyslipidaemia (paragraph 21). Reference is  also  made
         to 'iscgomic' heart disease (paragraph 22) [sic. -  ischemic?].  In
         respect of functional limitation it was  said  that  the  Appellant
         forgets to take medication, was unable  to  cook,  dress,  or  feed
         herself, and was unable  to  sit  on  a  toilet  and  take  a  bath
         (paragraph 22). A further report from  November  2018  referred  to
         nightmares, intrusive thoughts, and flashbacks with a diagnosis  of
         psychological distress and physiological reactivity (paragraph 23).
         The latter report also refers  to  severe  headaches,  difficulties
         moving,  cooking,  washing  clothes,  and   remembering   to   take
         medication.


11.  Further to this the Judge made findings in respect of  the  Appellant's
    underlying medical conditions and symptoms (paragraphs  25-32),  before
    concluding in these terms at paragraph 33:

         "In  considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole  on  a   balance   of
         probabilities, whilst I find that the appellant  has  a  number  of
         medical conditions, I do not find that on a  day-to-day  basis  the
         appellant requires long-term personal care as a result  of  illness
         or disability. Even if I accept that  she  does  require  long-term
         personal care as a result of illness or disability, that  care  can
         be provided to her in Ethiopia by  her  children  from  the  United
         Kingdom who already financially support. They can  employ  a  daily
         carer for her which is effectively  what  they  are  doing  now  by
         paying the rent on Hamida's flat; she in  return  looks  after  the
         appellant."


12.  For completeness I note that the Judge had regard to  the  evidence  in
    relation to care homes in Ethiopia (paragraph 34).


13.  Further to this analysis  and  the  findings,  the  Judge  went  on  to
    consider family life in the context of Article 8,  and  in  due  course
    proportionality (paragraphs 35-39). This was in the context of it being
    the Appellant's case that she had become separated from her children in
    the 1990s during the Somali civil war when she was abducted,  subjected
    to physical and sexual assault, and essentially enslaved. It  was  said
    that it was not until 2016 that contact between the Appellant  and  her
    children was re-established - the children in the meantime having lived
    with their uncle in Somalia  until  2006,  then  fleeing  to  Ethiopia,
    before entering the UK in 2009 under the family reunion scheme to  join
    their uncle.


14.  The Judge accepted that family life existed between the  Appellant  and
    her adult children (paragraph 36). This finding appears to be rooted in
    the financial support provided by the children to their mother, bearing
    in mind that there had been a significant  period  of  separation,  and
    notwithstanding such a circumstance there had  been  no  visit  to  the
    Appellant by any of the sponsor and his siblings since contact had been
    re-established in 2016,  despite  the  Appellant  having  relocated  to
    Ethiopia in May or June 2017: (see paragraphs 36-38). In  this  context
    the Judge noted that contact between the Appellant and her children was
    exercised primarily through telephone calls (paragraph 37).  The  Judge
    found that such family life as had been established  since  2016  could
    continue (paragraph 37).


15.  Notwithstanding the favourable finding in respect of family  life,  the
    Judge ruled against the Appellant on the issue of proportionality:

         "I find that even if the appellant  has  a  precarious  immigration
         status in Ethiopia as a Somali national,  nonetheless  she  has  an
         established private life which can continue. She has a  home  which
         is paid for by her children from the United Kingdom. They also  pay
         her medical expenses and her living costs.  Although  she  uses  an
         outside toilet, she has a kitchen and is able  to  move  around  by
         taxi if she needs to. I take into account the  private  and  family
         life rights of the appellant's children in accordance  with  Beoku-
         Betts [2008] UKHL 39. In conclusion I find that any interference in
         the Article 8 rights of the appellant  and  her  children  will  be
         proportionate.  I  do  not  find  that  the  interference  in   the
         appellants Article 8 rights  will  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences."


16.  The grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal  are
    pleaded under two headings: "Ground 1: Failure  to  take  into  account
    material evidence/consideration of immaterial evidence", and "Ground 2:
    Failure to provide reasons/adequate reasons". Ground 1  is  focused  on
    the factors considered in the context of the proportionality evaluation
    under Article 8; Ground 2 pleads that the  Judge  did  not  make  clear
    "exactly which medical conditions [the Appellant] was  found  to  have,
    and why they did not constitute illness  or  disability  that  requires
    long-term personal care".


17.  There are three elements to Ground 1. I consider them in turn.


18.  At paragraph 6 of the Grounds it is pleaded  that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider "the full extent of all the circumstances" of "the involuntary
    nature of the family rupture", which is characterised in  the  pleading
    as "extreme on any reading". Although the decision granting  permission
    to appeal did not limit the scope of  the  grant,  I  note  that  Judge
    Buchanan was critical of this paragraph, noting that it did not specify
    what constituted 'the full extent of all the  circumstances'  or  which
    circumstances were not taken into account,  and  observed  "No  alleged
    error of law is identified". In my judgement  it  is  adequately  clear
    that the Judge  was  cognisant  of  the  circumstances  of  the  family
    separation: reference is made  to  the  testimony  of  the  Appellant's
    children in this regard - see paragraphs 7 and 8); the Judge also noted
    the  medical  evidence  referring  to  symptoms  resulting  from  "ill-
    treatment when she was abducted in Somalia" (paragraph 23). I can  find
    no  basis  for  concluding  that  the  Judge  'lost  sight'   of   this
    circumstance in  considering  the  extent  to  which  the  Respondent's
    decision interfered with the family life that had more recently been re-
    established between the Appellant and her children.


19.  This is particularly manifest at paragraph 38, where  the  Judge  notes
    the submission  contained  in  the  Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument  at
    paragraph 16 in respect of "the circumstances which led to  the  family
    rupture". The Judge - in a manner which in my judgement was open to him
    - notes that notwithstanding this historical  circumstance  the  nature
    and quality of present family life was such that none of  the  children
    had made even a short visit to see their mother,  and  found  this  was
    essentially a matter  of  choice.  In  my  judgement  it  was  entirely
    appropriate for the Judge to have regard  to  the  quality  of  present
    family life as a factor more significant than the reason underlying the
    historical disruption. Be that as it may,  it  is  not  sustainable  to
    argue that the Judge did not have regard to the full extent of all  the
    circumstances of the involuntary nature of the family rupture.


20.  Judge Buchanan was also seemingly unpersuaded that paragraph 7  of  the
    Grounds identified an error of law. In my own judgement, it seems to me
    clear that Judge Beg did take into account the Appellant's  "precarious
    immigration status in Ethiopia" (paragraph 39). Further in this context
    I note that there was no material before the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    spoke as to  the  likelihood  of  the  Appellant  facing  any  sort  of
    enforcement action in respect of her immigration status in Ethiopia.


21.  Paragraph 8 of the Grounds pleads that  the  Judge  took  into  account
    irrelevant factors. It is specifically pleaded that the  Judge  was  in
    error at paragraph 27 of  the  Decision  in  stating  "There  are  many
    Somalis in Ethiopia. I find that given  the  levels  of  poverty,  many
    would be agreeable to  living  in  paid  accommodation  in  return  for
    providing care for the appellant". It is pleaded that this was  "highly
    relevant to the subsequent finding that the  sponsors  could  employ  a
    daily carer to look after" the Appellant.


22.  I am not persuaded by this ground. Ultimately, in so far as she  relied
    upon it, it was incumbent upon the Appellant to  demonstrate  that  her
    care needs could not be met in  Ethiopia.  Beyond  the  assertion  that
    Hamida was to leave for America, there was no supporting evidence as to
    the non-availability of care in Ethiopia. The Appellant's  case  rested
    in this regard essentially upon assertions from  the  sponsor  and  his
    siblings to the extent that they  had  not  been  able  to  identify  a
    suitable carer. Such assertions were appropriately  considered  through
    the prism of the fact that not one of them had travelled  to  Ethiopia.
    It was open to the Judge to conclude "I do not find  it  credible  that
    the sponsor and his siblings have made extensive  enquiries  about  the
    possibility of finding a person of  Somali  origin  to  live  with  the
    appellant in her flat" (paragraph 27). The Judge's observations  as  to
    the potential attractiveness of  such  a  proposition  to  a  displaced
    Somali was one of reasonable inference. Even if  I  were  to  accept  -
    which I do  not  -  that  the  Judge  should  not  have  made  such  an
    observation, it would not alter the essential fact that the evidence of
    non-availability of care was unsatisfactory.


23.  In my judgement  the  second  ground  of  challenge  cannot  avail  the
    Appellant. Even if there were substance to it, it seems to me  that  it
    is essentially unchallengeable that the Appellant failed to demonstrate
    that any care needs could not be met in Ethiopia - see paragraph 33.


24.  I acknowledge that there  is  an  unsatisfactory  tension  between  the
    Judge's listing of the care needs indicated in the medical reports, and
    the Judge's observation at paragraph 33 "I do not find that on a day-to-
    day basis the appellant requires long-term personal care as a result of
    illness or disability". However, this is materially  countered  by  the
    Judge's alternative finding that even if there are care needs they  can
    be met by employing a replacement for Hamida. Even taking  the  medical
    reports at their highest, I do not accept that any different conclusion
    would have been reached on the issue of proportionality.



Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


26.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 18 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
