
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06006/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 October 2020                 |On 5 November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 QING XIONG

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received.

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS


         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien on  30
         March 2020 against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chana promulgated on 27  September  2019  following  a  hearing  at
         Harmondsworth on 4 September 2019.

      2. The appellant is a national of China born on 1  January  1985.  She
         appeals against the decision of the respondent on 20 March 2019  to
         refuse her application for leave to remain on  long  residence  and
         private life grounds.

      3. The appeal was heard and dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chana who found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
         paragraph 276B(a) of the Immigration Rules  because  she  had  been
         absent for more than the required period during the ten  years  she
         had been here and that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
         which warranted  a  grant  of  discretionary  leave  on  article  8
         grounds.

      4. The appellant sought permission to appeal. She argued  that  :  (i)
         the judge erred in her consideration of article 8 outside the rules
         in that she considered that the appellant's  failure  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration  Rules  was  determinative  of  her
         ability to come within article 8; (ii) the judge failed to  conduct
         a proper and  comprehensive  balancing  exercise  when  considering
         article 8; and (iii) the judge failed to consider material evidence
         over why the appellant had returned to China  and  failed  to  give
         reasons why she rejected the appellant's explanations.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread,  this  did  not  happen  and  instead  directions  were
         included in the grant of permission sent to the parties on 4 August
         2020.  They were asked to present  any  objections  to  the  matter
         being dealt with on the papers and to make any further  submissions
         on the error of law issue within certain time limits.

      6. The Tribunal has not received any submissions from either party  in
         compliance with the directions. I am satisfied that the  directions
         were properly served both on the  appellant's  representatives  and
         the  respondent  by  email  and  I  now  consider  whether  it   is
         appropriate to determine the matter on the papers.

      7. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      8. I have had careful regard to all  the  evidence  before  me  before
         deciding how to proceed. I take the view that a full account of the
         facts are set out in those  papers,  that  the  arguments  for  and
         against the appellant have been clearly set out and that the issues
         to be decided are uncomplicated. I have regard to the importance of
         the  matter  to  the  appellant  and   consider   that   a   speedy
         determination of this  matter  is  in  her  best  interests.  I  am
         satisfied that both parties have had the opportunity to respond  to
         the directions issued but have not done so. I consider  that  I  am
         able to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the  papers  and
         now proceed to do so.

         Findings and reasons

      9. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission and the grant of permission.

     10. As argued in ground 1, the judge appears to have concluded  against
         the appellant on article 8 outside the rules because she could  not
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276B. Indeed, she approached the
         appeal as one brought under the Immigration Rules and under article
         8 (at 1, 11 and 28 and in the  decision  where  she  dismisses  the
         appeal under the Immigration Rules). Ironically, although  focusing
         on the Immigration Rules as  a  primary  consideration,  the  judge
         fails entirely to give any consideration to paragraph 276ADE as she
         was required to do.

     11. Whilst an inability to meet  the  provisions  of  the  rules  is  a
         relevant factor when considering article 8, it is  not  necessarily
         determinative and the only balancing  exercise  undertaken  by  the
         judge is contained in a single brief paragraph (at  42)  refers  to
         nothing else. There is no assessment  of  the  lengthy  period  the
         appellant  has  resided  in  the  UK,  the  private  life  she  has
         established during  periods  of  lawful  leave,  her  studies,  her
         employment, her reasons for having to travel to China and  for  her
         prolonged stays there or the ties she has built up here including a
         purchase of property. Whilst s.117 is referred to in paragraph  41,
         there is no consideration of any of the factors set out  in  s.117B
         such as the appellant's ability to speak  English  or  to  maintain
         herself without recourse to public funds.  As  observed  by  First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  when   granting   permission,   the
         consideration  of  article  8  is  so  brief  as  to  be   arguably
         insufficient.

     12. Conversely, the judge focused unduly  on  matters  which  were  not
         directly  relevant  to  the  claim,  such  as  the  source  of  the
         appellant's funds to purchase  a  property  (at  31-33).  She  also
         incorrectly found no evidence to support certain matters  when  the
         evidence had been available (at 21 and pp.60-65 of the  appellant's
         bundle). In rejecting the appellant's reasons for  visiting  China,
         she gave no reasons for disbelieving the evidence (at 30).

     13. It follows that the judge's determination is wholly  inadequate  in
         its reasoning and is rendered unsustainable by the  errors  of  law
         identified above.

         Decision

     14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of
         law and it is set aside in its entirety. No findings are preserved.
         The appeal shall be remitted for a fresh hearing to  another  judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal and directions shall be issued  by  that
         Tribunal in due course.

         Anonymity

     15. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage and  I
         see no reason to make one.




         Signed:


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 28 October 2020


