

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/06562/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2017                           |On 13th October 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PRANAYA RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. D Balroop, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "ECO")
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Obhi) who, in a determination promulgated on  the  24th  January
    2017 allowed the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the ECO to
    refuse to grant entry clearance to  settle  in  the  UK  as  the  adult
    dependant relative of his father who is an ex-Gurkha soldier.

 2. Whilst the Appellant  in  these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, for the sake of convenience I intend to refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

The background:

 3.  The Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as  the
    adult dependant relative of his father, an ex-Gurkha soldier.

 4. The Respondent considered his application under the Home Office  policy
    outlined in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section 2A 13.2 as  amended  on  5
    January 2015 as well as under Paragraph EC-DR 1.1 of Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules. The Respondent noted that the Appellant's father and
    mother were issued with entry  clearance  on  the  16th  May  2011  and
    settled in the  UK  on  27  May  2012,  under  the  2009  discretionary
    arrangements.

 5.  The Respondent took account of the fact that in  his  application  for
    settlement he stated that  he  was  unemployed  and  supported  by  his
    sponsor but had not demonstrated how he was emotionally and financially
    dependent on his sponsor. Whilst he  had  presented  only  two  Western
    union receipts dated 30/20/14 and 12/12/2014 respectively, there was no
    proof to suggest that the sponsor was sending regular financial support
    since leaving for the UK on the 27th May 2012. In the light of that, he
    was not satisfied that he was emotionally dependent on his  sponsor  as
    required under Annex K, Paragraph 9(5) of IDI  Chapter  15  Section  2A
    13.2.

 6. Furthermore applying Paragraph 9(8) of Annex K and that  the  applicant
    must not normally have lived apart from the  Gurkha  sponsor  for  more
    than two years on the date of the application or at  any  time,  unless
    the family unit was maintained albeit the applicant lived away as  part
    of their full time education (boarding school, college  or  university)
    but resided in the family home during holidays. If these conditions are
    not met the application must be refused under the policy. Applying that
    to the Appellant, a copy of his passport  showed  that  they  had  been
    living apart from the sponsor for more than two years. Thus  he  failed
    to show that he satisfied paragraph 9(8) and  19  of  Annex  K  of  the
    revised policy.

 7. The Respondent also considered and refused the  application  under  EC-
    DR1.1 of Appendix FM and under Article 8 of the ECHR. It was noted that
    if the Appellant could show that his father would have settled  in  the
    UK he had been able to before the historic  wrong  prevented  him  from
    doing so, at a time when the Appellant was still under the  age  of  18
    and that will be a strong factor in favour of allowing the application.
    The ECM did not think that this applied to  the  Appellant  because  he
    noted that his parents did  not  leave  to  go  to  the  UK  until  the
    Appellant was already an adult, and they knew that he would not, as  an
    adult ordinarily be eligible to accompany them; that he had grown up in
    Nepal; his parents could return to live in  they  chose;  that  he  had
    lived in Nepal three years of his own and  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    sibling and other family  members  in  the  pool.  He  noted  that  the
    Appellant's  parents  had  chosen  to  move  to  the  UK  without  him.
    Consequently he was not satisfied that the historic wrong had  affected
    his life to such an extent that he'd  been  prevented  from  leading  a
    normal life.

 8. The Appellant exercised  his  right  to  appeal  that  decision  having
    submitted written grounds in support which expressly made reference  to
    the Appellant circumstances which were relevant to the  application  of
    the revised policy. The appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Obhi) on the 11 January 2017. He heard the oral evidence of  the
    Appellant's parents and considered the  documents  provided  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 24 January  2017  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds. He found that the Appellant had been able to meet
    the  requirements  of  Appendix   K   and   there   were   "exceptional
    circumstances" in this appeal and thus  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal  that  decision
    on two grounds; firstly, that the judge failed to consider the issue of
    dependency in accordance with the decision in  Kugathas,  and  secondly
    that the judge failed to consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 31 July 2017.

11. Thus the matter came before the Upper Tribunal. Mr  Kotas  appeared  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "ECO") and Mr Balroop of Counsel, who appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal represented the Appellant. I heard submissions  from  each  of
    the parties which I will go on to consider when reaching a decision  on
    whether the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. There are two grounds advanced by Mr Kotas on behalf of the Respondent.
    The first ground, as set out in the written grounds, is that the  judge
    failed to properly apply the test in Kugathas v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    31. In particular, it is  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    dependency going beyond normal emotional ties and at [24] the judge had
    taken an expectation  of  future  emotional  support  as  meaning  that
    Article 8 rights were  engaged.  In  his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that the judge made no findings as to whether there  was  any
    "emotional dependency" and thus the analysis of the judge was flawed.

13. Mr Balroop on behalf of the Appellant  submitted  that  judge  lawfully
    considered the issue of whether family life was engaged under Article 8
    (1) of the ECHR and made adequate findings of  fact  on  the  evidence,
    which were in the main unchallenged,  concerning  financial  dependency
    between the parties and also emotional dependence based on the  ongoing
    communications between the family members via viper and  family  visits
    that had taken place.

14. I  have  considered  the  submissions  in  the  light  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the factual circumstances of the Appellant and his family
    members. There does not seem to be any dispute about the  main  factual
    circumstances. The Appellant was born in 1989 and that he was  aged  26
    when the policy to admit the  adult  children  of  former  Gurkhas  was
    introduced on 5 January 2015. His  father  was  an  ex-Gurkha  who  had
    served with the British Army Brigade  of  Gurkhas  in  the  role  of  a
    warrant officer for 16 years  and  124  days  with  exemplary  military
    conduct. He was awarded with a long service and good conduct medal. The
    Appellant's parents moved to United Kingdom to live  on  27  May  2012.
    These facts were uncontroversial and unchallenged.

15. As to the circumstances prior to  his  parents  moving  to  the  United
    Kingdom, it was the Appellant's claim that he had lived  with  them  as
    part of the family unit and that he was and  is  both  financially  and
    emotionally dependent upon them. The  judge  recorded  the  Appellant's
    claim that paragraph 11 - 13 and the  oral  evidence  very  briefly  at
    paragraph 16 - 18. It does not appear from the determination  that  the
    Appellant's father was subject to any significant cross-examination and
    paragraph 18 demonstrates the Appellant's mother was not cross-examined
    upon her evidence. The Appellant had stated that after his parents  had
    left he found it difficult to live alone, was lonely and felt unable to
    function effectively and found it difficult to adapt to the  day-to-day
    life that he now had. His parents had visited him from  20  April  2015
    and 21  May  2015  after  they  had  left  Nepal.  In  terms  of  their
    circumstances, they have not been dependent on public  funds  and  have
    worked full-time but could not get holiday from work to enable them  to
    visit sooner. The Appellant said that he would be the  support  of  his
    parents in their old age as they neared retirement ages.

16. As to his circumstances, he said that he had dropped out  of  full-time
    education due to personal problems but that he was now engaged  further
    in studies; that he was in contact with his parents on  a  daily  basis
    that they had sent him money to support him financially.

17. At paragraph 13 the judge summarised the typed  grounds  of  appeal  in
    which it was argued that but for the  historic  injustice  the  sponsor
    would have settled in the UK following his discharge from  the  Gurkhas
    in April 1988 and there is every likelihood that  the  Appellant  would
    have been born in the UK and would have acquired the right to live here
    some time ago. In relation to the two-year separation from the  sponsor
    and his wife, it is stated that if the Appellant had had the ability to
    do so he would have applied to come to the UK with his parents in  2012
    but that he was unable to do so until  the  policy  change  in  January
    2015,  making  it  the  first  opportunity  when  he  could  make  that
    application.

18. At paragraph 14 to 15 the judge summarised the decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to which I have made reference to  in  the  preceding
    paragraphs.

19. The judge set out his findings of fact and analysis of  the  appeal  at
    paragraph 21 - 30 of the determination. The judge  probably  identified
    at [21] that this was a human rights appeal and that was  the  decision
    was made under the policy guidance contained in Appendix K of the  Home
    Office policy IDI chapter 15 2A 13.2 the decision had  to  be  seen  in
    this context. Furthermore  at  paragraph  21  onwards  he  applied  the
    relevant law for the Article 8 assessment beginning with the five stage
    approach set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

20. The law has been stated in a number of cases and most recently  in  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ
    320 which was decided after the decision of Judge Obhi.

21. In the case of Rai (as cited) the Court of Appeal  set  out  the  legal
    principles relevant to determining whether there is family life engaged
    in appeal such as this from paragraph 17 onwards. It observed  that  in
    the case of Kugathas v SSHD[2003] EWCA civ 31, Sedley  LJ  referred  to
    dependency as "real" "committed" or "effective" support  and  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had accepted in the case of Ghising (family life - adult
    - Gurkha policy) that the judgement in Kugathas "had  been  interpreted
    too restrictively in the past "and that it ought  to  be  read  in  the
    light of the  subsequent  decisions  of  the  domestic  and  Strasbourg
    courts" ( see paragraph [18]).

22. At paragraph 19, the court cited Lord Dyson M.R  who  would  emphasised
    when giving the judgement of the court in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),
    "the question whether an individual enjoys family life is one  of  fact
    and depends on a careful consideration of all the relevant facts of the
    particular case." In some instances "an adult child (particularly if he
    does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish  that  he
    has a family life with his parents."

23. At paragraph 20 the court also cited the observations  of  Sir  Stanley
    Burnton in Singh v SSHD[2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [24]:

    "24. I do not think that the judgement which I have referred  leads  to
    any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article  8  cases
    involving adult children. In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of
    immigration control, there is no legal or factual presumption as to the
    existence or absence of family life the purposes of Article 8. I  point
    out that the approach of the European Commission of Human Rights  cited
    approvingly  in  Kugathas  did   not   include   any   requirement   of
    exceptionality. It all depends on the facts.  The  love  and  affection
    between an adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself justify
    a finding of family life. There has to be something more. A young adult
    living with his parents or siblings will normally have a family life to
    be respected under article 8. A child enjoying a family life  with  his
    parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight as he
    turns 18 years of  age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult  living
    independently of his parents may  well  not  have  a  family  life  the
    purposes of Article 8."

24. Lord Justice Lindblom made reference  to  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Rai and observed that the single factor which seem to  have
    weighed most heavily in the conclusion of the judge in  that  case  was
    the Appellant's parents willingness to leave Nepal to settle in the  UK
    when they did without focusing on the practical and financial realities
    entailed in that decision. At [39] the real issue under Article  8  (1)
    was whether, as a matter of fact, the Appellant had  demonstrated  that
    he had a family life with his parents, which had existed at the time of
    their departure to settle in United Kingdom and had endured beyond  it,
    notwithstanding their having left Nepal when they did ( see [39]).  The
    court made reference to the circumstances  of  the  Appellant  and  his
    family and the fact that he and his parents would have applied  at  the
    same time for leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  would  have  come
    together as a family unit had they been able to afford to  do  so.  The
    court considered that this was a factor that had not  been  taken  into
    account when it should have been. Thus the question  of  whether,  even
    though the Appellant's parents had chosen to leave Nepal to  settle  in
    United Kingdom  when  they  did,  his  family  life  with  his  parents
    subsisted then, and was still subsisting  at  the  time  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision; this was "the critical question  under  Article  8
    (1)."

25. The judge did not make any explicit reference to the case law which set
    out the relevant principles relating to family life between parents and
    adult children although at [25] he did make reference to  the  line  of
    cases dealing with cases of adult children of Gurkhas. Consequently  in
    the absence of a clear self-direction, the question  is  whether  those
    principles were properly applied to  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  as
    reflected in the findings of fact. This is the first ground advanced by
    the Respondent.

26. As the decision in  Rai makes plain, the critical question  is  whether
    as a matter of fact, the Appellant demonstrated that he had family life
    with his parents which had existed at the time of  their  departure  to
    settle in the UK and that it endured beyond  it  (see  paragraphs  [39]
    [42] of Rai). This is of particular significance because the ECO in the
    decision letter made reference to the Appellant's parents  choosing  to
    apply the settlement and their decision  to  move  to  the  UK  in  his
    assessment.

27. The judge's assessment of the facts which in  the  main  appear  to  be
    unchallenged, was that the family had lived as a family unit until  the
    time that his parents had left Nepal (see [23)). The judge set out  the
    evidence in this respect at [22] where he recorded that  the  Appellant
    had never been separated from his parents up until the time his parents
    had left. They had lived as a unit up until that time. The judge  noted
    that when the Appellant's father had been discharged from  the  Gurkhas
    in 1988 he returned to Nepal but did  not  find  work  easily  and  was
    forced  to  find  other  occupations  which  had  resulted  in  further
    separations from the family. During his time as a  Gurkha  he  had  had
    very little home leave and thus was living away  from  his  family  for
    long periods at a time. He had been unable to come to the UK and settle
    here and therefore it was not a matter that he had  considered  at  the
    time. It was only when the policy changed that he decided to settle  in
    the UK. He could not bring his son with him at  that  time  because  he
    could not afford to do so financially.

28.  The judge made a finding that [23] that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been living as part of the family unit with  his  parents
    until the time when they decided to  come  to  the  UK.  He  took  into
    account the argument advanced by the ECO that the parents had  "chosen"
    to come to the UK but that the decision to do so  was  "a  natural  and
    understandable" decision on the part of the sponsor. The judge accepted
    his claim that "had he been able to do so he  would  have  brought  the
    Appellant with him. They were living as part of a household, he is  the
    only son, and he tells me, and I accept that culturally is the only son
    he would be expected to continue to live with them, and in time support
    them in their old age."

29. The judge also found that the Appellant was  financially  dependent  on
    the sponsor and gave reasons for this at [22]. The judge made reference
    to the financial circumstances of the sponsor at the time he left Nepal
    which was that he only had income from his pension which was paid  into
    a particular account with a bank. On  leaving  Nepal  the  account  was
    under the control of his daughter, who was older, and that she withdrew
    that money using it for the benefit of the Appellant. The  judge  found
    that as he had been unemployed during this time, he was satisfied  that
    he had access to the funds as there was no other source of  income  for
    him. He considered the documentary evidence  and  the  bank  statements
    which demonstrated the money was being withdrawn at  a  time  when  the
    sponsor was not in the country and that his daughter had  authority  to
    withdraw the money for the benefit of the Appellant. He  further  found
    that the financial  remittances  as  evidenced  by  the  receipts  (and
    referred to in the decision letter) had been provided  in  addition  to
    the monies from the sponsor's account. Thus the judge found that he was
    and remained financially dependent on his parents.

30. At paragraph [28] he made a further  finding  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent upon his father as he was in full-time education that it  was
    paid for by his father and that this was in contrast to  the  sponsor's
    daughter, who was living independently.

31. The evidence and findings made as to emotional support are set  out  at
    [24] and [28]. Contrary to  the  Respondent's  grounds,  I  accept  the
    submission made by Mr Balroop that at paragraph [24] the judge was  not
    making reference to future emotional support but that he  was  in  fact
    referring to the nature of the emotional support that the Appellant had
    with his father whilst in Nepal which would be likely to endure if they
    resumed living together. The judge had made reference to  the  cultural
    expectation upon which their family life had been premised in Nepal  as
    the Appellant was the only son of the sponsor and would be expected  to
    live with his parents. However the judge was also considering  this  in
    the context of the circumstances in which the  Appellant's  father  had
    left the Appellant in  Nepal  (see  [23]).   The  continuing  emotional
    support and dependency between the Appellant and his  father  was  also
    expressed in the evidence in the witness statement and the continuation
    of the daily communications through viper evidenced in  the  papers  at
    pages 127 - 137 and the witness statement at paragraph 11( see  finding
    at[28]).

32. I am satisfied that the judge properly  focussed  on  the  question  of
    family life and his approach to that question was  entirely  consistent
    with that set out in Gurung, where the Court of Appeal said at [45]:  "
    Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys  family  life  is
    one of fact and depends on a careful consideration of all the  relevant
    facts of the particular case" and at  [46]  endorsed  the  guidance  in
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160.  The
    judge asked himself the relevant question, namely whether there existed
    emotional and other ties over and above the normal ties  between  adult
    family members and set out in his findings of facts his  assessment  of
    the evidence which was rationally open to him. Consequently  the  judge
    did apply the relevant principles and it was open to the judge  on  the
    evidence that was before him and the light of  the  factual  assessment
    that he made  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  family  life  had  been
    established between the Appellant and his parents (see [24]). The first
    ground therefore is not made out.

33. Dealing with the second ground advanced on behalf the Respondent, it is
    submitted that the judge failed to properly  apply  the  provisions  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. It was conceded in the ECO's grounds that
    the Appellant could rely on the historic injustice  argument  but  that
    this was only one of several factors. His oral  submissions,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that contrary to the judges assessment, the  Appellant  could
    not meet the policy requirements (paragraph 9 (8) of  annex  K  of  the
    revised policy) therefore, he submitted the proportionality analysis is
    flawed and that the public interest considerations in this appeal  were
    strong because he was unemployed and could not speak English.

34. By way of reply, it was submitted by Mr  Balroop  that  the  judge  had
    found that the Appellant could meet the rules (see [29]) and that there
    were "exceptional circumstances" in this particular  Appellant's  case.
    In the context of paragraph 9(8) he submitted the judge considered this
    issue at [26 - 28]  and  that  whilst  it  had  been  stated  that  the
    Appellant and the sponsor should not have lived  separately  from  more
    than two years, that this was not an absolute bar and  that  each  case
    should be determined on its facts and the judge had made reference to a
    letter from the Home Office at page 144 of the bundle.

35. He further submitted that in the light of  the  findings  made  by  the
    judge, which had resolved all the issues under the policy in favour  of
    the Appellant, including that he satisfied paragraph 9 (5) relating  to
    emotional and financial dependency and  paragraph  9(5),  this  was  an
    answer to the public interest considerations.  He  submitted  that  the
    policy was the Respondent's view of where the public interest  lay  and
    if met it would be wrong to go on and consider the section  117  public
    interest considerations. In the alternative  he  submitted  as  in  the
    decision of Rai, that in light of the historic injustice argument  this
    was of such significant weight that the balance was in  favour  of  the
    Appellant. As to his English language ability, he submitted that he had
    passed the IELTS and had undertaken educational studies in  English  as
    evidenced in the leaving certificates in the  Respondent's  bundle.  He
    had also passed a certificate in computing in 2011.

36. I have considered those submissions. The decision made by the judge was
    summarised  at  paragraph  [29]  that  the  Appellant   had   met   the
    requirements of Appendix K (the policy) and that "had the sponsor  been
    able to do so, he would have sought his son's  entry  to  the  UK  much
    sooner that he did. There are exceptional circumstances  in  this  case
    and therefore the Appellant should be given leave to enter and join his
    parents." He allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

37.  Earlier  in  the  determination  he  had   made   reference   in   the
    proportionality assessment to the issue of  "historic  injustice"  [25]
    and the weight attached to this as set out in the cases of  Gurung  and
    Ghising (see paragraphs 59 and 60 of Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOC's;
    historic wrong: weight) [2013] UK UT00567.


38. The Court acknowledged in Gurung and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 the
    importance of the issue of historic injustice and at paragraph 38 the
    court observed that "the historic injustice is only one of the factors
    to be weighed against the need to maintain a firm and fair immigration
    policy. It is not necessarily determinative. If it were, the
    application of every adult child of a UK settled Gurkha who establishes
    that he has a family life with his parent would be bound to succeed".
    At paragraph 42 the court held that "If a Gurkha can show that, but for
    the historic injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a time when
    his dependant (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him
    as a dependent child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for
    holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to join his
    family now".

39. In the decision of Ghising and others(Gurkhas/BOC's ;  historic  wrong:
    weight) [2013] UK UT00567 at paragraphs 59 the Tribunal considered  the
    issue of weight to be attached to the issue of  historic  injustice  as
    follows:

    "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs'submission where article 8 is  held
    to be engaged and  the  fact  that  but  for  the  historic  wrong  the
    Appellant would have settled in the UK long ago  is  established,  this
    will  ordinarily  determine  the   outcome   of   the   proportionality
    assessment; and determine it in an Appellant's favour. The  explanation
    for this is to be found, not  in  any  concept  of  new  or  additional
    "burdens" but, rather, in the weight to be  afforded  to  the  historic
    wrong/settlement issue in a proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,
    we consider, is the proper interpretation of what the Court  of  Appeal
    was saying when they referred to the historic injustice as  being  such
    an important factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.
    What was crucial, the court said, was the consequence of  the  historic
    injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOC's:

    "were prevented from settling in the  UK.  That  is  why  the  historic
    injustice is such an important factor to be taken into account  in  the
    balancing exercise and why the applicant dependent child  of  a  Gurkha
    who settled in the UK has such a strong claim to  have  his  article  8
    (one)   right   indicated,   notwithstanding   the   potency   of   the
    countervailing public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm  immigration
    policy." [41]

    In other words, the historic injustice  issue  will  carry  significant
    weight, on the Appellant cited the balance, and is likely  to  outweigh
    the matters relied on by the Respondent, where these consist solely  of
    the public interest just described."

40. At paragraph 60 the Tribunal went on to state;

    "once this point is grasped, it can  immediately  be  appreciated  that
    they may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not  succeed,
    even though their family life engages article 8 (one) and the  evidence
    shows that they would come to the United Kingdom with their father, but
    for the injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here  on
    completion of his military service. If  the  Respondent  can  point  to
    matters over and above the "public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm
    immigration policy", which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of
    leave to enter, these must be given appropriate weight in  the  balance
    in the Respondent's favour.  Thus,  about  immigration  history  and/or
    criminal behaviour  may  still  be  sufficient  outweigh  the  powerful
    factors bearing on the Appellant side. They being  an  adult  child  UK
    settled Gurkha ex-serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in  the
    sense that not every application  by  such  a  person  will  inevitably
    succeed. But, if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public
    interest described by the Court of Appeal at  paragraph  41  of  Gurung
    then the weight to be given to the  historic  injustice  will  normally
    require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

41.  By reason of his earlier findings, whereby he reached  the  conclusion
    on the evidence that the  Appellant  was  emotionally  and  financially
    dependent on the  sponsor,  the  judge  found  that  he  had  satisfied
    paragraph 9 (5) of appendix K and thus resolved that issue in favour of
    the Appellant.

42. The remaining issue  identified  in  the  decision  letter  related  to
    paragraph 9 (8) and the two-year separation. The judge considered  this
    at [28] and in line with the letter from the Respondent at page 144  of
    the bundle which was a letter to the director of communications sent on
    9 April 2015. This letter made reference to the requirements of the new
    2015 policy. The letter set out "this is just one factor which  it  may
    be appropriate to consider rather than a hard and fast instruction that
    all cases must result in refusal. The same applies to circumstances  in
    which the applicant has been living apart from  the  sponsor  for  more
    than two years. Each application must be determined on  a  case-by-case
    basis and if there  are  circumstances  which  an  applicant  feel  the
    decision-maker should consider is important the full details  of  these
    are provided by the applicant so that the Home Office can consider  all
    the relevant factors in making their decision."

43. The judge at [28] found that there were good reasons  on  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant as to why they had  lived  separately  for  more
    than two years. In accordance with the letter he found  that  doing  so
    was not an "absolute bar" to  refusal  and  that  "each  case  must  be
    determined on its own facts". The "good reasons" for the delay found by
    the judge were that when the sponsor came to the UK  he  did  not  know
    that he could bring his son with him, and secondly, he did not have the
    financial means at that time, and thirdly he  could  not  maintain  the
    family unit by family visits because they could not afford to do so but
    that they did maintain the family unit with the provision of  financial
    support and through communications via  Viper.  However  all  page  144
    states is that there may be circumstances (such  as  those  which  were
    said to exist in this appeal) which could mean  that  the  instructions
    should be considered in the light of those particular factors and  that
    the Appellant should provide such detail so that the decision-maker can
    consider all the relevant factors. Those issues were  set  out  in  the
    grounds of appeal. In essence,  the  judge  found  that  if  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had taken into account those particular  findings  of
    fact when reaching a decision, that the Appellant would  have  met  the
    policy under paragraph 9 (8).

44. This was a human  rights  appeal  and  therefore  section  117B  public
    interest  considerations  did  apply  when  considering  the  issue  of
    proportionality. However, it is plain from the determination  that  the
    judge, in reaching a decision on the proportionality balance considered
    that as the Appellant had met the requirements of the policy and  as  a
    result of the significant weight attached  to  the  historic  injustice
    argument as set out at [25] this was sufficient to outweigh any  public
    interest considerations. The judge concluded, having satisfied  on  the
    evidence before him that, but the historic wrong, the  Appellant  would
    have settled in the U.K. as a child,  he  found  that  this  ordinarily
    would be sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control. In this appeal, the Respondent has not  relied  on
    any  countervailing  factor,  such  as  poor  immigration  history   or
    criminality  that  would  have  been   capable   of   displacing   that
    presumption.

45. It is true that he made no reference to the section 117 public interest
    considerations under the 2002 Act, which is an error of law. However as
    Mr Balroop submitted, having found that the  policy  requirements  were
    met and in view of the significant  weight  attached  to  the  historic
    injustice, such consideration would have made no material difference to
    the outcome of this appeal. I agree with  that  submission.  The  judge
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons for finding that there was family
    life and dependency between the parties and having reached  conclusions
    in the affirmative to the first four questions in Razgar,  went  on  to
    consider the issue of proportionality. Having found that the  Appellant
    met the requirements of the policy, that being the Respondent's view of
    where the public interest lay, must of itself be of significant weight.
    In addition,  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  issue  of  historic
    injustice, which although not determinative, must be given  significant
    weight also for the reasons identified by the Upper Tribunal in Ghising
    and others (Ghurkhas/BOC's: historic wrong; weight[2013] UKUT 00567  at
    paras 59-60.

46.   It  has  not  been  demonstrated  by  the  Respondent  that  the  two
    considerations identified by Mr Kotas; ability  to  speak  English  and
    financial independence, would have  outweighed  those  two  significant
    considerations. In any event, there was evidence before the judge  that
    he could speak English (as evidenced in his school  certificates  which
    had  been  in  the  Respondent's  bundle).  He  was   not   financially
    independent (although his parents were)  but  this  is  not  surprising
    given that in order to satisfy the policy he would have to show that he
    was financially dependent upon his parents. No  other  public  interest
    considerations were stated to be relevant by Mr Kotas and  consequently
    I do not find  that  those  two  considerations,  even  if  taken  into
    account, would have been of such great or significant  weight  to  have
    outweighed the other issues identified by the  judge  in  this  appeal,
    namely that he met the requirements of the policy and  the  significant
    weight attached to the historic injustice argument.

47. I therefore find that even if the judge was  in  error  by  not  making
    reference to s117B,  it was not material in the light  of  the  matters
    set out above and does not justify the setting aside of  the  decision.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand; the appeal of  the
    Respondent is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision allowing the appeal  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
stand; the Respondent's appeal shall be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed [pic]                            Date: 12/10/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



