
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/06724/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |On 13 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     S H
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark, of Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the respondent by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on  14
         October 2019 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Neville, promulgated on 21  August  2019  following  a  hearing  at
         Taylor House on 25 February 2019. Although  this  appeal  has  been
         brought by the Secretary of State,  I  continue  to  refer  to  the
         parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 8  January  1983.  He
         entered the UK on 12 November 2008 with entry clearance as a spouse
         and on 13 December 2010 he was granted indefinite leave to  remain.
         The couple have four children, aged between 5 and 9 at the date  of
         the hearing. All are British citizens.

      3. On 28 May 2015, the appellant  was  convicted  of  paying  for  the
         sexual services and penetration of a  child  and  sentenced  on  11
         December 2015 to 2 years in prison, made the subject  of  a  sexual
         harm prevention order for 10 years and  ordered  to  sign  the  sex
         offenders register for 10 years. On 4 February 2016, he was  served
         with a decision to deport letter. On 9 February  2016,  he  claimed
         asylum. On 1 March 2016, he notified an Immigration Officer that he
         did not wish to claim asylum. On 2 March 2016, he made private  and
         family life submissions and on 17 May 2016 he withdrew  his  asylum
         claim. On 22 July 2016 a deportation order was signed and served on
         him on 29 July 2016.  The respondent also certified her decision to
         refuse the human  rights  claim.  The  appellant  sought  to  bring
         judicial review proceedings against the certification, but this was
         refused on papers and on renewal at an oral hearing on 10  February
         2017. Part of the challenge  had  been  that  the  appellant  would
         commit suicide if removed prior  to  the  hearing  of  his  appeal.
         Further submissions were subsequently made on 23 February 2017  and
         new evidence was submitted. On 23 May 2017, the respondent  refused
         to revoke the deportation order.

      4. Meanwhile, the appellant completed  his  custodial  sentence  on  1
         August 2016 but remained in  immigration  detention  until  he  was
         granted bail on 20 January 2017. He remained  on  licence  until  1
         August 2017 and resided with his sister whilst  an  assessment  was
         undertaken as to the risk he posed  to  his  four  children.  On  4
         September 2017, he was allowed to return home  and  did  so  on  11
         September 2017 under the terms of a Child Protection Plan. On 2 May
         2018, Social Services closed the case on him.

      5. The appeal was heard by Judge Neville and allowed on  human  rights
         grounds some six months later. The judge found  that  there  was  a
         high likelihood that the appellant would commit suicide  on  return
         in such a way as to engage article 3. He also found that if he  was
         wrong about  the  suicide  risk,  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh on his wife and children  and  he
         therefore met the exception to deportation contained in s.117C(5).




         The Hearing

      6. The respondent puts forward two grounds which were relied on by  Mr
         Whitwell although only  brief  submissions  were  made.  The  first
         criticism is that the judge had materially erred  in  finding  that
         the deportation would amount to a breach of article 3 (on suicide).
         Alternatively, it is argued that the judge was wrong to have  found
         exception 2 of 117C(5) was met.

      7. It is argued that the judge did not properly consider  the  leading
         authorities which made it clear that the article  3  threshold  was
         very high. It is maintained that had he done so he would have found
         that the threshold had not been met because  any  deterioration  in
         his condition would not be serious, rapid and irreversible. It  was
         pointed out that the appellant had not suggested  that  psychiatric
         care and medical treatment for depression would not be available in
         Pakistan. The grounds also emphasise that only in very  rare  cases
         would removal constitute a breach of article 3  and  there  was  no
         evidence to suggest that  the  appellant  would  make  any  suicide
         attempt before arrival in Pakistan and that he had never  made  any
         attempts in the past.  Reliance  was  placed  on  KH  (Afghanistan)
         [2009] EWCA Civ 1354. It was argued that it  was  not  unusual  for
         those faced with deportation to exhibit signs of depression (as per
         AE (Sri Lanka) [2002] UKIAT 05237.

      8. The second ground is that having found that the appellant would  be
         able to integrate in Pakistan, no cogent reasons were given  as  to
         why the whole family could not relocate there.  Both  parents  were
         familiar with the culture and the children were still  very  young.
         Issues regarding educational support and  financial  hardships  did
         not amount to unduly harsh consequences.  It is argued that  should
         the family choose to remain in the UK, the appellant's  wife  could
         manage as she had done when the appellant was  in  prison.  It  was
         maintained that there had been no consideration of the support  the
         appellant's family could receive from social services or the school
         with respect to the child who had special needs.

      9. In his oral submissions Mr Whitwell relied on the written  grounds.
         He submitted that the first ground was parasitic upon  the  second.
         He argued that no consideration had been given to  the  possibility
         of the family remaining in the UK and obtaining support.

     10. Mr Clarke disputed that the grounds were inter-linked. He submitted
         that the judge had considered the case at its highest but  also  on
         the basis that there was no risk of suicide.  He stated that whilst
         the authorities cited by the respondent had not been mentioned, the
         judge had considered others which took account  of  them  and  also
         noted the high threshold in suicide cases. He  submitted  that  the
         point about whether  the  family  could  access  support  from  the
         authorities was a matter  not  raised  by  the  respondent  in  her
         decision letter. It was not a Robinson obvious point and the  judge
         was not obliged to consider  it.  Submissions  were  then  made  on
         further fresh evidence as  to  the  case  that  might  possibly  be
         accessed; however, I indicated to Mr Clarke that the fresh evidence
         could not be admitted  at  this  stage.  Mr  Clarke  completed  his
         submissions by stating that the judge had considered the impact  of
         deportation on the appellant's wife and children and had reached  a
         sustainable decision.

     11. Mr Whitwell was content to rely on the grounds and made no  further
         response. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my  decision
         which I now give with reasons.




         Discussion and Conclusions

     12. Having considered all the evidence  and  the  submissions  made,  I
         reach the following conclusions.

     13.  The  respondent's  grounds,  albeit  lengthy,   essentially   only
         challenge the finding of suicide risk on  the  limited  basis  that
         certain authorities relating to the high threshold  applicable  had
         not been considered. Whilst Mr Clarke  readily  accepted  that  the
         judge had not, in his determination,  referred  to  the  cases  the
         respondent cited in her grounds, he pointed out that the judge  had
         considered other leading cases on suicide, notably  J  [2005]  EWCA
         Civ 629 and GJ [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), which themselves address  the
         cited authorities and the applicable threshold. He  also  correctly
         pointed to several parts of the determination where the  judge  had
         acknowledged the high threshold (at 41 and 42). The criticism  that
         the correct threshold was not  appreciated  or  recognised  by  the
         judge is, therefore, without merit. There is no challenge in ground
         1 as to the judge's analysis of the evidence  or  the  approach  he
         followed using the J steps and guidance (at 24-42).  Nor  is  there
         any challenge raised in respect of the medical evidence.  The  only
         slight reference to the medical  reports  is  paragraph  5  of  the
         grounds where it is maintained  that  depression  is  often  common
         amongst those facing deportation.  This  does  not,  however,  take
         account of the fact that the evidence gave many  more  reasons  for
         the appellant's poor state of mind.

     14. Mr Clarke is right to point  out  that  the  judge  considered  the
         appellant as a suicide risk and also in the alternative as  someone
         without such a risk. I therefore now  turn  to  the  second  ground
         which is that the judge erred in finding that the second  exception
         of s.117C had been met. The challenge to this is  that  "no  cogent
         reasons" were given by the judge for finding that the family  could
         not relocate to Pakistan together.

     15. The judge set out his conclusions on this at paragraphs 75-84. That
         has to, however, be read in conjunction with the  judge's  findings
         on  the  appellant's  wife's  vulnerability  and   past   traumatic
         experiences set out over six pages at paragraphs 62 - 64. There has
         been no challenge to any of these findings or evidence and none was
         raised at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Whilst
         it is possible that another judge  may  have  reached  a  different
         conclusion, that is not the test before  me.  Judge  Neville  found
         that the  appellant's  wife  should  be  treated  as  a  victim  of
         trafficking, that she was vulnerable and had serious issues of  her
         own and that these issues would impact upon the well-being  of  the
         children. The judge relied on medical evidence in  respect  of  the
         appellant's wife, the social worker's report on the family and  the
         oral evidence. None of this was challenged at any  stage.  He  also
         considered whether the appellant's presence would  ameliorate  that
         situation but, for the reasons set out at paragraph  79,  found  it
         would not. The situation of the children and  their  special  needs
         were also considered at length  (at  80-84).  Whilst  it  could  be
         argued that another  Tribunal  would  not  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion as Judge Neville, it cannot be argued that his reasoning
         is inadequate. In the absence of any challenge by the respondent to
         any of the evidence in respect of  the  wife  and  to  any  of  the
         findings  made  with   respect   to   her   emotional   state   and
         vulnerability,  I  cannot  find  that  the  judge's  decision   was
         perverse.

     16. The last point, also raised in  this  ground,  is  that  the  judge
         failed  to  consider  whether  local  authority  support  would  be
         available to the  appellant's  family  were  they  to  remain  here
         without him. Reliance is placed on BL  (Jamaica)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         357. The difficulty for the respondent, however, is that  this  was
         not a point relied on at any previous stage of the proceedings.  In
         contrast with BL, where the decision letter makes  the  point  that
         state support would  be  available,  the  decision  letter  in  the
         present case is silent on this.  Nor was it a matter raised by  the
         respondent at the hearing before Judge  Neville.  The  respondent's
         case was that support would be available from the  extended  family
         and the judge addressed this point in his determination (at 72). Mr
         Clarke argued that the issue  of  local  authority  support  was  a
         matter of fact and not a point of law such as  to  come  under  the
         Robinson obvious category.  That is a valid submission.

     17. For all these reasons, I conclude that the  respondent's  challenge
         is not made out.




         Decision

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it stands.




         Anonymity

     19. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge
         Date: 6 January 2020
