
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06228/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          CHRISTOPHER ANTHONY GREEN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliott-Kelly, Counsel instructed by Owens
Stevens Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the appellant, hereinafter "the
    Secretary of State" on 5 May 2017 refusing him leave to remain on human
    rights grounds.

 2. The claimant is  subject  to  automatic  deportation  and  he  made  no
    response to a notice given to him on 20 April 2017 informing  him  that
    the Secretary of State considered him to be a person  to  whom  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and inviting him to show  that
    he fell under one of the specified exemptions set out in Section 33  of
    that Act.

 3. The Secretary of State  was  given  permission  to  appeal  on  grounds
    extending to nine substantive paragraphs but they are  all  essentially
    variations on the same theme.  It is the Secretary of State's case that
    the judge's decision did not show proper regard to the requirements  of
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This
    Section  and  sub-Section   should   be   well-known   to   immigration
    practitioners but for convenience we set out below the terms of Section
    117C(6):

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

 4. We consider his criminal record in more detail below but  the  claimant
    was sentenced  to  4  years  detention  in  an  institution  for  young
    offenders on 27 March 2015 for possessing heroin and crack cocaine with
    intent to supply. It is clear  from  Section  117D(4)(c)  that  such  a
    sentence is within the meaning of "imprisonment" under Section 117C(6).



 5. Exception 1 applies where the  person  can  satisfy  three  conditions,
    namely lawful residence in the United Kingdom for  most  of  his  life,
    being socially and culturally integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    there being "very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  the
    country to which he will be deported". Exception 2  applies  where  the
    person to be deported has a "genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    qualifying partner" or a child and the effect  of  deportation  on  the
    partner or a child would be unduly harsh.

 6. We consider the learned First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  in  some
    care below but the short point is that he was satisfied that this is  a
    case where there are "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" of the kind required by the Act.

 7. The Higher Courts have been critical  of  judges  who  have  apparently
    ignored the provisions of Section 117C(6).  We make it clear that  this
    is not such a case.  It is apparent beyond all possible  argument  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had in mind the requirements of  that  Section.
    The criticism is not of any failure  to  follow  relevant  legislation.
    The criticism is that it  was  not  followed  lawfully.   We  will  not
    therefore have very much to say,  if  anything,  about  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's self-directions.

 8. The decision shows that the claimant is a national of Jamaica.  He  was
    born in 1994 and he was brought to the United  Kingdom  shortly  before
    his 7th birthday in August 2001.  He entered the United Kingdom  on  11
    August 2001 when he was just a little over 7 years old.

 9. He was admitted as  a  "non-visa  national  visitor".   His  leave  was
    extended and he was given indefinite leave to remain on 8 January 2007.
     It is a feature of this case that he has always had permission  to  be
    in the United Kingdom.

10. He has misbehaved; sometimes quite seriously.

11. He first came to the attention of  the  authorities  for  possessing  a
    blade in a public place in June 2008 and was  made  the  subject  of  a
    referral order.  A similar order was made for an offence of theft  very
    soon afterwards.  He was discharged for a  public  order  matter  after
    pleading guilty in November 2008 and was similarly  dealt  with  for  a
    matter of theft in March 2009.

12. In July 2009 he was again found to be in possession of  a  blade  in  a
    public place and he was placed under young offenders'  supervision  for
    six months.

13. In February 2010 he was found  possessing  an  offensive  weapon  in  a
    public place and in March he was detained and  subject  to  a  training
    order.  In March 2010 he committed offences of  robbery  and  attempted
    robbery and was subject to supervision and curfew requirements.  He did
    not comply with the detention and training order  and  was  also  dealt
    with for theft.

14. In March, and on two occasions  in  May,  2011  he  was  involved  with
    supplying crack cocaine and heroin and in January 2012 he was  sent  to
    detention and training for two years  reduced  to  eighteen  months  on
    appeal.

15. In January 2014 he was found in possession of heroin and  cocaine  with
    intent to supply  and  possessing  cannabis.  This  led  to  his  being
    sentenced to detention in a young offenders' institution for four years
    in March 2015 as indicated above.  He was also subject to an  ASBO  and
    was made the subject of a community order for failing  to  comply  with
    that.  He has not been convicted of any offences since.

16.  The  claimant  has  previously  been  the   subject   of   deportation
    proceedings.  In a decision promulgated on 13 May 2013  the  President,
    the Honourable Mr Justice Blake, and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J F  W
    Phillips upheld a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  his
    appeal against deportation.

17. The First-tier Tribunal noted the claimant's rather difficult start  in
    life.  He lived in Jamaica with his paternal  great-grandmother  in  an
    area of Kingston described as a place of "poverty  and  violence".   He
    had some occasional contact with his mother and less  with  his  father
    who was abusive.  When he came to the United Kingdom in 2001 he  joined
    his maternal grandmother.  His mother had moved  from  Jamaica  to  New
    York and remains there.

18. The judge noted that the claimant had "grown up in the United Kingdom".

19. His grandmother had moved to a different house in an effort to keep him
    out of bad company but the move brought no appreciable benefit.

20. He has also formed an association lasting  some  twelve  years  with  a
    school friend who  will  be  identified  simply  as  "Ms  W-T".   Their
    relationship has changed in its nature but has not been continuous.  Ms
    W-T has taken advantages of educational opportunities and is engaged in
    degree level study.  She has apparently serious ambitions to  study  at
    master's level.

21. He also  has  a  long-term  friend  who  we  identify  as  "NS".   This
    friendship has not been entirely  helpful  to  the  applicant  and  his
    association with NS seems to  have  been  the  cause  of  some  of  his
    trouble.  Together they were members of a gang known as "QC gang".

22. The drugs offences for which he was sentenced to four years in custody,
    possibly ironically but definitely disgracefully, were committed  as  a
    fund-raising exercise when he was  not  allowed  to  engage  in  honest
    employment because he was still subject to deportation.

23. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the  claimant  was  being
    supported by the father of his friend  NS  who  clearly  impressed  the
    judge.   His  friend's  father  had  set   up   a   business   creating
    opportunities for his own son  and  for  the  claimant  to  work  as  a
    personal physical trainer.

24. The claimant had taken advantages of improving opportunities in  prison
    and there were reasons to think that he  had  resolved  to  change  his
    behaviour.

25. He has some contacts in Jamaica.  In particular he has  two  aunts  who
    live in Kingston.  He has had no  contact  with  his  father  for  many
    years.

26. Although the judge was careful to recognise there would be difficulties
    for the claimant which would be elevated  in  part  to  "hardship"  the
    judge was not satisfied there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    the claimant's integration into his country of nationality if  he  were
    made to live there.

27. This is not a case where it  is  contended  that  the  claimant  has  a
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or  qualifying  child
    within the terms of the Section and so the judge was clearly  satisfied
    that the claimant did not come within  the  scope  of  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2 yet in a case such as this he could only allow  the  appeal
    where there were "very compelling circumstances, over and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

28. The First-tier Tribunal's core findings are set out  at  paragraphs  32
    and 33 which we set out below:

         "32. I take into account in favour of the  [claimant],  as  calling
         for a measure of compassionate understanding, his  relative  youth.
         Indeed it is of no little weight that his offending was entirely as
         a juvenile or young offender.  I attach weight of some substance to
         the length of his presence in the United Kingdom,  which  has  been
         lawful until the issue of  the  first  deportation  order,  against
         which he  successfully  appealed.   His  presence  since  then  has
         likewise been lawful with leave carried over by operation  of  law.
         I attach weight both to the existence of his relationship with Ms W-
         T, inchoate or tenuous  as  that  might  yet  remain,  and  to  the
         obstacles that  he  would  encounter  to  integration  in  Jamaica,
         including official and monitions of a degree of risk to persons re-
         settling  in  Jamaica.   Although  these  do  not  either  of  them
         constitute sufficient bases in themselves to engage either  399  or
         399A individually, they are  nevertheless  factors  of  significant
         weight as part of an overall assessment of the  existence  of  very
         compelling circumstances justifying  exceptional  treatment  beyond
         the individual application of either of those Rules.

         33.  A further factor, exceptional not only in the sense  of  being
         most individual and unusual, and potentially also in the  sense  of
         justifying exceptional treatment, is the progress of the [claimant]
         towards rehabilitation.  The  support  which  he  enjoys  from  his
         former gang member and present friend,  N---  S---,  and  from  the
         principal involvement of Mr S---, the elder,  constitutes  evidence
         of very real prospects of complete rehabilitation,  well  beyond  a
         mere vague aspiration.  That prospect is, if anything, enhanced  by
         the continued support of so accomplished  and  determined  a  young
         woman as Ms W-T.  The [claimant], from the moment he was given  the
         opportunity by his admission to bail, has taken positive  steps  to
         work towards his hope of  occupation  in  his  own  business  as  a
         personal trainer, entering formal training for  that  purpose.   He
         does have a strong and now influential family and wider network  in
         this country, including his grandmother and aunt, who vouch for him
         in his current bail, his uncle, his girlfriend, and his mentor,  Mr
         S---.  He is complying with ongoing conditions of probation."

29. In short it is the judge's view that the claimant, inspired by his  own
    efforts and encouragement from his time in custody and  new  circle  of
    friends including particularly Mr S, has realistic hopes  of  reforming
    his character and  earning  an  industrious  honest  living.   That  is
    pleasing to read but we do not see how this factor, even when bolstered
    with the other  points  identified  by  the  judge,  can  be  described
    properly as  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

30. The Secretary of State relies on the analysis  of  the  decision  in  N
    (Kenya) given by the Court of Appeal in OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 694 to the effect that the risk of reoffending is only one facet in
    the public interest and in the case of very serious crimes not the most
    important facet.  Other important facets  include  the  need  to  deter
    foreign  nationals  from  committing  serious  crime   and   expressing
    society's revulsion and building confidence in the treatment of foreign
    citizens who  committed  serious  crimes.   These  concepts  have  been
    subject to modest degrees  of  refinement  and  reformulation  but  the
    principles remain the same.  It is  unlikely  that  good  prospects  of
    rehabilitation are ever going to be enough to establish  the  necessary
    very compelling compassionate circumstances.

31. Whilst any decision  that  there  are  "very  compelling  compassionate
    circumstances over and above" the statutory  exceptions  is  likely  to
    involve a wide-ranging and composite consideration  of  the  facts,  we
    reject any suggestion that  the  claimant's  youth  is,  of  itself,  a
    particularly significant factor. There are considerable hurdles in  the
    way of sending young offenders to long periods of custody and fact that
    such sentences are included in the definition of imprisonment steers us
    away from accepting that a person's youth is a weighty  factor  in  his
    favour.

32.  We  have  read  Ms  Elliott-Kelly's  Rule  24  notice  carefully   and
    respectfully just as we have listened to her submissions.  In some ways
    she is undoubtedly right.  We  must  not  interfere  with  the  judge's
    decision just because we do not think it  is  the  one  we  would  have
    reached had we heard the appeal, which of course we did not.  The judge
    has identified factors  that  are  relevant,  particularly  his  lawful
    presence in the United Kingdom and his committing  offences  before  he
    entered adulthood.  Where we  cannot  agree  is  that  the  judge  gave
    sufficient  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  points  he  identified
    amounted to very compelling circumstances.  The simple fact is that  in
    our judgment they do not.

33. It follows therefore that we find the First-tier Tribunal erred and set
    aside its decision.  The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  is  thorough.
    It appraises accurately and fairly the evidence  that  was  given.   We
    know what this case is about.  There is no point in ordering a  further
    hearing.  We remake the decision and although we  accept  the  findings
    made  we  conclude  that  they  do  not  amount  to   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described.

34. We are of course applying statute law.  The claimant's  deportation  is
    in the public interest because Parliament says that it is and  that  is
    all the explanation that is needed.  Whereas the Rules  may  not  be  a
    complete code we cannot go behind  statute.   Even  so  we  have  asked
    ourselves  if  there  is  anything  here  that   might   need   further
    consideration separately and independently in an  Article  8  balancing
    exercise and we conclude there is not.

35. We understand the judge's reason for allowing this appeal.  Whereas the
    claimant has links with Jamaica he has spent most of his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom. To the extent that a person's criminality is shaped  by
    his environment the claimant is shaped by the less attractive facets of
    United Kingdom society. His misbehaviour is no more the  fault  of  the
    people and government of Jamaica than his arrival in the United Kingdom
    as a small boy is the fault of the claimant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to find that his best chance of being  rehabilitated
    comes from being permitted to remain in the United Kingdom where he has
    lived lawfully for most of his life. Nevertheless we cannot agree  that
    these facts amount to "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

36. We therefore substitute a decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law.  We  set  aside  its  decision  and
substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal against the  decision
of the Secretary of State.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 April 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |

