

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/06377/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2018                     |On 11 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                    Between

                              USHAKIRAN BONTHA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bukhari, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

   1. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (a panel formed of Designated Judge Appleyard  and
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson) promulgated on 23 May 2017.



   3. For the reasons given at the  hearing  on  25  September  2018,  I  am
      satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error of law in that they  made  basic  errors  of  fact:
      whether the appellant had lived with her partner for two  years  prior
      to the most recent application (she had); appeared to think  this  was
      an Entry Clearance Application (it is not); and, failed to  note  that
      the appellant's partner's parents had not  been  referred  to  in  the
      initial application as at that point  they  were  not  living  in  the
      United Kingdom.  Further, the panel failed to note  that  the  parents
      had been granted leave to remain as elderly dependent  relatives,  and
      that thus they had already shown that they require long-term  personal
      care to perform everyday tasks and were unable even with the practical
      and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain  the  required  level  of
      care in the country where they are living.   As  was  accepted  by  Mr
      Howells, their son had had to give a guarantee to meet their needs for
      five years in the United Kingdom.


   4. In the circumstances, Mr Howells accepted  that  there  were,  on  the
      particular facts of this case, insurmountable obstacles to the  family
      life between the appellant and her partner being conducted outside the
      United Kingdom, and on that basis, I am satisfied that  removal  would
      be disproportionate.

   5. Rule 40 (1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provided that the Upper Tribunal may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
      hearing which I did. Rule 40 (3) provides that the Upper Tribunal must
      provide written reasons for its decision with a decision notice unless
      the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal  not  giving  written
      reasons. I am satisfied that the parties have given  such  consent  at
      the hearing.


      Notice of Decision

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside.

   2. I remake the appeal by allowing it on human rights grounds

      Signed                                           Date: 25 September
2018
      [pic]
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

