
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06825/2019
                                                HU/06835/2019, HU/06838/2019
                                                HU/06842/2019, HU/06847/2019
                                                HU/06852/2019, HU/06856/2019
                                                               HU/06858/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 January 2020                   |On 31 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  Nadia [D]
                               Hijratullah [D]
                               Hasibullah [D]
                                  Nazia [D]
                                Gullalay [D]
                                    [S D]
                                    [T D]
                                    [N D]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated on 14 August 2019 dismissing their appeals against
    the linked decisions of the respondent dated  27  March  2019  refusing
    their human rights claims for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

Factual background

 2. The appellants are a large family  unit.   They  are  all  citizens  of
    Afghanistan.  The first appellant, Mrs Nadia [D], was born on 30 August
    1974.  She is married to a British citizen, who is the sponsor in these
    proceedings.  The remaining seven appellants are the children they have
    together.  The sixth to eighth appellants are still under  the  age  of
    majority; their dates of birth are 29 July 2002, 26 June  2003  and  21
    March 2006.

 3. The appellants claim to have entered the United  Kingdom  via  Ireland,
    where they lived with the sponsor, ostensibly pursuant to his  exercise
    of his rights as a citizen of the Union under EU law.   They  initially
    sought a right to reside in this country under the  so-called  Surinder
    Singh route, on the basis that the sponsor had exercised Treaty  rights
    in Ireland, prior to his return here.  Their applications for residence
    cards on that basis under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 were refused by the respondent, and an appeal  against
    the refusal of those applications was dismissed by  Judge  Lodge  in  a
    decision promulgated on  17  May  2018.   The  appellants  subsequently
    applied to the respondent for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  their
    human rights.  Those applications were refused and the appeals  against
    those refusals were heard by Judge Grimmett.

 4. Judge Grimmett dismissed the appellants' appeals on the basis  of  what
    he considered to be inconsistencies in their evidence. The judge  found
    that the appellants retained property  in  Afghanistan  and  still  had
    close family members there. He was  accordingly  satisfied  that  there
    would be no "insurmountable obstacles" to the return of the  appellants
    to Afghanistan. He found that family life would be able to continue  in
    Afghanistan, or, alternatively, "their family  lives  can  continue  in
    Ireland where all family members currently have the right to live."

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney on
    the basis that it was arguable that the judge had not made any findings
    concerning the best interests of the children concerned.  In  addition,
    it was arguable that the judge erred by  applying  the  "insurmountable
    obstacles" test, rather than  the  quite  different  "very  significant
    obstacles test", under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). It  was  also  arguable
    that the judge erred by concluding that  the  family  could  return  to
    Ireland, as it was not clear on what basis they would continue to enjoy
    a right to reside there.

Discussion

 6. It was common ground that the judge's  failure  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the three children concerned  was  an  error  of  law.  In
    addition, it was also common ground  that,  in  light  of  the  judge's
    application of the "insurmountable obstacles" test, which originates in
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  rather  than  the  "very
    significant obstacles" test contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules, was also an  error.  Finally,  the  judge  erred  by
    concluding that the family enjoyed a right to reside in  Ireland,  when
    Judge Lodge had found that they did not.

 7. Ms Fijiwala, who appeared for the  respondent,  realistically  accepted
    that this was  a  decision  infected  throughout  by  material  errors.
    Although there were some credibility concerns that appear to be  within
    the range of legitimate findings open to the  judge  on  the  evidence,
    given the overall erroneous approach of the judge to the above matters,
    she submitted, it would not be  appropriate  to  preserve  any  of  the
    judge's findings, and the matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. We agree. The judge failed to consider the best interests of any of the
    three  children  concerned.  He  did  not  engage  with  the  extensive
    background materials concerning the security situation in  Afghanistan,
    which had been part of the submissions put to him. Alternatively, if he
    did engage with those materials, he did not say that he  had,  or  what
    his reasons for dismissing the  relevance  of  the  material  were.  He
    applied the wrong test under the  Immigration  Rules,  and  erroneously
    concluded that the family enjoyed a right  to  reside  in  Ireland.  Of
    course, it may be that, in time, the sponsor  would  be  able  to  take
    employment in Ireland and resume residing there pursuant to his  rights
    under EU law. However, that is not what the judge  found;  the  judge's
    operative finding on this issue was that Ireland was  a  place,  "where
    all family members currently have the right to live" (see [15]).

 9. The judge's errors of law were such that the decision must be set aside
    with no findings preserved.

10. The appropriate course is for the decision to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be reheard before any judge other than Judge Grimmett.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Grimmett involved the making of an error  of  law  and
is set aside with no findings preserved.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  any
judge other than Judge Grimmett.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 27 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
