
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06889/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 17 September 2020         |On Tuesday, 22 September 2020        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                               TARA KUMARI RAI

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received

For the respondent:    Ms S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


       Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on 23  June
          2020  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Mailer, promulgated on 23 January  2020  following  a  hearing  at
          Hatton Cross on 16 December 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Nepali national (not Sri Lankan  as  stated  in
          the grant of permission) born on 13 November  1982.   She  appeals
          the decision of the respondent of 22 February 2019  to  refuse  to
          grant her entry clearance to enable her to join  her  father,  the
          sponsor, a former Gurkha soldier. He was granted settlement  on  2
          May 2011.


       3. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  dependent
          on her father at the time of his application to settle in the  UK.
          On his visa application form he had declared a number of dependent
          children  but  her  name  had  not  been  included  on  the  list.
          Additionally, the kindred roll submitted with the application  did
          not include her name. No details of her financial  commitments  in
          Nepal  had  been  provided  and  there  was  limited  evidence  of
          financial support from her father or  contact  beyond  that  which
          would  be  expected  between  an  adult  child  and  parent.   The
          respondent noted that the sponsor had been in the UK since January
          2012 and  that  they  had  not  lived  together  since  then.  The
          respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  had  demonstrated
          that  she  had  not  formed  an  independent  family   unit.   The
          application was also considered and refused under appendix  FM  of
          the immigration rules.


       4. The appeal came before Judge Mailer who heard oral  evidence  from
          the sponsor and his wife and considered the  documentary  evidence
          and the submissions. He found that the application for  entry  had
          been made when the appellant was 36 years old,  some  seven  years
          after her parents entered the UK in 2012. He noted that there  was
          no evidence of  any  money  transfers  before  2018  and  was  not
          satisfied that there was dependency between the parties. He  noted
          that the appellant had left the family home  and  moved  with  her
          sister to Kathmandu to obtain employment. He  had  regard  to  the
          evidence of contact between the appellant and her parents  and  to
          the visits they made. He had regard to the relevant case  law  but
          found that it had not been shown that the appellant's family  life
          with her parents had  endured  after  they  left  Nepal  in  2012.
          Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.


       5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal. There were seven grounds but it has to be said that they
          were unfocused and repetitive.


       6. The first argued that the judge made a  material  misdirection  in
          law as to the relevant test and standard to  be  applied.  It  was
          submitted that he failed to undertake a proportionality assessment
          under article 8 (2). It was submitted that he failed to  make  any
          reference to support when assessing the issue of family  life  and
          that his analysis suggested that he was focusing on  a  different,
          higher standard of dependency which was not required.


       7. The second ground argued that the judge erred in  failing  to  ask
          the right question, focusing on irrelevant matters and failing  to
          consider material evidence. It was submitted  that  he  failed  to
          give an adequate  explanation  for  not  accepting  the  sponsor's
          evidence that close ties were maintained with his  children  after
          his departure, that he had travelled to  Nepal  and  that  he  had
          opened a bank account for the use of his  children.  It  was  also
          submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  why  an   earlier
          application  had  not  been  made  and  failed  to  consider   the
          difference in labour conditions between the UK and Nepal.  It  was
          submitted that the appellant's evidence  was  credible,  that  the
          judge focused on financial dependence and applied the wrong  test.
          It was  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
          appellant's grounds and submissions.


       8. The third ground argued that the decision was based  on  incorrect
          factual basis which infected the  article  8  assessment.  It  was
          maintained that  the  evidence  before  the  judge  was  that  the
          appellant's father had been withdrawing his pension while  he  was
          in Nepal for the use of the appellant.  It  was  argued  that  the
          judge did not direct himself in accordance with relevant case law.




       9. Ground 4 maintained  that  the  judge  failed  to  note  that  the
          threshold in relation to the engagement of article  8  was  a  low
          one. It was submitted that  the  judge  should  have  allowed  the
          appeal on the  basis  of  the  historic  injustice.  The  skeleton
          argument had not been considered.


      10. Ground 5 argued that the judge failed to properly assess  all  the
          relevant evidence and that his reasoning was inadequate.


      11. The sixth ground argued that the judge failed to apply the law and
          case law correctly.


      12. In conclusion it was submitted that the outcome  might  have  been
          different had the errors not been made. It was submitted that  the
          judge did not apply anxious scrutiny to the case.


      13. Permission to appeal was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Loke. The appellant renewed her application to the Upper Tribunal.
          Similarly lengthy and unfocused grounds were put forward.


      14. It was argued by way of ground 1 that there was a failure to apply
          the correct test for family life between adults. It was maintained
          that the judge set out no self direction and that it had not  been
          shown that the correct test had  been  applied.  Lengthy  extracts
          from various judgments were cited and it was argued that the judge
          placed too high a threshold on  the  support  required  to  engage
          article 8(1). It was further argued that the judge failed to  have
          regard to binding case law, conflated the issues  of  family  life
          and proportionality, erred in his assessment of whether article  8
          was engaged and had regard to irrelevant  matters  and  failed  to
          have regard to established principles. It was submitted  that  the
          judge did not make any reference to support when applying the  law
          and that his finding at  paragraph  68  suggested  that  a  higher
          standard was applied when the matter of support was considered. It
          was argued that the judge did not correctly direct himself to what
          support meant.


      15. Ground 2  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  material
          evidence. This is essentially a repetition of  paragraph  7  above
          and I do not therefore need to repeat it here. Additionally it was
          argued, again, that the wrong test  on  financial  dependency  was
          applied, a higher threshold used and that the  presence  of  other
          family members in Nepal  was  not  determinative  of  whether  the
          appellant enjoyed real, effective or committed  support  from  her
          parents.


      16. The third ground argued that there was  a  failure  to  perform  a
          proportionality assessment. It was argued that  the  judge  should
          have applied the case law on Gurkha cases addressing the  Military
          Covenant and the historic injustice.


      17. In conclusion it was argued that if article 8  was  engaged,  then
          the fact of historic injustice would normally require  a  decision
          in the appellant's favour. The live question for the Tribunal  was
          thus said to be whether article 8 was engaged.


Covid-19 crisis



      18. The usual procedure after the grant of permission would have  been
          for the appeal to have been listed for hearing after the grant  of
          permission, but due to the Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
          precautions against its spread,  this  did  not  happen.  Instead,
          directions were sent to the  parties  accompanying  the  grant  of
          permission on 26  June  2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
          objections to the matter being dealt with on  the  papers  and  to
          make any further submissions on the  error  of  law  issue  within
          certain time limits.


      19. The Tribunal has received written submissions from the  respondent
          but the appellant has not responded. I am satisfied that the grant
          of permission and the directions were properly served on both  the
          appellant and her UK representatives  by  post.  Additionally,  Mr
          Whitwell served a copy  of  his  submissions  on  the  appellant's
          representatives by email on 18  August  2020.  I  now  proceed  to
          consider the matter.


      20. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


      21. I have had regard to  the  submissions  and  the  evidence  before
          deciding how to proceed. The appellant has had  two  opportunities
          to respond to the Tribunal but has failed to do so.  There  is  no
          indication that the correspondence sent by the Tribunal  has  been
          undelivered.  I  consider  that  the  issues  to  be  decided  are
          uncomplicated and straightforward. There  are  detailed  arguments
          for the appellant in the grounds.  There are  no  matters  arising
          from the papers which would require clarification and so  an  oral
          hearing would not be needed for that purpose. There  is  provision
          in the rules for the Tribunal to determine an appeal on the papers
          and in this case I cannot see any basis  on  which  the  appellant
          would be disadvantaged by the lack of  an  oral  hearing.  I  have
          regard to the importance of the matter to her and consider that  a
          speedy determination of this matter is in her best interests. I am
          satisfied that I am able to  fairly  and  justly  deal  with  this
          matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to do so.


      Submissions


      22. The respondent's submissions are dated 10  August  2020  and  were
          sent to the Tribunal and to the appellant's representatives on  18
          August.


      23. The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal and submits that the
          judge directed himself appropriately. It  is  submitted  that  the
          judge was referred to the noted jurisprudence on the error of  law
          (at 51) with reference to Gurung [20130 EWCA Civ 8 with regard  to
          the historic injustice, to Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 (at 17),  Patel
          [2010] EWCA Civ 17 and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (at  24).  It  is
          submitted that the judge confirms that he has considered  all  the
          evidence placed before him (at 53) and that he expressly  referred
          to Singh (at 78). It is submitted that the  judge  did  not  limit
          himself solely to the  issue  of  finances  when  considering  the
          question of support and that he noted the most recent evidence  of
          contact between the appellant and sponsor and  the  family  visits
          (at 77). It is pointed out that the grounds do not  maintain  that
          it was perverse for the judge to  find  there  was  no  continuing
          family life between the appellant and the sponsor.


      24. It is submitted that ground 2 is essentially a reason's challenge.
          It is pointed out that most of the factors cited by the  appellant
          in the grounds of appeal appear in the judge's decision. Thus, the
          visits are referred to (at 61), the remittances (at 64 -  65)  and
          the phone contact (at 77). It is pointed out that the  grounds  do
          not engage with the many reasons the judge gave for not  accepting
          that family life continued between the appellant and the  sponsor.
          These  were  that  the  appellant  was  36  at  the  time  of  the
          application, that a  number  of  years  had  elapsed  between  the
          sponsor entering the UK and the application  for  entry  clearance
          being made, that the appellant had enough of an  independent  life
          to leave the family home and to relocate away  from  the  siblings
          who remained at home, that she  was  sufficiently  independent  to
          undertake a beautician's course and enterprising enough to  assist
          her sister in starting a beauty parlour  business  and  thereafter
          seeking salaried employment when the business was not  viable.  It
          is pointed out that  the  evidence  was  found  to  be  vague  and
          inconsistent  in  places,  that  there  was  limited   documentary
          evidence of contact and financial support prior to 2017 (at 66 and
          77) and most importantly that the  appellant  had  not  even  been
          named on the sponsor's visa application form as a dependant or  on
          the original kindred roll (at 2).


      25. It is submitted for the respondent that the findings were open  to
          the judge to make and that more than  adequate  reasons  had  been
          provided to underpin the conclusion that family life  between  the
          appellant and sponsor had not endured following his departure from
          Nepal. It is pointed out that  the  appellant's  disagreement  and
          claim that a different Tribunal might  have  reached  a  different
          conclusion did not mean that the judge had erred in law.


      26. With respect to ground 3, it is submitted that this  either  stood
          or fell with the first and second grounds.  It  is  accepted  that
          proportionality was not considered but it is submitted  that  this
          was not surprising given that the issue was agreed to  be  whether
          there was family life between the appellant and the sponsor. It is
          submitted that if the judge's finding on family  life  was  upheld
          then any absence of consideration of proportionality  pursuant  to
          Razgar was immaterial.


      Discussion and Conclusions


      27. I have considered all the evidence, the  grounds  for  permission,
          the First-tier Tribunal's determination and the submissions made.


      28. Despite the length of the appellant's  grounds,  the  argument  is
          essentially two fold: that the assessment of family life  was  not
          properly  undertaken  and  that  there  was   no   proportionality
          assessment.


      29. The judge  identified  the  agreed  issue  at  the  start  of  the
          determination (at 7) as being whether family life existed  between
          the appellant and sponsor. It is acknowledged in  the  appellant's
          grounds to the Upper Tribunal that that was the live issue  before
          the Tribunal. It follows that if no family life was  found,  there
          being no private life claim put forward, then the  judge  had  not
          need to undertake a proportionality assessment.


      30. The judge properly considered all the evidence and confirmed  this
          at paragraphs 8 and 54. The case law relied on was noted (at  51).
          It is well established that judges are not  required  to  set  out
          every piece of evidence or to refer to every argument made. It  is
          enough  that  the  reasoning  is  such  that  the   losing   party
          understands why he has lost. The judge also properly self directed
          at 55-57 and considered case law at 78.


      31. The appellant's case is set out in full  (at  9-46).  The  matters
          raised repeatedly in both sets of grounds are all present  in  the
          determination. The sponsor's evidence of contact, of  Viber  calls
          on a regular basis, his five visits and the two visits made by his
          wife, the fact that his army pension (described as meagre  in  his
          evidence at 14) was paid into a local bank and  that  he  withdrew
          money for his children, the  delay  in  the  making  of  the  visa
          application, the reason for the lack of evidence prior to 2017 and
          2018 and the appellant's unemployment are all  matters  which  are
          recorded in the determination.


      32. I can see nothing in the determination to  suggest  that  relevant
          matters were disregarded or that a higher threshold  was  applied.
          The judge properly considered the issue of family  life.  He  took
          account of the evidence but concluded that the claimed support was
          not committed or effective. That was  a  conclusion  open  to  him
          notwithstanding the contact between the appellant and the sponsor.
          Given the absence of the appellant as a dependant on  the  kindred
          roll  and  on  the  sponsor's  visa  application  (for  which   no
          explanation has been provided), the fact that  the  appellant  had
          relocated away from the family home and had set up a business with
          her sister and the absence of evidence  prior  to  2018  when  the
          entry  clearance  was  made,  there  is  nothing   irrational   or
          unreasonable in the judge's conclusion on family life. Visits  and
          calls  are  what  one  would  expect  between  parents  and  adult
          children. They do not  establish  a  family  life  for  article  8
          purposes.


      33. For all the above reasons, the judge was entitled to conclude that
          there was no family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor.
          Given  that  finding,  there  was   no   need   to   undertake   a
          proportionality assessment and consider the issue of the  historic
          injustice.




          Decision

      34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
          of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.




          Anonymity


      35. No request for an anonymity order has been made at  any  stage  of
          the proceedings and I see no reason to make one.



        Signed


              R. Keki?
              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 17 September 2020






