
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06093/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 18 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                harpreet [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain in which he dismissed the appellant's
    appeal.  On 26 January 2017 the appellant made a human rights claim  in
    an application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    having completed a continuous period of ten years' lawful residence and
    on the basis of her family life with  her  son  [MM].   The  respondent
    refused the application in a letter dated 20 February 2018.  It is  her
    appeal against the respondent's decision that was dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 17 May 1985.   She  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 26 January 2007 and was granted leave to enter
    as a student.  She was  subsequently  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student or a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 7 June 2014.

3.   Thereafter, her leave was extended by  virtue  of  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 because on  6  June  2014,  she  made  an  in-time
    application for leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    leave  was  extended  until  4  July  2014,  when  she  withdrew   that
    application.

4.   Also, on 6 June 2014, she  made  an  in-time  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card.  The application was refused on 7 December 2014.  On 22
    December 2014, she appealed the refusal which was dismissed by way of a
    determination promulgated on 26 June 2015.  Following  onward  appeals,
    the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and remitted the appeal for rehearing.  By a determination  promulgated
    on 7 September 2016, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal.

5.   FTTJ Hussain said in his decision that Mr Solomon of  Counsel  accepted
    that there was a gap in the continuity  of  the  appellant's  residence
    from 2015 onwards.  I accept Mr Solomon's submission that  he  had  not
    conceded that there was a gap in continuity of residence.  What he  had
    conceded was that there was a gap in her lawful  residence.   This  was
    because her lawful (not continuous) residence ended in 2014.   Although
    the appellant also made an in-time application  for  an  EEA  residence
    card on 6 June 2014, Section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  does  not
    apply to EU law residence applications.    Thus, the concession made by
    Mr Solomon at the hearing below  was  that  the  appellant  had  lawful
    residence until 4 July 2014 but not thereafter.

6.   The  basis  of  the  appellant's  application  was  that  as  a  single
    unmarried mother of a child of about 3 years of  age,  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to  her  integration  into  Indian  society.
    While she is receiving some financial  support  from  her  brother  who
    lives in the UK with his partner, her brother  would  not  be  able  to
    continue with that support were she to return to India.

7.   Her mother lives in  India.   It  appears  from  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision that the appellant has been in touch  with  her  mother  since
    having the baby.  Her mother calls her to check if she or the  baby  is
    unwell.  Whilst her mother cares about them, she does not want them  to
    return because she is concerned as to how society will treat them.

8.   I find that the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  address  how  the
    appellant will be treated by the society were she to return  to  India.
    Whilst the judge at paragraph 31 was  prepared  to  accept  that  as  a
    general rule, despite the progress made in India,  Indian  society  may
    not have as yet reached a position where  having  children  outside  of
    wedlock is the norm, the judge failed to address this issue as  to  how
    the appellant would be treated by the society  in  India  were  she  to
    return to India.

9.   At paragraph 33 the judge accepted that  societal  attitudes  generally
    towards women who conceive outside  of  marriage  is  likely  to  be  a
    negative one,  he  did  not  accept  that  that  operates  without  any
    exception and the exception is not isolated.  However, the  judge  does
    not decide whether the appellant's  circumstances  are  such  that  she
    would  suffer  the  stigma  of  ostracization   which   goes   to   the
    consideration of whether there are very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into society in India.

10.  That was the basis of the appellant's reason for not wanting to  return
    to India.  I find that the judge failed to deal  with  this  particular
    issue.

11.  In considering Article 8 outside of the Rules, I find  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the best  interests  of  the  child  and  failed  to
    grapple with the cogent arguments set out by Mr Solomon in his skeleton
    argument.  The judge at paragraph 27 said he had the benefit of a well-
    crafted skeleton argument that the Tribunal has  come  to  expect  from
    Learned Counsel Mr Solomon, but the judge I find failed to consider the
    well-crafted arguments set out in the skeleton argument.

12.  For the above reasons, I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  discloses
    material errors of law such that this whole decision is  set  aside  in
    order to be reheard.

13.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Harmondsworth for rehearing by  a
    First-tier Judge other than FtTJ Hussain.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  13 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun







