
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06937/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st February 2020                        |On 6th March 2020             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mohzam; Burton & Burton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction has been made by the First-tier Tribunal.  For
      the avoidance of any doubt that direction continues.  Unless and until
      a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, JH is granted anonymity. No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him
      or any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others to
      all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
      contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is JH.
      However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I adopt
      the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to JH as the
      appellant, and the SSHD as the respondent.


   3. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He is the subject of a
      deportation order that was signed on 3rd April 2019.  On 4th April
      2019, the respondent considered representations made on behalf of the
      appellant on 21st December 2018 and rejected the appellant's claim
      that his deportation to Iraq would be in breach of Article 8 of the
      European Convention on Human Rights. The appellant's appeal was
      allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Law for reasons set out in a
      decision promulgated on 7th November 2019.


   4. The respondent claims the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give
      clear reasons for the conclusion reached at paragraph [39], that the
      effect of the appellant's deportation on the appellant's three older
      children would be unduly harsh. The respondent claims that the report
      of the social worker relied upon by the appellant establishes that
      there will be obvious difficulties for the children but the report is
      based upon generic comments relating to single-parent families and
      does not establish that the effect of the appellant's deportation on
      his children would be unduly harsh. It is also said the judge failed
      to consider the extent to which any support or assistance required by
      the appellant's partner, might be available from social services who
      would perform their duties under the law.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Woodcraft and the matter comes before me to determine whether
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material
      error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Law


   6. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [2] to [8] of
      the decision.  The judge noted the appellant has a British partner and
      children, and that in March 2014, he was granted discretionary leave
      on Article 8 grounds until 4th March 2017. In considering an
      application for an adjournment made by the appellant's representative
      to obtain a copy of an OASyS report, the judge noted at paragraph
      [11], the central issue in the appeal is whether it would be unduly
      harsh for the children to go to Iraq with the appellant or remain in
      the UK without him.


   7. It is uncontroversial that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with his partner and children. His partner and children
      are British citizens. The appellant has four children, [RH] born on
      24th November 2002, [ZH] born on 5th August 2007, [HH] born on 5th
      March 2010 and [NH] born on 19th September 2017.


   8. The evidence given by the appellant is set out at paragraphs [12] and
      [13] of the decision. The appellant confirmed that he, his partner and
      his younger daughter visited his family in Dohuk in Iraq in 2015, when
      they went to visit the appellant's parents.  The appellant said that
      he could not live in Iraq if he is deported because his brother has
      seven children and the appellant did not think there was room for him.
      He claimed it would also be very difficult for his family to live in
      Iraq as the education and healthcare system do not compare, and, his
      children would have no future there.


   9. The evidence of the appellant's partner is set out at paragraph [14]
      of the decision.  The appellant's older son adopted his witness
      statement, and his evidence is recorded at paragraph [15] of the
      decision.


  10. The Judge noted that in assessing the claim by the appellant that his
      deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
      under Article 8 ECHR, he had to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
      of the immigration rules applies.  The Judge found that paragraph 399A
      does not apply because he could not be satisfied that the appellant
      has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life or that
      there would be very significant obstacles to his integration in Iraq.
      The judge also found that paragraph 399(b) of the immigration rules
      does not apply because the appellant's relationship with his partner
      was formed at a time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully and
      his immigration status was precarious.  The issue was whether on a
      balance of probabilities, it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's
      children to live in Iraq, or unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK
      without the appellant.


  11. At paragraphs [28] to [30] of the decision, the judge referred to the
      decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, noting
      that "unduly harsh" introduces a higher hurdle than that of
      "reasonableness" and the use of the word "unduly" denotes a level of
      "harshness" that may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
      context.


  12. At paragraphs [32] to [33] of the decision, the judge refers to the
      report of the social worker. The judge found at paragraph [34] of the
      decision, that it would be unduly harsh for any of the children to
      live in Iraq.  The judge noted, at paragraph [35], that none of the
      evidence suggests that the family would consider moving to Iraq as a
      whole, and found the appellant's partner would stay in the UK and try
      to bring up the children on her own, if the appellant were to be
      deported.


  13. The Judge records at paragraph [36] of the decision that the
      appellant's representative was asked to identify the particular
      factors relied upon to establish that the effect of the appellant's
      deportation on the children would be "unduly harsh", and beyond what
      would necessarily be involved when a child is faced with the
      deportation of a parent.  The judge states:


         "... he pointed to the prospect of psychological harm identified in
         the social workers report if the appellant  was not in the family
         home providing love and support for his children, as well as to the
         increased prospect of financial hardship arising from the fact that
         his partner would not be able to go out work as long as she had to
         provide full time childcare..."

  14. At paragraphs [38] and [39] of the decision, the judge concluded:


         "38. ... I find that the appellant was a constant figure in the
         lives of his children, from 2002 when the oldest child was born
         until his incarceration at the end of 2018; his partner stresses in
         paragraph 5 of her statement that he has been " the best father to
         my children I could have ever wanted.". I also find that the
         catering business had to close when the appellant was arrested,
         adding to the family's financial problems, with the result that the
         respondent would not have been able to say that his partner was
         "coping" if the true position had been known.

         39.  Having heard the appellant, his partner and the oldest child
         give evidence, I am satisfied that there is an extremely close bond
         between the appellant and each of his children. I find that the
         deportation of the appellant would inevitably fracture that
         relationship because it could not be adequately maintained by
         modern methods of communication. There are perhaps some children
         who would cope in that situation, even though it would be harsh for
         them. Other children would cope less well and for them the
         harshness of separation would be greater. Taking account of the
         evidence I have heard and of the expert opinion of the social
         worker, I am satisfied that the appellant's three older children
         are in the category of children who would cope less well. I find
         that they would face undue harshness if he were to be deported.
         That would arise from their particular vulnerabilities, on which
         the social worker commented above, as well as from the financial
         hardship created by the inability of their mother to go back to
         work.

  15. Mr Mohzam submits the judge carefully considered all the evidence
      before him and found that there is an extremely close bond between the
      appellant and his children. He submits the judge was entitled to take
      into account the fact that the deportation of the appellant would mean
      that he would be unable to see his children, and understandably, the
      youngest of the children who is now aged 2, would want to see her
      father and would be deprived of the opportunity to develop her
      relationship with him.


  16. Mr Mohzam relied upon the extracts from the report of the social
      worker that are referred to in paragraph [32] of the decision and also
      drew my attention to paragraphs 9.31 and 9.32 of the social worker's
      report in which she expresses the opinion that the children's
      separation from the appellant is likely to have a negative impact on
      the attachment bond the children already have with their parents,
      thereby forming an additional route of fear and lack of safety for
      them and the children may interpret any separation as their being
      "abandoned" by their caregivers.  Mr Mohzam refers to the opinion that
      the children may then develop a profound sense of wrongdoing resulting
      in the caregivers having to leave, igniting complex emotions and shame
      that may damage their lifelong relationships with themselves and
      others.


  17. He submits the judge carefully considered the relevant authorities
      including the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and
      following a proper assessment of the circumstances and relationships,
      reached a decision that was open to him.  Mr Mohzam submits the
      respondent disagrees with the decision that was open to the Judge, but
      the decision is not tainted by a material error of law.


Discussion


  18. It is uncontroversial that the deportation of criminals is in the
      public interest.  Section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act confirms that the
      more serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal, the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      Applying s117C(3) of the 2002 Act, the public interest required the
      appellant's deportation unless Exception 2 set out in s.117C(5)
      applies.  That is, the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of his deportation
      on the child would be unduly harsh.


  19. With specific reference to Exception 2 in S.117C(5) , Lord Carnwath in
      KO (Nigeria) observed, at paragraph 23:


         "The expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce
         a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness" under section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the deportation
         of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element
         of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
         that is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section
         itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64) can it
         be equated with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons".
         That would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by
         section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more.".

  20. In SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, Holroyde LJ said, at
      paragraph 34:


         "It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the comparative
         seriousness of the offence or offences committed by the foreign
         criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the effects
         of his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree
         of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child or
         partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation. Pursuant to
         Rule 399, the tribunal or court must consider both whether it would
         be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to live in the country
         to which the foreign criminal is to be deported and whether it
         would be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to remain in the
         UK without him."

  21. At paragraph 38, Holroyde LJ further observed:


         "In the circumstances of this appeal, I do not think it necessary
         to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because it is no
         longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5) of the 2002
         Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for SAT and the
         children of PG's deportation against the seriousness of his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to find that deportation of PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree of harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.".

  22. The respondent accepts the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
      parental relationship with his children who are all British citizens.
      The judge was satisfied that there is an extremely close bond between
      the appellant and each of his children.  He found the deportation of
      the appellant would inevitably fracture the relationship because it
      could not be adequately maintained by modern methods of communication.
      The judge  was satisfied that the appellant's three older children
      would "cope less well", if the appellant is deported.


  23. I acknowledge that if the Tribunal judge applied the correct test,
      and, that resulted in an arguably generous conclusion, it does not
      mean that it was erroneous in law.  However, in my judgment the
      conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal judge, on the evidence, that the
      effect of his deportation on his children would be unduly harsh is
      unsustainable in the light of Lord Carnwath's analysis of the proper
      interpretation of Exception 2 in s.117C(5) , namely that:


         "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent."

  24. The social worker expressed the opinion that the deportation of the
      appellant would be emotionally damaging to the children, should the
      appellant be separated from them for the second time.  The impact upon
      the children was addressed by the social worker by reference to the
      experiences of children raised by a single parent, or children brought
      up in single-parent households.


  25. In my judgement, neither the social worker, the appellant's
      representative nor the First-tier Tribunal Judge identify factors that
      take the effect upon the appellant's children beyond the inevitable
      disadvantages resulting from the separation of a parent and child. It
      is inevitable that a separation will have a real and potentially
      damaging impact on children when a parent is deported and that a child
      will feel unhappiness in those circumstances.


  26. Looking at the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the factors
      identified by the appellant's representative that are recorded in
      paragraph [36] of the decision, it is difficult to identify anything
      which distinguishes this case from other cases where a parent who is
      subject to deportation as a foreign criminal, is separated from a
      child. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the three older
      children "would cope less well", and that would "arise from their
      particular vulnerabilities", without identifying what the particular
      vulnerabilities the judge had in mind, are.  All children should,
      where possible, be brought up with a close relationship with both
      parents. All children deprived of a parent's company during their
      formative years will be at risk of suffering harm. It is necessary to
      look for consequences characterised by a degree of harshness over and
      beyond what every child would experience in such circumstances.


  27. It is important to bear in mind the observations of Hickinbottom LJ in
      PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:


          "When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in circumstances in
         which they can remain in the United Kingdom with the other parent,
         they will inevitably be distressed. However, in section 117C(5) of
         the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its will that, for foreign
         offenders who are sentenced to one to four years, only where the
         consequences for the children are 'unduly harsh' will deportation
         be constrained. That is entirely consistent with Article 8 of ECHR.
         It is important that decision-makers and, when the decisions are
         challenged, tribunals and courts honour that expression of
         Parliamentary will."

  28. In my judgment it was irrational for the First-tier Tribunal to
      conclude that it would be unduly harsh for the respondent's children
      to grow up in the UK without him without identifying the particular
      vulnerabilities that elevated the impact upon the children from being
      "harsh" to "unduly harsh".  The three older children may well "cope
      less well" but that is unfortunately, without more, an unfortunate
      consequence of the separation of a parent and child, when the parent
      is deported.  It follows that in my judgement, the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal judge is vitiated by a material error of law and
      must be set aside.


Remaking the decision


  29. Mr Mohzam invited me to adjourn the hearing so that the appellant can
      submit further evidence.   The application was opposed by Mrs Aboni
      who submitted that I should remake the decision upon the evidence that
      is before the Tribunal.


  30. I refused  the  application  to  adjourn  the  hearing.  The  standard
      directions issued to the  parties  make  it  clear  that  there  is  a
      presumption that if the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
      aside, the Upper Tribunal will proceed to remake the decision  at  the
      hearing of the appeal.     The Tribunal is empowered to permit new  or
      further evidence to be admitted in the remaking of a decision, but  no
      application has been made by the appellant  in  accordance  with  Rule
      15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   No
      further witness statements have been made by  the  appellant  and  his
      partner. I have  been  provided  with  no  explanation,  let  alone  a
      satisfactory explanation, as to  why  any  new  evidence  could,  with
      reasonable diligence, not have been made available to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on the initial appeal,  and  why  no  application  to  adduce
      evidence in accordance with the Tribunal Rules, has been made.


  31. Mr Mohzam relied upon the report  of  the  independent  social  worker
      report and submits that in this case, I should have particular  regard
      to the close family ties and the relationship  between  the  appellant
      and his children.  I invited Mr Mohzam to outline and direct me to any
      evidence of any particular vulnerabilities that either his partner  or
      any of the children have, to support the claim that the impact of  the
      appellant's deportation upon his children, would be unduly harsh.   Mr
      Mohzam referred to the age of  the  youngest  child  and  the  opinion
      expressed by the social worker that the children are  close  to  their
      father.  He submits the impact of  separation,  will  be  severe.   Mr
      Mohzam submits that the children have grown up with their father,  and
      his removal from the family will result in a sense of loss, a loss  of
      security and the loss of the support that he has  provided,  including
      the financial support.


  32. Mrs Abonhi submits the independent social worker does not identify any
      particular factors that are capable of satisfying the high threshold
      that must be met.  She submits there is no evidence of any particular
      vulnerability and there is no evidence from the schools attended by
      the children or any medical professionals to demonstrate any
      particular detrimental effect upon the children when their father was
      in prison and separated from his family.  She submits that here, there
      is nothing more than the normal impact upon children when a parent is
      deported.


  33. In remaking the decision I adopt the unchallenged findings made by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Law.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Law found it
      would be unduly harsh for any of the children to live in Iraq.  The
      respondent did not challenge that finding and Mrs Aboni has not sought
      to persuade me that I should revisit that finding. The issue is
      whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK
      without the appellant.


  34. I have carefully considered the content of the independent social work
      report.  First-tier Tribunal Law set out at paragraph [32] of his
      decision, the conclusions set out in the report of Lucy Mwape dated
      15th July 2019.  That report followed an assessment undertaken when
      the appellant was in prison.  I note that although the report is that
      of Lucy Mwape, an independent social worker, the report is based upon
      a home visit on 21st July 2019, "undertaken by Mr Masimba Karemba and
      Mrs Beatrice Madzadzavara - independent social worker" when they saw
      and interviewed the appellant's partner and three eldest children.
      They observed the youngest child during that visit.  The independent
      social worker met with the appellant on 30th July 2019 at Stoke Heath
      Prison.  Lucy Mwape identifies in section 4 of her report, the
      documents that were made available to her.


  35. In the course of the assessment, the appellant's partner reported that
      she does not have support from family networks and closing the family
      business had a huge negative impact on the family's financial
      situation [7.1].  She explained that there are no major problems in
      school for these three school-age children [8.1], and the children's
      schooling was not being impacted upon by the absence of their father
      [8.3].  She claimed to be coping with the children to the best of her
      ability under the circumstances [8.5], although she did not consider
      that she was meeting the needs of the family financially, and did not
      have enough money to spare for regular visits to see the appellant in
      prison [8.8].  The appellant's partner believed that it is going to be
      a struggle with no money to open the business again, and she believed
      that she would struggle to manage the four children as a single parent
      [8.16]. The appellant's partner reported that she had not been to see
      the doctor since the appellant had been in prison and had tried to
      deal with the situation on her own [8.10].  The appellant's partner
      confirmed that the family has never had any involvement with social
      services [8.17].  The appellant's partner reported that RH has no
      health issues other than being asthmatic.  She reported that ZH is
      reported by his teachers to be a "bright boy" but had been put on
      school detention 5-6 times during the time that the appellant had been
      in prison.  She reported that if the appellant was in the family home,
      he would not tolerate that behaviour and such behaviour would stop.
      She said that most of the time she is busy with household chores, and
      ZH appeared to take advantage of the situation. That aside, the
      appellant's partner confirmed that ZH is in good health and has a good
      and clear daily routine in place.  The appellant's partner reported
      that HH was doing well at school although she was behind with reading
      and writing.  She was described as a "lovely girl", but the
      appellant's partner reported that her attitude had changed since the
      appellant's imprisonment and she was now always fighting with her
      sibling ZH.  The appellant's partner confirmed that she has
      facilitated telephone contact between NH and the appellant and said
      that NH recognises the appellant's voice on the phone, and she laughs
      and giggles during telephone contact.


  36. In her analysis, Lucy Mwape confirms that the family was missing the
      appellant and struggling to understand why the respondent proposed to
      deport him. The appellant's partner believed that her children are
      missing out, and the appellant was missing out on their development
      and life events.  She states:


         "9.31    "The information provided by [the appellant's partner]
         suggests that there are secure attachments between the children and
         [the appellant]. It is the social workers' professional opinion
         that should the children be separated from either [the appellant's
         partner] or [the appellant], the situation is likely to have a
         negative impact on the attachment bond the children already have
         with the two thereby forming an additional route of fear and lack
         of security for them. This is likely to happen due to the fact that
         when parents are removed from children's lives suddenly and without
         adequate support, the attachment and relationship is affected.

         9.32 The assessors believe that, should [RH], [ZH], [HH] and [NH]
         be separated from either [the appellant] or [the appellant's
         partner], it is likely that they may interpreter sic that situation
         as "abandoned" by their caregivers. It is most likely that they may
         then develop a profound sense wrongdoing sic resulting in their
         caregivers having to leave, igniting complex emotions and shame
         that may damage their lifelong relationships with themselves and
         others."

  37. In the final analysis, Lucy Mwape confirms that the appellant
      expresses love for his children and wife with passion [13.39], and
      that he appears genuinely concerned about their emotional welfare in
      his absence.  She states there would be emotional and psychological
      implications on all the children should the separation continue, worse
      should the appellant be removed from his children altogether [13.40].
      She notes that RH and ZH are in their adolescent years and a father
      figure is very crucial for them during this stage as they look out for
      him to reassure them that they are going through what he experienced
      [13.42].  She states that children at NH and HH's developmental age
      require secure stable and affectionate relationships with adults and
      responsiveness to their needs.  At paragraph 13.50, she states:


         "... [The appellant] requires time to reflect on his character and
         be able to provide insightful parenting. His role as a loving
         father is crucial in establishing age-appropriate boundaries and
         rules to allow his children to experience both positive and
         negative natural consequences for their behaviour or provide
         logical consequences to help them learn from mistake."

  38. Lucy Mwape concludes that during the home visit on 21st July 2019, it
      was observed from the way the children spoke about their father and
      mother that there is a close relationship with the appellant.  They
      rely on him in terms of applying discipline in the house and providing
      the financial and practical support needed by the family.  She notes
      that the appellant has been in the children's lives since they were
      born and had been separated from his children during the period when
      he was in prison. She records that all the older children considered
      visiting their father in prison was better than talking over the
      phone, as evidence of how significant it is for them to have physical
      contact with their father. Such physical contact is in their best
      interests.  In her opinion, it would be emotionally damaging to the
      children should the appellant be separated from them for the second
      time if he is deported. She states that the children have already
      suffered his loss once, and twice may contribute further trauma.  At
      paragraphs 14.8 to 14.13, she draws upon her experience and sets out
      the impact upon children that are raised by single parents.


  39. Having carefully considered the evidence before me, I am satisfied
      that First-tier Tribunal Judge Laws correctly found that there is an
      extremely close bond between the appellant and each of his children.
      I am quite satisfied that apart from the period during which the
      appellant was incarcerated, he has lived with his partner and
      children, and that it is in the children's best interests to continue
      to live with both of their parents together in the UK.  I acknowledge
      that the best interests of the children are a primary factor in my
      ultimate decision, however they are not a determinative factor.


  40. I must take into account the public interest in deportation as
      expressed in the immigration rules and s117C of the 2002 Act.  I have
      carefully considered whether there is anything within the evidence and
      in particular, the report of the independent social worker, that
      establishes a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily
      be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent
      reminding myself that it is an elevated threshold denoting something
      severe or bleak to be evaluated exclusively from the effect on the
      child.  Having carefully considered the evidence, in my judgment there
      simply is not the evidence on which I can properly conclude that the
      deportation of the appellant would lead to his partner and children
      suffering a degree of harshness beyond what would necessarily be
      involved for any child of a foreign criminal facing deportation. I
      have no doubt that the children will initially feel a sense of loss
      because of their close relationship with their father, and that the
      consequences of the appellant's deportation will be harsh.  The
      evidence establishes that the children are bright and resilient and
      that with the love and care that they received from their mother when
      their father was in prison, the impact upon them was kept to a
      minimum. The 'commonplace' distress caused by separation from a parent
      is insufficient to meet the test.  The children will continue to
      receive the love, care and support that they need from their mother in
      the United Kingdom.  It will undoubtedly be difficult for the children
      in the short term, but in my judgment the evidence simply does not
      provide a basis upon which the appellant can establish Exception 2
      under s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399 of the Immigration
      Rules.


  41. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
      held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
      those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
      construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
      person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
      unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
      described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  As to the meaning of "very
      compelling circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions
      1 and 2, Lord Justice Jackson said:


         "28. ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
         117C(6) . It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
         and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
         Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C, but they do so in greater
         detail.

         29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
         117C(6) , in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
         to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances described in those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his claim based on
         Article 8 especially strong.

  42. Whether there are "very compelling circumstances" is a demanding test,
      but nonetheless requires a wide-ranging assessment, so as to ensure
      that Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8.  It has not
      been suggested either before First-tier Tribunal Judge Law or before
      me that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to go to
      Iraq with him or remain in the UK without him.  First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Law found that it would be unduly harsh for the children to live
      in Iraqi and for the reasons set out above, I have found that it would
      not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the
      appellant.


  43. I have noted the appellant's offending history.  On 16th November 2018
      he was convicted at Wolverhampton Crown Court of burglary and
      sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.  In his sentencing remarks, His
      Honour Judge Watson noted that the appellant was found not guilty of
      possessing criminal property and the judge inferred from that that the
      jury found that although he was involved in the burglary he was not
      the leading light.  The sentencing judge said:


         "...Notwithstanding that, this was a serious burglary and you have
         heard the consequences for the family who owned this business. It
         may not have been a dwelling burglary, but it must have felt like a
         dwelling burglary to those who had put time and effort into the
         business and kept items precious to them within the business, which
         items were stolen by you, either alone or with others.....In my
         judgement, given the extent of the loss to the victim, given the
         degree of vandalism in breaking into the property, this was, in my
         judgement, an offence with greater harm. There must have been, in
         my judgement, a degree of planning or organisation; the burglar
         alarm was disabled and in any event, there must have been equipment
         for burglary in order to go through the felt roof. It is therefore,
         in my judgement, an offence indicating higher culpability.  What
         this means to you is that this is a category 1 offence. The
         starting point is imprisonment of two years with a range of between
         1 to 5 years in custody. But it does not stop there. I must look at
         the factors indicating an increase in seriousness and indeed those
         factors reducing seriousness. Increasing seriousness is the fact
         that you have previous convictions, not just that fact alone, but
         you have previous convictions for a similar type of offence; two
         previous convictions for non-dwelling burglary, one going back to
         2012, the other very shortly before this offence was committed.
         Following your first conviction, you were given a suspended
         sentence. That did not deter you. The second conviction, you
         received a financial penalty. I do not have the circumstances of
         that, but nonetheless this was a conviction very close in time to
         the one I must now sentence you for.

         In addition there are further indicators indicating seriousness.
         This was an offence committed at night. Fortunately, no staff were
         present. There are no features within the guidelines which reduce
         seriousness, but I bear in mind your personal mitigation. You have
         four children, the oldest being 16, and you have been with your
         partner for some 20 years.

         ..., the starting point is two years. It is aggravated by your
         convictions, but I am prepared to reduce back to the starting point
         on account of your personal mitigation. That makes a sentence of
         two years. In my judgement, this offence is so serious that only a
         custodial sentence can be imposed, and that custodial sentence will
         be one of immediate imprisonment..."

  44.  I have carefully considered the matters referred to in the report of
      the independent social worker, particularly at section 13, in which
      the social worker records the information provided by the appellant
      during an interview on 30th July 2019.  The appellant acknowledged
      that he let down his wife having come to the UK for better living
      prospects.  He passionately described each one of the children.  When
      speaking about the offence leading to his incarceration, the appellant
      did not wish to go into detail because each time he thinks about it,
      he cannot come to terms with the fact that he got himself involved in
      a criminal act that has affected his family.  He acknowledged that he
      deserved to be punished and was very sad that the people being
      punished most are his children and wife.  The independent social
      worker states that the appellant shows good insight into what his
      criminality has caused his family, and he expresses love for his wife
      and children.


  45. I acknowledge that the public interest in the deportation of a foreign
      criminal is not set in stone and must be approached flexibly,
      recognising that there will be cases where the person's circumstances
      outweigh the strong public interest in removal.  I have had regard
      inter alia to the appellant's length of residence in the UK, the close
      ties that he retains with his wife and children, his immigration and
      offending history, and the family circumstances described in the
      report of the independent social worker but there are in my judgment
      no very compelling circumstances which make his claim based on Article
      8 especially strong.  It follows that in my judgement, the deportation
      of the appellant is in the public interest and not disproportionate to
      the legitimate aim.


      Decision:


  46. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Law is set aside.

I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.

Signed                                  Date          21st February 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




