
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/06967/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 February 2019               |On 19 February 2019                 |
|                                  |....................................|
|                                  |...                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                OLADIMEJI [A]
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECREARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Coleman (counsel) Instructed by Paul John & Co
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 30 October  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14 April 1977 and is a national of Nigeria.  On
6 March 2018 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application  for
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Lucas ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and,  on  21  December  2018,  Judge
Birrell granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The Appellant claimed to be in a relationship with a lady  who  had  a
      previous child who was a British Citizen and they  also  had  a  child
      together. There is no reference  to  or  identification  of  the  best
      interest of the children in the decision: while that may not have been
      material in respect of the second child  who  was  neither  a  British
      citizen nor one who had lived in the  UK  for  over  7  years  it  was
      clearly relevant in respect of  the  British  citizen  child  who  the
      Appellant and sponsor claimed had a relationship with  his  biological
      father.

The Hearing

5. Both Mr Coleman and Mr Wilding told me  that  the  decision  contains  an
error of law and, on joint motion, they asked me to set the  decision  aside
and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal for further fact-finding.  Mr
Coleman restricted himself to relying on the grounds of appeal.  Mr  Wilding
told me that [21] of the decision is  wrong,  that  the  decision  does  not
contain an adequate analysis of the evidence that  was  led,  and  that  the
Judge's findings are inadequately reasoned.

Analysis

6. At [3] of the decision the Judge summarises the areas of dispute in  this
case. After reading [3] one  could  realistically  expect  the  decision  to
contain a discussion  of  the  evidence  relating  to  whether  or  not  the
appellant's relationship with his partner existed for  two  years;  findings
on whether that relationship is genuine and subsisting; findings  about  the
relationship between the appellant and his stepdaughter. One of  the  issues
that the Judge manifestly fails to take account of is  and  the  appellant's
stepdaughter is a British citizen.

7.   In   R   (on   the   application   of   RK)    (s.117B(6);    "parental
relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 it  was  held  that  (i)  It  is  not
necessary for an individual to have "parental  responsibility"  in  law  for
there to exist a parental relationship; (ii) Whether a person who is  not  a
biological parent is in a "parental  relationship"  with  a  child  for  the
purposes of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
depends  on  the  individual  circumstances  and  whether  the   role   that
individual plays establishes he or she has "stepped into  the  shoes"  of  a
parent; (iii)  Applying that approach, apart from  the  situation  of  split
families where relationships between parents have broken down and an  actual
or de facto step-parent exists, it will be unusual, but not impossible, for
more  than  two  individuals  to  have  a  "parental  relationship"  with  a
child.  However, the relationships between  a  child  and  professional  or
voluntary carers or family friends are not "parental relationships".

8. The Judge's brief findings occupy just half a page between [17] and  [23]
of the decision. The appellant had lodged a  bundle  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal which included a letter from his Minister  of  religion,  a  letter
from his stepdaughter's school and three  witness  statements.  The  witness
statements and letters  contain  evidence  of  the  nature  and  quality  of
relationship  with  his  partner,  and  the  nature  and  quality   of   the
relationship with his British Citizen stepdaughter.

9. The Judge's decision contains no  meaningful  analysis  of  the  evidence
that is produced. The first sentence of [21] is simply  wrong.  [20]  stands
in isolation. The Judge finds that there  is  no  relationship  between  the
appellant's British citizen stepdaughter  and  her  biological  father,  but
does not go on to make any findings at all about  the  relationship  between
the appellant and his stepdaughter.

10. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

11. The appellant's relationship with his British citizen stepdaughter is  a
central issue in this appeal, yet  there  is  no  consideration  of  section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act and no consideration of section 55  of  the  Borders
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. There are no  meaningful  findings  of
fact about the relationship between the appellant and  his  British  citizen
stepdaughter.

12.  Because the fact-finding exercise is incomplete, because  the  decision
contains  no  meaningful  analysis  of  relevant  evidence  lead   for   the
appellant, because s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act has  not  been  considered  and
because there is no consideration of s.55 of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009, the decision is tainted by material errors of  law.  I
set it aside. I consider whether I  can  substitute  my  own  decision.  The
material error of law in the decision  relates  to  an  inadequacy  of  fact
finding. I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision.  A  further  fact-finding
exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

15. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Lucas.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

17. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  30  October  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
              Date 14 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





