
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07526/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 18 October 2017                         |On 06 November 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M H S
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr J. A. Trussler, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim in the context  of  an  application  for  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain  (ILR)  on  grounds  of  10  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou ("the judge") allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 20 January 2017. The judge noted that  the
    appellant did not exceed the total number of days allowed  for  absence
    from the UK during the  10-year  period.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application because he was absent from  the  UK  for  a  single  period
    exceeding six months contrary to paragraph 276A(a) of  the  immigration
    rules [23]. The judge noted that the policy  guidance  stated  that  an
    application would "normally" be refused, but it "may be appropriate  to
    exercise discretion over excess absences in compelling or compassionate
    circumstances, for example  where  the  applicant  was  prevented  from
    returning to the UK through unavoidable circumstances." The judge noted
    that the policy went  on  to  state  that  the  decision  maker  should
    consider the reasons  for  the  absence  and  whether  it  was  due  to
    compelling circumstances.  The  decision  maker  should  also  consider
    whether the applicant returned to the UK as soon as they were  able  to
    do so [25].

4.    The judge considered the reliability of the evidence relating  to  the
    compassionate circumstances that the appellant said  arose  during  his
    visit to Pakistan (18 June 2009 - 31 January 2010), including  the  way
    the evidence was obtained by  his  legal  representative  [26-27].  The
    judge concluded:

       "28. In the circumstances, I do give  weight  to  the  correspondence
       with Dr  Warsi  primarily  because  this  has  been  checked  by  the
       appellant's legal representatives and is  not  totally  documentation
       provided by  an  unverifiable  individual  who  has  merely  provided
       documentary evidence at the appellant's request.  Had  the  situation
       been otherwise, I would have dismissed the appellant's appeal  as  he
       and his previous solicitors had failed to provide this information in
       his application and grounds of appeal respectively. Consequently, the
       respondent was totally correct in her original decision as the  facts
       which have now been  presented  to  me  were  not  available  to  the
       respondent. The  respondent  was  therefore  not  in  a  position  to
       exercise discretion and it was not incumbent upon the  respondent  to
       seek further information from  the  appellant  to  ascertain  whether
       discretion should have been exercised  or  not  but  I  now  exercise
       discretion on the respondent's behalf.


       29. For the record, the appellant's  claim  to  private  life  either
       within or outside the Immigration  Rules  would  fail.  He  does  not
       satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  at  all.  I  do  not
       consider that there are any significant obstacles to  his  return  to
       Pakistan. He is a young, fit man who  has  transferrable  skills.  He
       came to the United Kingdom at the age of 24 so he was an  adult  when
       he left Pakistan and is totally familiar with the  culture.  He  will
       certainly be more familiar with the culture  on  return  to  Pakistan
       than he was familiar with the culture in the United Kingdom  when  he
       first arrived here. With regard  to  his  private  life  outside  the
       Immigration Rules, I note that he is currently in employment here and
       has friends and family but his status has always been  precarious  as
       defined by the Court of Appeal  in  Rhuppiah  and  therefore  section
       117B(v) applies to the appellant.
       ......
       30. On the totality of the evidence before me, and  bearing  in  mind
       that the burden of proof lies upon the appellant,  I  find  that  the
       respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
       Immigration Rules applicable to this case. Accordingly this appeal is
       allowed."

5.          The Secretary of State appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    following grounds:

       i)  It  was  not  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  'exercise
          discretion' on the respondent's behalf under  paragraph  276B  of
          the immigration rules.


      ii) If the judge erred in relation to  the  assessment  of  paragraph
          276B, then the appeal should have been dismissed in light of  the
          judge's finding that the appellant would not otherwise  meet  the
          private life requirements of  the  immigration  rules  and  there
          would be a breach of Article 8 outside the rules.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

6.    Before I consider the grounds of appeal, there are  other  fundamental
    errors on the face of the First-tier Tribunal decision that  cannot  be
    ignored. The application for leave to remain was made on  25  September
    2015. The respondent refused the application the same day.  This  is  a
    'new style'  appeal  following  amendments  made  to  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014. The appellant has a right of appeal to the Tribunal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse a human rights claim (section  82(1)(b)
    NIAA 2002).

7.    Although the 'new style' appeal  provisions  primarily  have  been  in
    force since 05 April 2015, the judge appeared to be  unaware  of  these
    fundamental changes to the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal. The
    judge erred in law in purporting to allow the appeal on the ground that
    the decision was 'not in accordance with  the  law'  and  was  'not  in
    accordance with the immigration  rules'.  The  only  ground  of  appeal
    available to the judge to consider  on  the  facts  of  this  case  was
    whether the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 (section 84(1)(c) NIAA 2002).

8.     GEN.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  states  that  the  requirements  of   the
    immigration  rules  reflect  how,  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect for
    private and family life  and  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration control. A refusal of leave  to  remain
    on grounds of long residence engages the operation of Article 8 of  the
    European Convention. The way in which the immigration rules relating to
    private life are considered and applied is directly relevant to whether
    a decision is lawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.
    Because the rules are relevant to the  assessment  of  a  human  rights
    claim, the mere fact  that  the  judge  considered  the  terms  of  the
    immigration rules is not an error. However, it is of some concern  that
    a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  appeared  to  be  ignorant  of  his
    jurisdiction nearly  two  years  after  major  changes  to  the  appeal
    framework were commenced.


9.    The Secretary of State is correct say that it is a matter for her  to
    consider whether discretion should be exercised under  the  immigration
    rules. The Tribunal in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT
    00307 made clear that if the decision maker  has  failed  to  exercised
    discretion the failure renders the decision 'not in accordance with the
    law. In this case, the appellant did not explain  the  reason  for  the
    extended period of absence when he made the application  for  leave  to
    remain. As a result, the respondent could not be expected  to  consider
    whether it was necessary to exercise discretion when  she  refused  the
    application. In light of the  decision  in  Ukus  the  judge  erred  in
    purporting to "exercise that discretion on the respondent's behalf."  I
    have already  explained  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal on the ground that  the  decision  was
    'not in accordance with the law'.

10.   However, the scope of the  Article  8  assessment  undertaken  by  the
    Tribunal is wide enough to consider whether the appellant had  produced
    evidence  that  might  satisfy  the  requirements   outlined   in   the
    respondent's policy guidance. It would still be open to a judge to find
    that the decision did not strike a fair balance between  the  competing
    interests giving due weight to the respondent's policy guidance,  which
    states that it she may find it appropriate to exercise discretion if an
    applicant can  explain  why  there  were  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances that prevented him from returning to the UK in time.

11.   Even if the judge considered that it was open  to  him  to  allow  the
    appeal under the immigration rules, the fact that he had found that the
    appellant had provided an adequate explanation for the extended absence
    was relevant to a proper assessment of  the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8. The judge's failure to appreciate this fact  when  assessing
    where a fair balance was struck also amounts to  an  error  of  law.  I
    conclude that the combination of errors identified above were  material
    to a proper determination of the appeal and that the decision  must  be
    set aside.

12.   I have gone on to consider whether the decision can be remade  on  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, which have  not  been
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.  The  judge  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing evidence from the appellant, who explained  that  he  fell  ill
    during the visit and had to remain in  Pakistan  longer  than  intended
    [9].  The  judge  considered  the  credibility   of   the   appellant's
    explanation in light of the evidence provided by Dr Warsi  [26-27].  Dr
    Warsi confirmed that he treated the appellant for viral  hepatitis  and
    that the appellant was unable to travel due to his  illness  [27].  The
    judge outlined the information provided by Dr Warsi and  gave  adequate
    reasons to explain why he placed weight on  the  evidence  [27].  I  am
    satisfied that the judge made sustainable findings to  explain  why  he
    accepted the explanation provided by the appellant and that I can go on
    to remake the decision based on that finding.

Remaking the decision

13.   The appellant has lived in the UK for a period  of  13  years.  During
    that time, it is likely that he has established a private life  in  the
    UK. The appellant has studied and worked in the UK  and  is  likely  to
    have established social and economic ties here. He  also  has  extended
    family  members  in  the  UK.  I  am  satisfied  that  his  removal  in
    consequence of the decision is likely to interfere with  his  right  to
    private life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation  of
    Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage  approach  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

14.   The state can lawfully  interfere  with  an  appellant's  private  and
    family life if it is pursuing a legitimate aim and it is necessary  and
    proportionate in all the circumstances of the case. In cases  involving
    human rights issues under Article 8, the heart  of  the  assessment  is
    whether the decision strikes a fair balance between the due  weight  to
    be given to the public interest in maintaining an effective  system  of
    immigration control and the impact of the decision on the  individual's
    private or family life. In assessing whether  the  decision  strikes  a
    fair balance a court or tribunal  should  give  appropriate  weight  to
    Parliament's and the Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of
    the general public interest as expressed  in  the  relevant  rules  and
    statutes: see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

15.   The respondent's  policy,  as  expressed  in  paragraph  276B  of  the
    immigration rules, recognises the ties that a person has established in
    the UK during a continuous period of 10 years'  lawful  residence.  The
    appellant met the requirements of the  immigration  rules  save  for  a
    single absence of more than six months from June 2009 to January  2010.
    I am  unable  to  exercise  discretion  under  the  immigration  rules.
    However, I  can  consider,  as  part  of  the  overall  proportionality
    assessment, the circumstances in which the  respondent  would  consider
    exercising discretion  in  accordance  with  her  policy  guidance.  In
    relation to a single absence of over 180 days the guidance states  that
    the decision maker should consider (i) the  reasons  for  the  absence;
    (ii) whether it was due to compelling or  compassionate  circumstances;
    and (iii) whether the applicant returned to the UK as soon as they were
    able to do so.

16.   The First-tier Tribunal was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  produced
    sufficient evidence to show that his extended absence in 2009/2010  was
    due to a serious illness that, it appears, required in-patient and then
    out-patient treatment. He was advised not to travel until he  was  well
    enough to do so. I am satisfied that the appellant has provided a  good
    reason for his extended  absence  and  that  a  serious  illness  is  a
    compelling and compassionate circumstance. The evidence indicates  that
    the appellant returned to  the  UK  as  soon  as  he  was  sufficiently
    recovered to travel.

17.   The respondent's rules and policies must  be  given  due  weight.  The
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph  276B  of  the  immigration
    rules save for needing to explain one extended absence. The explanation
    appears to satisfy the matters that would  normally  be  considered  to
    justify  discretion  being  exercised  according  to  the  respondent's
    policy. I find that these are matters that  can  be  given  significant
    weight in assessing where a fair balance should be struck.

18.   Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 sets out a  number  of  public  interest
    considerations that a court or  tribunal  must  take  into  account  in
    assessing whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
    private and family life is justified and proportionate.

19.   I have place weight on the fact that the maintenance of  an  effective
    system of immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest  (section
    117B(1)). I have explained why weight should be given to the fact  that
    the  appellant  appears  to  meet  the  combined  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules and the  relevant  policy  guidance.  The  rules  and
    guidance are said to reflect where  a  fair  balance  is  struck  under
    Article 8.

20.   The appellant did not need the assistance of an  interpreter  and  was
    able to give evidence in English at the hearing. As such I find that it
    is reasonable to infer that no public policy issues arise  relating  to
    the  appellant's  ability  to  speak  English  (section  117B(2)).  The
    appellant works in the UK and there is no evidence to suggest  that  he
    is likely to be a burden on taxpayers or is unable  to  integrate  into
    society (section 117B(3)).

21.   Section 117B(5) states  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious. The appellant was granted a series of
    periods of limited leave to remain in  the  UK,  but  they  were  still
    'precarious' for the purpose of section 117B(5): see AM (S 117B) Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260. The Tribunal in Deelah and  others  (section  117B  -
    ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 found  that  the  terms  of  section  117B(5),
    although  giving  statutory  instruction,  did  not  encroach  on  "the
    independent adjudicative function of the judiciary".

22.   In order to comply with Article 8 each case must be considered on  the
    facts. The fact that the appellant developed a private life in  the  UK
    when his immigration status was 'precarious' is only  one  part  of  an
    overall assessment of the facts of this  case,  which  must  also  give
    weight to the respondent's policy as outlined in the rules and relevant
    guidance. In this case the periods of limited leave to  remain  counted
    towards potential settlement under paragraph 276B  of  the  immigration
    rules. The appellant met the requirements save for an  extended  period
    of absence, which he has been able to explain in  accordance  with  the
    terms of the respondent's policy guidance.

23.   After having weighed all the circumstances of  this  case  I  conclude
    that removal of the appellant in consequence of the decision would  not
    strike a fair balance between the weight to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest (as expressed in the relevant rules, statutes and policy)  and
    the impact on the individual involved in this case (points (iv)  &  (v)
    of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).

24.   The appellant did not meet the strict requirements of the  immigration
    rules at the date of the decision, but having considered the  terms  of
    the  respondent's  policy  guidance,  and  after  having  weighed   the
    circumstances of the case at the date of the hearing, I  conclude  that
    the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

25.   It is a matter for the Secretary of State to  consider  what  form  of
    leave to grant the appellant and whether it is appropriate to  exercise
    discretion  under  rule  276B  to  grant  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
    considering the factual findings made by the Tribunal relating  to  the
    extended period of absence.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involves the making of an error of law

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   02 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
