

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: HU/07347/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 6 December 2016                     |On 7 December 2016       |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Farrell (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant in this determination identified as AS.

   1. I have made an anonymity order because this  decision  refers  to  the
      appellant's two minor children and their circumstances.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 21 January 2016, in which it dismissed his
      appeal against the respondent's decision dated 18  September  2015  to
      refuse him leave to remain.

Background

   3. The appellant is a citizen of the USA.  He arrived in  the  UK  on  25
      April 2015 as a visitor.  On 13 July 2015 he made  an  application  to
      remain in the UK on the basis of his family life in the UK.  His wife,
      who he married in 2009, is a British citizen.  They have two children:
      a daughter, H, who was born in Senegal in 2006 but has  been  residing
      in the UK since 2007; and a son, M,  born  in  2012  in  the  UK.   Mr
      McVeety clarified that the respondent  accepts  both  children  to  be
      British citizens.

FTT decision

   4. The FTT decided that the appellant  could  not  meet  the  Immigration
      Rules.  As the FTT noted, any application to remain  pursuant  to  the
      Rules was bound to fail in light of paragraph E-LTRP.2.1 (para 12).


   5. The FTT then considered Article 8 briefly (para 18) before  concluding
      that the appellant  could  return  to  the  USA  to  apply  for  entry
      clearance and the period of separation to enable him to do so could be
      described as compelling circumstances justifying  a  consideration  of
      Article 8 outside the Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal went on to  find
      that the appellant's return to the USA to apply for  entry  clearance,
      leaving his wife and children in the UK would not be  disproportionate
      (para 19).

Issues arising

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal in  relation  to  Article  8
      only.  When granting permission Judge Brunnen was unimpressed with the
      grounds of appeal and granted permission on the basis  of  an  obvious
      point overlooked by the grounds: the FTT  failed  to  have  regard  to
      section 117B(6) contained in Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').

Error of law

   7. At the beginning of the hearing both representatives  agreed  that  as
      the relevant application and decision  postdated  7  April  2015,  any
      appeal could only be brought on human  rights  grounds  following  the
      implementation of section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014.  Ms  Farrell
      clarified that she only sought to appeal against  the  FTT's  decision
      regarding Article 8 in any event.


   8. Both representatives  agreed  that  the  FTT's  Article  8  assessment
      contains a material error of law such that it must be  set  aside  and
      remade.


   9. In Bossade (Sections 117A - D: inter-relationship with  Rules)  [2015]
      UKUT 415 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal considered  the  interplay  between
      Part 5A and the Rules.  It was  held  that,  ordinarily,  it  will  be
      appropriate for the Tribunal to first consider an appellant's  Article
      8  claim  by  reference  to  the  Rules.  This  exercise  will  entail
      determining whether the relevant substantive conditions are  satisfied
      by the person concerned. Part 5A has no role in this discrete process.
      Rather, the Part 5A regime is engaged only if the Tribunal finds  that
      the impugned measure interferes with a person's right  to  respect  to
      private  or   family   life,   thereby   requiring   examination   and
      determination  of  the  question  of  whether  such  interference   is
      proportionate.

  10. Although the FTT did not clearly  find  an  interference  with  family
      life, this is implicit from reading the decision as  a  whole.   After
      all, the FTT clearly accepted the family life  between  the  appellant
      and his children (which was not in dispute and expressly  accepted  by
      the respondent in the decision  letter)  and  this  shall  plainly  be
      interfered with once the appellant returns to the USA.   The  FTT  was
      therefore obliged to turn to proportionality and in doing so  consider
      and apply the Part 5A regime.   This  approach  is  supported  by  the
      reasoning of the Supreme Court in Hasham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60.
      At [17] and [53] Lord Reed emphasised that the Immigration  Rules  are
      not law and do not govern the determination of appeals.  The  policies
      adopted  by  the  respondent  and  given  effect  by  the  Rules   are
      nevertheless a relevant  and  important  consideration  for  tribunals
      determining appeals brought on Convention  grounds.   It  remains  for
      tribunals to judge whether on the facts as they have found  them,  and
      giving due weight to the public interest, the  factors  on  the  other
      side   lead   to   the   conclusion   that   deportation   would    be
      disproportionate.   Although  Hasham  Ali   is   a   case   concerning
      deportation  its  reasoning  regarding  the  proper  approach  to  the
      Immigration Rules and Article 8 is instructive in the  non-deportation
      context as well.

  11. In any event, as both representatives before me accepted,  in  finding
      an absence of compelling circumstances justifying a  consideration  of
      Article 8, the FTT has erred in law in failing  to  direct  itself  to
      relevant considerations: how the best interests of the children may be
      adversely affected if their father leaves the UK (having  been  living
      with them since April 2015); the impact of even a temporary  cessation
      of family life upon  the  children;  and  the  likely  length  of  the
      interference with family life.

  12. Section 117B(6) of Part 5A of the 2002 Act provides:


                 "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                 the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
                 where-
                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

  13. It is clear from paras  16  and  17  of  the  FTT  decision  that  the
      appellant's claimed genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
      his two British citizen (and therefore "qualifying") children  is  not
      disputed.


  14. The FTT has not directed itself to the 2002 Act at  all  when  section
      117B(6) was clearly potentially applicable.

Re-making the decision

  15. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice statement for appeals on  or
      after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

                 "the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
                 necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                 made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the   overriding
                 objective in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                 the First-tier Tribunal."

  16. Ms Farrell invited me to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  FTT  for  fresh
      findings of fact to be made regarding in particular the impact of  the
      appellant's return to the USA on the children.  No findings have  ever
      been made regarding  this.   Mr  McVeety  agreed  that  this  was  the
      appropriate course in this  case.   In  all  the  circumstances  I  am
      satisfied that it is proportionate to remit the case to the FTT.  This
      is because there needs to  be  comprehensive  findings  of  fact  made
      regarding the best interests of the children in the particular context
      of this case.


  17. No doubt the FTT  shall  take  into  account  Lord  Thomas's  guidance
      regarding the importance of the structure of decisions where Article 8
      is engaged and the utility of employing the "balance  sheet  approach"
      i.e. after setting out all the relevant factual findings,  the  "pros"
      and "cons" can be set out  followed  by  reasoned  conclusions  as  to
      whether  countervailing  factors  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
      maintaining effective immigration controls.  Of  course  in  doing  so
      express consideration must be given to the section 117B(6) of the 2002
      Act factors.

Decision

  18. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error of law
      and I set it aside.




  19. The matter shall be remade by the FTT.

Directions

   1) The matter shall be listed on the first available date before the FTT
      with a time estimate of 2 hrs.
   2) The appellant's solicitors shall file and serve a skeleton argument
      outlining the applicable legal framework and the evidence relied upon
      with page references to the appellant's bundle, 28 days before the
      hearing.
   3) The respondent shall file and serve a skeleton argument or outline of
      her position in response, 14 days before the hearing.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 December 2016

