
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07875/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2017                    |On 5 October 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     WC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed on a Direct Access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal A M Black (the judge), promulgated on  14  November  2016,
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
         made on 1 March 2016 to refuse his human rights claim.

Relevant background

      2. The Appellant is a national of Zambia, date of birth [ ]  1991.  He
         entered the UK on 1 May 1995 as a visitor. He was aged 4 years old.
         Although an application was made on 2 November 1995 for him  to  be
         treated as a dependent of his mother,  this  was  refused  with  no
         right of appeal. He was however granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain
         (ILR) on 6 January 2006 under the terms of the Family ILR exercise.

      3. The Appellant has been convicted of several criminal offences. On 4
         May 2010 he was convicted and fined for possession  of  a  Class  B
         drug (cannabis). On 26 August 2010, he was convicted  of  making  a
         false representation to make gain for  himself  or  another  or  to
         cause loss to another, for which he received a 6-month sentence  of
         imprisonment suspended for  24  months,  a  supervision  order  and
         unpaid work  requirement  of  80  hours.  On  31  March  2011,  the
         Appellant received  a  conditional  discharge  for  12  months  for
         possession of cannabis. He pleaded guilty to a similar offence  and
         received a community order on 6 February 2013. He failed to  comply
         with the requirements of this community order and was ordered, on 4
         April 2013, to continue the community  order  and  an  unpaid  work
         requirement of 7 hours. On  1  November  2013,  the  Appellant  was
         convicted of assault occasioning Actual Bodily Harm and received  a
         12 month prison sentence, suspended for 18 months. He was also made
         the subject of  a  supervision  order  and  a  12  months  activity
         requirement. On 23 June 2014, he received a  conditional  discharge
         of 6 months for criminal  damage,  and  on  9  September  2014  the
         Appellant was sentenced to 6 weeks imprisonment for  possession  of
         an offensive weapon in a public place.

      4. On 10 October 2014, the Appellant was convicted of  harassment.  He
         was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment and made the  subject  of  a
         restraining order for 5 years. As he  failed  to  comply  with  the
         community requirements of the previous suspended  sentence  he  was
         sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.

      5. On 1 March 2016, the Respondent made a deportation  order  pursuant
         to section 32 (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. On the same date, the
         Respondent refused a human rights claim made by the Appellant. This
         is the decision that was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

      6. The judge set out a  summary  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and  the
         reasons advanced by the Respondent  for  refusing  the  claim.  The
         judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  the  Appellant's
         sister (AV), and two friends (DC, and AWP).  The  judge  accurately
         set out the burden and standard of proof and the appropriate  legal
         provisions (the relevant immigration rules - especially  paragraphs
         398,  399  and  399A,  and  sections  117A-D  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

      7. From [39] the judge considered the  Appellant's  relationship  with
         his siblings, and in particular  his  youngest  sister.  The  judge
         noted that the evidence  of  his  involvement  in  their  care  and
         upbringing was extremely thin. The judge found that the Appellant's
         involvement with his youngest sister was not  akin  to  a  parental
         role. The judge concluded, and it has not been challenged, that the
         Appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child under the age of  18.  In  so  doing  the
         judge expressly took into account the need  to  consider  the  best
         interests of children pursuant to s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009.

      8.  The  judge  then  considered  whether  the   Appellant   met   the
         requirements of paragraph 399A, which is reflected in s117C(4).  At
         [43] the judge noted that the Appellant had lived in  Zambia  until
         the age of 4, that he entered the UK as a visitor on  1  May  1995,
         but that he had lived illegally in the UK  from  about  1  December
         1995 to 6 January 2006, a period of about 10 years. The judge noted
         that the Appellant had ILR for about 10 years. Having regard to the
         whole of the Appellant's immigration history  the  judge  concluded
         that he had not been lawfully resident in the UK for "most  of  his
         life", as required by both paragraph 399A(a) and s.117C(4)(a).

      9. At [44] the judge considered whether there were  'very  significant
         obstacles' to the Appellant's integration in Zambia, as required by
         paragraph 399A(c)  and  s.117C(4)(c).  The  judge  noted  that  the
         Appellant was a Zambian national, that he had a current and Zambian
         passport, that he was a healthy adult and that English  was  spoken
         in  Zambia.  The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  had   various
         vocational qualifications which he would be able  to  use  to  find
         work in Zambia, particularly in the building industry.  Whilst  the
         Appellant had no immediate family in Zambia the  judge  noted  that
         his parents were born there. As a result, the judge founded  likely
         that the Appellant would have wider family members in  Zambia  with
         whom he could make contact. The judge noted, in any event, that the
         Appellant's mother currently accommodated and  maintained  him  and
         that there was no evidence to suggest that she would not do  so  at
         least in the short term until the Appellant could find  a  job  and
         was  able  to  accommodate  and   maintain   himself.   The   judge
         additionally noted that  the  Appellant  had  lived  independently,
         outside the family unit, and could live  independently  in  Zambia.
         The judge finally noted that the Appellant could  maintain  contact
         with  his  family  and  friends  in  the  UK  by  remote  forms  of
         communication and through personal visits by friends and family  to
         Zambia. The judge therefore  concluded  that  there  were  no  very
         significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Zambia.

     10. At [45] the judge accepted that  the  Appellant  was  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the UK.

     11. Having found that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 399 or 399A of the immigration  rules,  or  s.117C(4)  or
         (5), the judge proceeded to consider, pursuant to paragraph 398  of
         the  immigration  rules,  whether  there  were   'very   compelling
         circumstances' over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and
         399A capable of outweighing the public interest in the  Appellant's
         deportation. At [48] the  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  spoke
         English, and that his private life had been established principally
         when he was lawfully residing in the UK, this having  been  granted
         when he was nearly 14 years old. The judge found however  that  the
         Appellant  was  not  financially  independent  as  he  was   wholly
         supported by his mother  and  there  was  no  documentary  evidence
         confirming that he would be given work as an apprentice plumber.

     12. The judge then considered the nature, frequency and seriousness  of
         the  Appellant's  offending.  The  judge  did  not  find  that  the
         Appellant's oral evidence relating to his criminality  demonstrated
         that he was  contrite  or  accepting  of  the  punishment  for  his
         offences. The judge found that the Appellant had  not  demonstrated
         insight into his behaviour. At [50] the judge took into account  an
         undated letter addressed  to  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant
         claimed was written by his sister, who had better handwriting. This
         letter was not however adopted  by  the  Appellant  and  the  judge
         therefore gave it little weight. The  judge  additionally  accorded
         little weight to various letters of support which were all  undated
         and typed in a similar form, which did not  contain  statements  of
         truth, and were unsupported by identification documents relating to
         the authors [51]. At [52] the judge considered a letter of  support
         for the Appellant from his former girlfriend, dated 30 March  2015.
         Was the judge took into account that the former girlfriend was  the
         victim of harassment for which  the  Appellant  was  convicted  and
         sentenced, and indicated that she could not ignore the  restraining
         order which was in place at the date the  letter  was  written,  or
         that the ex-girlfriend did not attend  the  hearing  to  give  oral
         evidence. Whilst taking the letter into account the judge  gave  it
         little evidential  weight  given  its  vintage,  the  ex-girlfriend
         status as a former  victim  of  the  Appellant's  criminality,  the
         existence of the restraining order and the lack of any  opportunity
         to examine the witness as regards the circumstances  in  which  the
         statement was given.

     13. The judge considered the evidence from the Appellant's  sister  and
         his 2 friends [54] but gave a number of reasons for concluding that
         the friends were not familiar with the extent  of  the  Appellant's
         criminality. The judge considered that the Appellant may be at  low
         risk of repeating the offences or causing serious  harm,  and  took
         into account that his absence will have a detrimental impact on his
         minor siblings. The  judge  specifically  made  their  interests  a
         primary consideration but was unable, given the considerable weight
         to be given to the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to  conclude
         that  those  interests  outweighed  the  public  interest  in   the
         Appellant's deportation. The judge  therefore  concluded,  at  [58]
         that there were no exceptional or compelling circumstances  in  the
         Appellant's case. The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     14. The grounds contend that the judge erred in not accepting that  the
         Appellant had been lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  his
         life. The grounds  note  that  the  entire  period  of  overstaying
         occurred when the Appellant was a child. As such, the fact that the
         Appellant remained after his leave expired could  not  lawfully  be
         held against him. This contention was said to be supported  by  the
         decision in Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest
         interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC). It was submitted, especially in
         light of the case of Azimi-Moayed and others  (decisions  affecting
         children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC),  that  the
         childhood years spent by the Appellant as an  overstayer  ought  to
         have been disregarded when assessing the case  under  s.117C(4)(a).
         The grounds additionally submit that the judge's finding  that  the
         Appellant may have wider family  in  Zambia  was  speculative.  The
         grounds further contend that the judge erred in law  in  concluding
         that the Appellant was not financially independent as the financial
         issues raised by s.117B were intended to address the concerns  that
         such individuals do not become  a  burden  on  the  state  and  the
         Appellant was supported financially  by  his  mother.  The  grounds
         finally contend that the judge was  not  entitled  to  give  little
         weight on the undated letter written by his sister,  and  that  the
         judge was not entitled to accord little weight to the  letter  from
         his former girlfriend because this ignored the fact  that,  despite
         being the victim of his harassment, she continued to support him.

     15. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal judge Frances on the basis
         that it was arguable that the judge erred in law in his  assessment
         of paragraph 399A and s.117C(4) with  respect  to  the  Appellant's
         period of unlawful residents from the age of 4  to  14.  Permission
         was granted on all grounds.

Submissions at the error of law hearing

     16. Mr Gajjar relied on the grounds of appeal and,  although  accepting
         that the Appellants did not have leave to remain  between  December
         1995 and 2006, submitted that this did not prevent him from meeting
         the requirements of s.117C(4)(a)  and  paragraph  399A(a).  It  was
         submitted that the words "most of his  life"  should  be  construed
         having regard to the Appellants minority when he was an  overstayer
         and that any period of  illegal  residents  should  be  disregarded
         until the Appellant became an adult. Mr Gajjar then submitted  that
         the judge failed to have regard to the reasons for the  Appellant's
         overstaying in her overall proportionality assessment, which was  a
         mitigating factor, and that such failure  amounted  to  a  material
         legal error. This was said to be a 'Robinson' obvious point.

     17. Mr Kotas submitted that the grounds misconstrued the case of  Kaur,
         which did not concern a deportation, and that the judge was correct
         to find, as a matter of fact,  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
         lawfully in the UK for most of his life. It was  further  submitted
         that the judge was entitled to find that the Appellant  was  likely
         to have wider family members in Zambia. Mr Kotas submitted that the
         grounds did not challenge the  judge's  proportionality  assessment
         outside of the immigration rules and that permission had  not  been
         granted on this basis.

Discussion

     18. It is not in dispute that the Appellant lawfully entered the UK  in
         May 1995 as a 4-year-old visitor, and that he was residing  without
         lawful leave from about December 1995 until he was granted ILR on 6
         January 2006. The Appellant lived in Zambia until the age of 4.  At
         the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing the  Appellant  was  25
         years old. At [43] the judge concluded that, although the Appellant
         entered the UK lawfully as a visitor  and  had  ILR  for  about  10
         years, he had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
         life.

     19. Paragraph 399A states,

             'This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -

          a) The person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and

          b) He is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          c) There would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.'

         S.117C(4) is substantially similar terms.

     20. Having regard to the principles enunciated in Mahad v ECO [2010]  1
         WLR 48 and having considered  the  natural  language  of  the  rule
         construed against the relevant  background,  I  cannot  accept  the
         Appellant's submission that periods  of  unlawful  residence  as  a
         child can be disregarded for the purposes of paragraph 399A(a). The
         natural meaning of the rule clear. In order to avail oneself of the
         exception in paragraph 399A a person must have lawfully resided  in
         the UK for most of his life. The construction  of  s.117C(4)(a)  is
         equally clear. Had Parliament intended that unlawful residence as a
         child  be  disregarded  from  consideration  then  it  would   have
         expressly  said  so.  The  section  does  not  distinguish  between
         unlawful residence as a child and an adult. The core requirement is
         that the individual must have spent 'most' of their life in the  UK
         with lawful residence. On no rational view could the  Appellant  be
         said to have been lawfully resident for most of his life.

     21. This is not to suggest that unlawful residence as  a  child  is  an
         irrelevant factor. The fact that an individual may have been in the
         UK unlawfully as a child is clearly a factor to take  into  account
         in the overall proportionality assessment. A child has  no  control
         or influence over their immigration  status  and  will  usually  be
         entirely dependent on the actions of their parent or guardian. They
         are not at fault for entering or remaining in the UK without leave.
         The child should not be made to suffer for the misconduct of  their
         parent. But this  is  a  matter  that  will  come  into  play  when
         considering whether there are very compelling  circumstances  where
         the exceptions are not met.

     22. Mr Gajjar submitted that the judge failed to take into account  the
         Appellant's unlawful presence in the UK when he was  a  child,  and
         that  this   should   have   been   considered   in   her   overall
         proportionality assessment. The judge was however  aware  that  the
         Appellant entered the UK as a 4 year old, and that he  was  granted
         ILR when aged nearly 14 ([43] and [48]). The decision, read 'in the
         round', indicates that the FtJ has fully  taken  into  account  the
         Appellant's minority when he was unlawfully resident.

     23. The judge was, in any event, fully entitled to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A(c), which
         are also reflected in s.117C(4)(c). at [44] the judge gave detailed
         and  cogent  reasons  for  concluding  that  there  were  no   very
         significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration  in  Zambia.
         This included the fact that the Appellant is a national  of  Zambia
         and has a current passport which  would  allow  him  to  enter  the
         country, that English is spoken in Zambia, that  he  is  a  healthy
         adult, that he has vocational qualifications which he could use  to
         find work in the country, that he  could  continue  to  communicate
         with his friends and relatives in the UK, and that his mother would
         be able to provide him with support, at least in  the  short  term,
         while the Appellant obtains accommodation and the means to  support
         himself. The only challenge to this conclusion was that  the  judge
         engaged in undue speculation in finding that there were  likely  to
         be wider family members in Zambia with whom he could make  contact.
         I am not persuaded that this finding was  unduly  speculative.  The
         Appellant's parents lived in Zambia all their lives and  the  judge
         was rationally entitled to find that there were likely to be  wider
         family members with whom he could contact. But even  if  the  judge
         was not entitled to this particular finding, in light of the  other
         reasons she gave for concluding that the Appellant could return  to
         Zambia, any error would not have been material and  could  not,  on
         any rational view, undermine her ultimate conclusion. Having  found
         that there were no very significant  obstacle  to  the  Appellant's
         integration in Zambia,  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 399A or Exception 1 in s.117C(4).

     24. The grounds additionally contend that the judge misdirected herself
         in finding that  the  Appellant  was  not  financially  independent
         because he was wholly reliant on his mother. Although  one  of  the
         justifications for being financially independent  is  because  such
         persons are not a burden on  taxpayers,  another  justification  is
         that, if they are financially independent, they are better able  to
         integrate into  society.  This  puts  the  focus  squarely  on  the
         individual as opposed to other family members who may  be  able  to
         support that individual without any recourse to public funds.  This
         is reflected in s.117B(3)(b). The interpretation  advanced  by  the
         Appellant has, in aby event, been roundly rejected by the Court  of
         Appeal in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ  803.  At  [63]  Lord  Justice  Sales  stated  that
         'financially independent' is "... an ordinary English  phrase,  and
         the FTT gave it its natural meaning, as indicating someone  who  is
         financially  independent   of   others.   This   is   the   correct
         interpretation." And at pparagraph 65 Lord Justice Sales stated, "I
         do not accept Mr Southey's  proposed  alternative  construction  of
         "financially independent", which in effect involved an  attempt  to
         introduce  an  unwarranted  gloss  to  make  it  mean  "financially
         independent of the state". That is not the natural meaning  of  the
         phrase. Moreover, if the phrase meant "financially  independent  of
         the state", the stated reason why this is desirable - "because such
         persons ... are not a burden on taxpayers"  -  would  be  close  to
         being tautological and redundant."

     25. Mr Gajjar did not advance or develop the  grounds  contending  that
         the judge was not lawfully entitled to attach little weight to  the
         letter allegedly written by the Appellant's sister, or  the  letter
         from his former girlfriend. I am satisfied, in any event, that  the
         judge gave cogent  and  compelling  reasons  for  attaching  little
         weight to both documents. The letter said  to  be  written  by  the
         Appellant's sister was undated and was not formally adopted by  the
         Appellant in his evidence. The judge attached little weight to  the
         former girl-friends letter because it was written  in  March  2015,
         the former girlfriend status was  the  victim  of  the  Appellant's
         criminality, the existence of the restraining order and the lack of
         any opportunity to examine her in respect of the  circumstances  in
         which the statement was given. The approach adopted  by  the  judge
         discloses no error of law.

     26. Having carefully considered the determination the judge has not, in
         my judgement, committed any material legal error.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains no material error of law.

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               4 October 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

