
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07533/2018
                                                               HU/09110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2019                               |On 14 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Muhammad [A]
                                  Sania [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms T Fisher of Counsel, instructed by Legal
Solutions Advocates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant will be referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondents will be referred to as the Claimants.

2.   The first and second Claimants, nationals of Pakistan,  date  of  birth
    13 November 1982 and 2 February 1985, appealed against the Secretary of
    State's decisions dated 14 March 2018 to refuse their applications made
    on 21 August 2007 for leave to remain and upon  a  human  rights  based
    claim.  The appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy  (the
    Judge) who, on 31 October 2018, allowed their appeals on  human  rights
    grounds.

3.   Permission to appeal the decision was given by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McGeachy on 29 January 2019.

4.   In particular the Judge concluded that the first Claimant had not  been
    dishonest and therefore suitability was not an  issue  because  he  had
    given an innocent  explanation  and  a  credible  one  to  explain  the
    discrepant HMRC tax return which had been made.   The  Judge  concluded
    that the first Claimant was a credible  witness  and  his  claims  were
    fully supported by the evidence referred to in his oral testimony (D21)
    and the Judge found that the first Claimant had  provided  a  plausible
    innocent explanation to rebut the evidence of the  Secretary  of  State
    and there was no evidence to conclude the first Claimant had engaged in
    any conduct that impugned his character.

5.   It appeared the underlying basis or potential cause  of  error  lay  in
    the first Claimant's and second Claimant's personal circumstances which
    most unfortunately included the stillbirth of a child in  January  2013
    and a subsequent miscarriage  in 2013,  for  which  evidence  had  been
    produced.  Mr Bramble fairly accepted that whilst the Judge's  decision
    was perhaps not as well-written, or was potentially ambiguous, the fact
    was that in the light of the Judges' findings there really was  nothing
    in the appeal for the Secretary of State left to substantively argue.

6.   Ms Fisher provided  an  extensively  argued  Rule  24  statement  which
    largely mirrored the representations that  had  previously  been  made.
    Having considered them and Mr Bramble's  assessment  of  the  matter  I
    concluded that there is no material error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made nor was one required.


Signed                                  Date 10 March2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
