
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07120/2016
     hu/07124/2016
     hu/07129/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2018                              |On 11 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Arben Nezaj
                            Feliza Adamme Miguel
                           Bethany Blessing Nezaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Amunwa, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by three members  of  the  same  family  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse them leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.  The first and second appellants are  married  to
    each other, the third appellant is their daughter.  The child was  born
    in October 2011.

 2. I have not made an order restricting publicity. The case does touch  on
    the rights of a child but I have no  reason  to  find  that  publishing
    details of this decision would create a risk of  serious  harm  to  the
    child.

 3. The first appellant is a national of Albania and the  second  appellant
    is a national of the Philippines and  the  Tribunal  decided  that  the
    third appellant is also a national of the  Philippines.   That  finding
    has not been challenged. It is likely to be correct given that  she  is
    the daughter of a citizen of the Philippines and is the basis on  which
    I make my decision.

 4. It has been plain all along that this case  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Rules.  That does not mean it cannot succeed  but  that  is  sufficient
    reason to set alarm bells ringing.  The Rules are intended  to  protect
    people's Article 8 rights and experience  suggests  that  a  case  that
    cannot succeed under the  Rules  is  not  likely  to  succeed  at  all.
    Nevertheless, the appeal was properly brought and ought  to  have  been
    dealt with properly.

 5. Mr  Amunwa,  for  the  appellants,  has  made  detailed  criticisms  in
    appropriately brisk grounds which carry a great deal of merit.   It  is
    not surprising that the First-tier Tribunal gave permission.

 6. The main complaint is that there was no finding on the  best  interests
    of the child when there should have been. The subsidiary  complaint  is
    if there had been much a finding on the best  interests  of  the  child
    then more would have said about the circumstances of the child  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  in  the  country  of  possible  return  and   the
    difficulties the child might have.

 7. It is also of concern that the First-tier Tribunal Judge used  language
    suggesting that he was reviewing a decision rather  than  deciding  the
    appeal and he may have made an adverse credibility finding for no  good
    reason.  It is not entirely clear what he made of  the  evidence  about
    the language spoken in the home.

 8. These are potentially serious criticisms but I have  to  bear  in  mind
    that I am tasked to look for material errors of law and I have  to  ask
    myself if the complaints made could  have  made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome.  If they could not, then there is no material error.  If  they
    could have done then there may, but only may, be an error that requires
    a remedy.

 9. I am not persuaded that there is a material error here.

10. The best finding that could possibly be made from the appellants' point
    of view is that the best interests of the child lie in remaining in the
    United Kingdom with both parents and the rest of the nuclear family.  I
    think it likely that is in the best interests  of  the  child.   It  is
    clear that the child is doing well at school and that suggests, it does
    not prove, that the family home is a happy place and the child is being
    brought up by caring parents and assisted by  caring  close  relatives.
    The  child  does  not  know  life  outside  the  United   Kingdom   and
    understandably  would  want  to  remain  there.  Although  it  is   not
    necessarily the case, the benefits of living in the United  Kingdom  in
    terms of access to education and health  facilities  and  opportunities
    later in life are likely to be better than comparable  arrangements  in
    Albania or the Philippines.  However this is not a case that  has  been
    put on the basis that life in either of those  countries  would  be  so
    intolerable that it would be wrong for those reasons for the  child  to
    grow up there. That said, the child is not entitled to a decision  that
    gives effect to her best interests.  It  is  very  important  that  the
    child, where possible, is brought  up  by  both  parents  living  in  a
    committed relationship and caring for the child.  That seems to be  the
    case in the United Kingdom and there is no reason at all to think  that
    that could not be recreated  in  the  Philippines  or  indeed  even  in
    Albania if that is what the parents chose to do.

11. Much has been  made  of  the  difficulties  the  child  would  have  in
    establishing herself in the Philippines but they are, with  respect  to
    Mr Amunwa, speculative.  It is likely on the judge's findings that some
    language used in the Philippines is spoken in the home but  it  is  not
    likely that the child is fluent  in  that  language  and  that  is  not
    suggested.  I believe it is appropriate for the Tribunal to  note  that
    children often prove themselves to be extremely adaptable  at  learning
    other languages when they are very young and it is not something to  be
    regarded with horror to put the child into a different culture when the
    child is supported by loving parents.  It might be different  if  there
    was  evidence  of  unusual  learning  difficulties  or  unusual  social
    difficulties but that is not the case here.  The child  does  not  have
    the necessary seven years' residence in the United Kingdom  to  qualify
    for particular protection.  There is nothing in  the  case  to  suggest
    that there are unusual circumstances that make it more than  ordinarily
    important to respect the child's private and family life.

12. The absence of a finding about the best interests of  the  child  is  a
    point which, if developed fully and supported by  appropriate  findings
    on the evidence, in my judgment would have gone nowhere.

13. The parents  have  a  discreditable  but  not  disgraceful  immigration
    history. The first appellant was removed from the United Kingdom having
    unsuccessfully claimed asylum and  returned  without  permission.   The
    second appellant entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  but  overstayed.
    It is not good to be in the United Kingdom without permission.   It  is
    very often a  criminal  offence  although  one  that  is  almost  never
    prosecuted but that is the extent of  their  unsatisfactory  behaviour.
    They are not people who are regarded as criminals for  other  activity.
    They are not people who have been involved in  any  more  sophisticated
    disregard for immigration control.  The problem is there  and  that  is
    the extent of it.  It is to their discredit.  It enhances  the  reasons
    for refusing the case on human rights grounds because it is  more  than
    ordinarily important to enforce immigration control.

14. Of course, none of this is the fault of the child  but  it  is  not  an
    irrelevant consideration. The child has not established a right  to  be
    in the United Kingdom even if it was not for all those difficulties.

15. It follows therefore that although I am grateful to Mr Amunwa  for  his
    realistic criticisms which I hope I have considered properly I have  to
    conclude that Mr Jarvis is right and that there is  no  material  error
    here even though there are points that really should  have  been  dealt
    with rather more thoroughly than was the case in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

16. It follows therefore that I dismiss the appeals against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17. This appeal is dismissed.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 9 May 2018                    |
|Judge                                |                                     |

