
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07039/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 02 December 2019                  |On 05 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                             CART KENT DELA CRUZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A. Slatter, instructed by Douglass Simon
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  27  February
    2018 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for entry clearance as a dependent child.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 22 July 2019.

3.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. Rule 40(3) provides exceptions to the rule if the decision
    is made with the consent of the parties or the parties  have  consented
    to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.  In  this  case  both
    parties consented to the decision at the hearing so it is not necessary
    to give detailed reasons.

4.    In summary, it is agreed that the judge failed to consider  the  issue
    of 'sole responsibility' with reference to the principles  outlined  in
    relevant case law, failed to give adequate reasons for his  credibility
    findings, failed to take into account relevant evidence and had  regard
    to irrelevant matters.

5.    The First-tier Tribunal decision  must  be  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings can stand. The nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
    necessary to remake the decision is such that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 02 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








