
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/07902/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th May 2021 & 4th June 2021              |On 22 July 2021               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                      Niamkey Esther Mockey Epse Dadie
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Simak instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on 25th March 2020  dismissing
    her appeal against the respondent's decision not to grant the appellant
    leave to enter the UK as an adult dependent relative.

 2. The grounds for the application for permission  noted  that  the  judge
    concluded that but for the appellant's condition  requiring  "long-term
    personal care" the  conditions  for  a  grant  of  leave  as  an  adult
    dependent relative under Appendix FM were met.  The  judge  also  found
    that since the appellant's stroke in October 2019, not  only  that  the
    appellant remained in hospital, but one of her three daughters, all  of
    whom were settled in the UK with  their  family  had  to  be  with  the
    appellant in the Ivory Coast.  The  appellant  questioned  the  judge's
    interpretation of the term "long-term".

 3. Secondly, the appellant invited the court to consider  the  application
    for permission to appeal in the context of the passage of time and  the
    continuity of the appellant's dependency.   Given  the  nature  of  the
    dispute it was incumbent on the judge to consider that ten  months  had
    passed, and the appellant's condition had not improved.  The  admission
    of this new argument into an appeal at the error of law stage of appeal
    proceedings was permissible, either by way of Ladd  v  Marshall  [1954]
    EWCA Civ 1 or subject to exceptional circumstances in the interests  of
    justice.

 4.  On  the   appellant's   case   the   second   condition   (exceptional
    circumstances)  was  met,  particularly  where  the  appeal   concerned
    fundamental human rights.

 5. The appellant's position in  the  above  regard  held  that  where  new
    evidence  was  credible  and  sufficiently  cogent  to  be  capable  of
    affecting the final decision the court should be slow to exclude  it  R
    Immigration Tribunal ex parte Azkhosravi [2001] EWCA Civ 977.

 6. It was also submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  undertake  a  proper
    assessment of undue harshness test when undertaking his  assessment  of
    the appellant's Article 8 ECHR interest and misdirected  himself  given
    his conclusions.

 7. On the  proper  application  of  the  exceptional  circumstances  in  R
    (Agyarko) v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC
    11 the court accepted the following propositions that:

      1)  Ultimately  the  court  has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is
         proportionate by "balancing the strength of the public interest  in
         the removal of the person in question against the impact on private
         and family life." (Paragraph 57)

      2) "The ultimate question is how  a  fair  balance  should  be  struck
         between the competing public  and  individual  interests  involved,
         applying a proportionality test." (Paragraph 60).

      3) The court noted that the respondent:

             "has defined the word 'exceptional', as already explained,  as
             meaning  'circumstances  in  which  refusal  would  result  in
             unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual such  that
             the refusal of the application would  not  be  proportionate."
             (Paragraph 60).

 8. The  test  did  not  require  a  demonstration  of  unusual  or  unique
    circumstances on the appellant's part.

 9. The correct starting point is that adult family  relationships  may  be
    protected by Article  8  if  there  are  elements  of  more  than  mere
    emotional dependency as per Ghising (family life  -  adults  -  Ghurkha
    policy) [2012] 160.

10. In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31; [2003] INLR 31 Sedley  LJ  referred  to  dependency  as  "real"
    "committed" or "effective"  support.   The  approach  to  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences was adopted by the respondent in her  IDIs  entitled
    family migration  Appendix  FM  Section  6  adult  dependent  relatives
    (August 2017).

11. The grounds asserted that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  in  his
    determination identified no proper public interest consideration of any
    moment necessitating interference with family life at all, never mind a
    compelling one.

12. Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley granted permission on the basis  that  as
    the appellant's care had continued from November  2019  to  25th  March
    2020 "it is arguable that there is insufficient  reasoning  to  explain
    why it was concluded that the situation would not be  continuing  given
    she is 66 years old and arguably is found to have permanent  right-side
    weakness.  Similarly it is arguable that the finding that there are  no
    Article 8 ECHR family life ties between the appellant and her daughters
    at  paragraph  39  of  the   decision   is   insufficiently   reasoned,
    particularly as this was not disputed by the  respondent".   Permission
    was granted.

13. A supplementary bundle of evidence was provided to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 26th April 2021.  This included a  further  letter  from  Dr  Koutou
    entitled 'medical certificate' dated 1st February 2021.

14. At the hearing before me it was submitted that by the time the case had
    gone  before  Judge  Boyes,  who  refused  permission  to  appeal,  the
    appellant was still in hospital and the appellant remained in hospital.
     The judge had been confused over the long-term  care.   The  appellant
    had had a stroke in 2019 and her daughters had gone to the Ivory Coast.
     The new evidence, in the form of the letter from Dr Koutou  dated  1st
    February 2021 should be admitted at this stage because of the  question
    over the  appellant's  long  care  and  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  There were  conditions  for  submitting  this  evidence
    because of the interests of justice.   I  questioned  whether  evidence
    could have been obtained at the time, but it  was  submitted  that  the
    evidence was available  now  and  the  appellant's  condition  was  not
    improving.  It appeared Ms Simak  did  not  have  the  medical  reports
    before her.

15. Mr Lindsay submitted that the supplementary bundle  provided  with  the
    application for permission to appeal postdated the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and was not capable of assisting the  case  today  because  it
    postdated the decision and was not directed to the date of decision nor
    demonstrated that the judge had erred.  Ladd v Marshall was directed to
    admissibility and to the evidence which existed at the time.  It was  a
    common thread that the appellant had not proved that she required long-
    term  personal care and the judge was entitled to make that finding and
    therefore under the Immigration Rules the  appellant  would  fail,  the
    public interest was not outweighed and thus the Article 8  claim  would
    fail.  At the time the appellant was in hospital but what  was  lacking
    was detailed medical evidence on her condition and it was not clear the
    extent of the appellant's limitations and further it  was  unclear  why
    the appellant would need her family to care for her when  in  fact  she
    was in hospital.  On the evidence this appellant  was  bound  to  fail.
    The failure to find that the appellant needed long-term care was  fatal
    to any claim outside the Rules.  On Article 8  outside  the  Rules  the
    claim was bound  to  be  dismissed  unless  there  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences and there were none here.  Contrary to the Upper  Tribunal
    grant of permission to appeal the judge did  find  no  family  life  on
    Kugathas grounds and the judge  took  an  alternative  approach.   That
    said, Article 8 private life was not engaged because this was an  entry
    clearance matter.

Analysis

16. The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was held on 10th February  2020,
    the daughter of the appellant Ms Agnes Callaghan gave evidence and  the
    judge had before him a medical certificate signed by Dr Olivier  Koutou
    Doctor of  Medicine  of  the  Port-Bouet  General  Hospital  dated  3rd
    February 2020.  In that letter the doctor states that the appellant is

         "a known diabetic and hypertensive patient for the past two  years,
         but not cooperative with follow-up care and treatment,  now  has  a
         right-side hemiparesis with a left-side facial paralysis  resulting
         from a haemorrhage cerebral vascular accident, following a spike in
         blood pressure occurring in October 2019".

         She  is  having  functional  physiotherapy  sessions   with   anti-
         hypertensive and anti-diabetic oral medications.

         This medical certificate is issued to her for all for all statutory
    effects.  I so attest".

17. The judge at paragraphs 34, 35 and 36 stated the following:

         "34. Ms Callaghan stated that one of her sisters had been to  visit
             the Appellant for  four  weeks  in  November  2019,  and  that
             another was with her presently.  There was only Ms Callaghan's
             word for that, but I found those aspects of her oral  evidence
             to be plausible and credible, despite the lack of  documentary
             evidence which could have been produced.

         35.  Ms Callaghan referred in her oral  evidence  to  'the  report'
             stating that the  Appellant  could  not  use  her  left  side,
             whereas the certificate in fact states that the Appellant  has
             weakness (hemiparesis) in her right side, but  the  difference
             is  of  no  consequence.   There  was  consistency   with   Ms
             Callaghan's oral evidence that the Appellant  presently  needs
             help getting dressed.

         36.  There is in my  consideration  therefore  sufficient  evidence
             that the Appellant needs personal  care  to  perform  everyday
             tasks, owing to age,  illness  or  disability.   There  is  no
             evidence as to the likely duration of that need  however,  and
             although it is possible that that the  need  is  long-term  in
             nature, I do not consider that I am able to find that that  is
             inherently likely, even after a stroke that has left her  with
             weakness.  Therefore I do not consider that the Appellant  has
             established  that  it  is  so  to  the  applicable  evidential
             standard that as a result of age, illness  or  disability  she
             requires long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks."

    On the basis of the medical certificate that was provided for the judge
    at that time, there was  no  evidence  as  he  stated,  of  the  likely
    duration of the need for personal care and it was entirely open to  the
    judge to find that he was not able to find, even after a stroke,  which
    had left her with 'weakness' (without being further defined)  that  she
    required long-term personal care or indeed the extent of its intensity.
     The certificate merely stated,  as  the  judge  identified,  that  the
    appellant was continuing to have  "functional  physiotherapy  sessions"
    and as the judge stated, "but the nature of the therapy and the need it
    presumably targeted are not stated in  the  certificate".   Indeed  the
    appellant had not been cooperative with follow-up care but there was no
    suggestion  that  she  continued  to  be  uncooperative  as  the  judge
    referenced.

18. The judge also took into account the oral evidence of Ms Callaghan  who
    identified that she was the eldest  of  four  daughters  and  the  oral
    evidence recorded that one of her sisters  had  visited  the  appellant
    four weeks in November 2019, but another was with her presently.  There
    was no indication that Ms Callaghan had visited, and I note the grounds
    identify that three of the daughters, are settled in the UK with  their
    children and families but does not refer to the fourth.

19. The witness statement of Ms Callaghan recorded that "At the moment  she
    had nobody to assist her day-to-day upkeep.  All of us are  in  the  UK
    and it is only proper that she comes to live with us  so  that  we  can
    take good care of her".  That did not acknowledge  that  the  appellant
    was in fact in hospital nor detail the long-term personal care required
    and in the face of the evidence the judge was entitled to  conclude  as
    he did that there was no evidence that the appellant  was  in  need  of
    long-term personal care as a result of her "weakness".

20. The judge identified that there was a lack of documentary  evidence  as
    at the date of the hearing; he was entitled to find it was limited  and
    his conclusions were open  to  him  despite  the  oral  evidence.   His
    reasoning was adequate and took into account the oral  and  documentary
    evidence.

21. Subsequent to the First-tier Tribunal decision,  further  evidence  was
    produced on 26th April 2021 showing flights booked presumably  in  2019
    and a further medical certificate from  Dr  Koutou  stating,  "done  in
    Abidjan on 1st February 2021"  and  referred  to  the  fact  that  "She
    suffered an incapacitating right side hemiparesis with left side facial
    paralysis ...The patient is still hospitalised, and her state of health
    requires the presence of her family members to assist with her  medical
    care and nursing needs".   There was  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
    appellant needed her family members and there was no further detail  of
    the care required.

22. I am not persuaded that Ladd v Marshall applies in this instance.   The
    principles explained in Ladd and Marshall are as follows

         'In order to justify the reception  of  fresh  evidence  or  a  new
         trial, three conditions mast be fulfilled: first, it must be  shown
         that the evidence could not  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable
         diligence for use at the trial: second, the evidence most  be  such
         that, if given, it would probably have an  important  influence  on
         the result of the case, though it need not  be  decisive:  thirdly,
         the evidence must be such as is presumably to be  believed,  or  in
         other words, it must be apparently credible, though it need not  be
         incontrovertible'.

23. The 'new' evidence was not in existence at the date of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and reflected a changing medical condition and cannot arguably
    serve to undermine that decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The 'new'
    report was compiled almost one year after the hearing. It was  open  to
    the  appellant  to  produce  at  the  time,  particularly  as  she  was
    represented,  evidence  in  relation  to  her  medical  condition   and
    requirements at the relevant time and indeed she made  her  application
    knowing the requirements under the Immigration Rules.  The judge at the
    First-tier Tribunal accurately reflected the  nature  of  the  evidence
    before him and it is the legality of that decision which  is  relevant.
    As identified above there was minimal information on  long  term  care.
    The second limb  to  the  argument  appeared  to  be  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances particularly in asylum cases in the interests
    of justice and applying the requirement for anxious scrutiny  following
    E v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  49.



24. Reasonable diligence would have ensured that  a  comprehensive  medical
    report was produced prior to the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    although I enquired there were no exceptional  circumstances  outlined,
    merely that the appeal concerned the fundamental human rights interests
    of the appellant as well as her daughter's and their  settled  families
    in the UK.  This appellant has been living in  the  Republic  of  Ivory
    Coast on a long-term basis and undertaking visits to the United Kingdom
    and as Mr Lindsay pointed out, this is an entry clearance  application.



25. Even so, the medical certificate produced latterly  did  not  take  the
    appellant's  case  any  further  forward  and  indeed  there   was   no
    explanation of why, if the appellant was in hospital, she required  the
    presence of her family members  to  assist  with  medical  and  nursing
    needs.

26. Turning to the criticism of the  judge's  approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment, it was asserted that the judge failed to undertake a proper
    assessment of undue harshness.  Outside the Rules the correct test,  as
    identified, is that set out in Agyarko  such  that  the  court  has  to
    decide whether the refusal is proportionate  and  whether  the  refusal
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  individual.
    It was advanced that  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  in  his
    determination identify a proper public interest  consideration  of  any
    moment, never mind compelling ones.  That is incorrect.

27. It was further asserted that the correct starting point is  that  adult
    family relationships may be  protected  by  Article  8  if  there  were
    elements of more than emotional dependency as per Ghising  family  life
    adults Ghurkha policy [2012] UKUT 00160 and as per  Kugathas.   It  was
    open to the judge, having applied Kugathas, as he did at paragraph  39,
    to consider that the appellant had  not  established  to  the  required
    standard of a balance of probabilities that her relationship  with  her
    daughters in the UK  involved  elements  of  dependency  beyond  normal
    emotional ties between adult relatives.  That was a finding  the  judge
    was entitled to make on the evidence particularly in view of  the  fact
    of the long-term location of the appellant and the  limited  nature  of
    evidence  from  the  other  sisters  who  had  apparently  visited  the
    appellant in the Republic of Ivory Coast.

28. The judge however addressed the position in the alternative  that  even
    if the appellant did  enjoy  family  life,  she  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements for a grant of leave to remain under the Immigration Rules
    (see paragraph 42 of that decision). That sets out the position of  the
    Secretary of State and the relevant immigration rules which  have  been
    found not to be incompatible with Article 8, Britcits  v  Secretary  of
    State [2017] EWCA Civ 368. The public interest was thus identified  and
    factored into the equation by the judge. As  the  judge  identified  at
    paragraph 47 with reference to the Immigration Rules

         "The weight to be attributed to the achievement of that policy  and
         those objectives rather than the retention of  sponsors  who  might
         prefer to re-locate to countries which have a less rigorous  policy
         for permitting dependants to enter  and  remain,  and  rather  than
         avoiding the risk of deterring  potentially  desirable  immigrants,
         was essentially a matter  for  the  government  and  Parliament  to
         decide".

29. The judge rightly identified that a balance was to  be  struck  on  the
    facts of any  particular  case,  but  the  judge  also  cited  that  as
    explained at paragraph 59 of Britcits, the standard of  care  available
    in an applicant's home country had not been evidenced by the  appellant
    and that "any such considerations or requirements are relevant  to  her
    case, aside from establishing that two of her  daughters  have  visited
    her since she suffered a stroke, but that is not sufficient".

30. The judge thus did identify the public interest considerations  and  it
    was open to him to weigh the evidence as it was and strike the  balance
    as he did.  Mere disagreement about the weight to be  accorded  to  the
    evidence, which is a matter for the judge, should not be  characterised
    as an error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

31. As set out in Agyarko at paragraph 47

         "47.  The  Rules  therefore  reflect  the  responsible   Minister's
         assessment, at a general level,  of  the  relative  weight  of  the
         competing factors when striking a fair balance under article 8. The
         courts can review that general assessment in  the  event  that  the
         decision-making process is challenged as  being  incompatible  with
         Convention rights or based on an  erroneous  understanding  of  the
         law, but they have  to  bear  in  mind  the  Secretary  of  State's
         constitutional responsibility for policy  in  this  area,  and  the
         endorsement of the Rules by Parliament. It is also the function  of
         the courts to consider individual cases which come before  them  on
         appeal or by way of judicial review, and that will require them  to
         consider how the balance is struck in individual  cases.  In  doing
         so, they have to take the Secretary of State's policy into  account
         and to attach considerable weight to it at a general level, as well
         as considering all the factors which are relevant to the particular
         case..."

32. Additionally, the judge found  when applying Sections 117B(2)  and  (3)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as he was  obliged
    to do, that there was no indication  that  the  appellant  could  speak
    English and the judge noted  that  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant met the eligibility financial requirement, and this would not
    count against her (paragraph 44). Although not relevant to my decision,
    I note that it was asserted that the appellant was in need  of  medical
    care and yet there was no evidence that private medical care was set up
    for her.  That the judge did not take this point, however, was  to  the
    appellant's advantage.

33. In the circumstances,  the  judge's  brief  but  relevant  findings  on
    proportionality  were  properly  reasoned  and  justified  and  on  the
    evidence the question of proportionality properly decided, namely  that
    the  refusal  on  entry  clearance  was  not  incompatible   with   the
    appellant's right to respect for her family life under  Article  8,  or
    indeed that of her family in the UK.

    Notice of Decision

34. I find no error of law and the decision shall stand.  If the  appellant
    wishes  to  adduce  new  evidence  the  correct   approach   in   these
    circumstances is to make a new entry clearance application.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 12th July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

