
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 October 2017                     |On 31 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               bhe kumari pun
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Lagunju, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a single woman from  Nepal.   She  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the UK as the dependent adult daughter of  her  father  in
    2010 which was refused.  Her father was granted leave to enter  the  UK
    on 3 August 2009 for the purposes of settlement on  the  basis  of  his
    past service with the Brigade of Ghurkhas,  and  her  mother  was  also
    granted entry clearance in 2010 as his dependent spouse.  The appellant
    and her siblings had their 2010 applications refused in part apparently
    because their parents were still living in Nepal at the time which,  on
    the face of  it,  appears  to  be  a  somewhat  confused  and  circular
    argument.

 2. The appellant made a new application for entry  clearance  on  29  July
    2015 which was refused on 4 September 2015 and the grounds  of  refusal
    were as follows. First, that she was over 36 at the time she  had  made
    that application and as a result did  not  meet  the  requirements  for
    settlement under Appendix K to the Immigration Rules  because  the  cut
    off threshold age for such applicants was 30 years.  Second, the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  she  was  financially  and
    emotionally  dependent  upon  her  sponsor  father.  Third,  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  she  had  any   personal
    circumstances by way of incapacity or medical condition  or  disability
    that prevented her from living her life  in  comfort  in  Nepal  as  an
    independent 36 year old who had always lived in Nepal, and  who  had  a
    property available to her by way of a family home that appeared to meet
    all of her needs, and who also had siblings and  other  family  members
    living in Nepal to whom she could look for emotional support.

 3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  Courtney  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  on  9  January  2017  and  it  was  allowed,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 January 2017, on Article 8 grounds.   The  respondent
    applied to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission  to  appeal,  which  was
    granted by way of a decision of Judge Lambert on 7 August 2017 and thus
    the matter comes before me.

 4. Before me Mr Clarke  accepts  that  the  grounds  of  the  respondent's
    challenge  are  effectively  a  perversity  argument,  rather  than   a
    challenge to the adequacy of the reasons given by  Judge  Courtney  for
    her decision. Certainly Judge Courtney's decision is a careful one  and
    a detailed one and it is not suggested before me  that  she  overlooked
    any relevant evidence or took into account any irrelevant evidence.

 5. If one looks at the position as it  was  in  2009  and  2010  when  the
    appellant's first application for entry clearance was made and  refused
    the position was this: the appellant lived as she had always done  with
    her siblings who like her were unmarried and living in the family  home
    with their parents.  She was then aged about 29.  I think  I  can  take
    judicial notice of the fact that it is a cultural norm in Nepal as in a
    number of other countries for unmarried adult daughters to continue  to
    live in the family home with their parents until the  time  comes  when
    they do marry and then leave.  At the age of 29,  and  living  in  such
    circumstances, few judges would oppose the argument that  it  would  be
    impossible for the child to have a subsisting family  life  with  their
    parents.  The jurisprudence that began with  Ghising  followed  by  the
    Court of Appeal decisions in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630  and  PT  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 612 makes it clear that there is no bright-line  rule  that  a
    child living with their parents who reaches the  age  of  maturity  and
    adulthood ceases at that point to enjoy family life with their parents,
    nor that their parents cease to enjoy family life with them.  There may
    come a point  where  that  "family  life"  ceases  as  a  result  of  a
    supervening event such as marriage, and there may come a point in  time
    where that erodes.  Cases are undoubtedly fact-sensitive, but there are
    no bright-line rules.

 6. Judge Courtney, having analysed the evidence before her, was  satisfied
    that in 2009/2010 the appellant did enjoy family life with her  parents
    and siblings.  I can see no fault with that finding.  It is  adequately
    reasoned, and it was plainly open to her upon the evidence before  her.
    The real thrust of the respondent's  challenge  before  me  is  to  the
    conclusion that family life persisted  and  subsisted,  notwithstanding
    the decision of the appellant's elderly parents to leave Nepal for  the
    UK and that it still subsisted and persisted, both at the date  of  the
    decision on the fresh entry clearance application she had made when  it
    was refused on 4 September 2015 and indeed at the date of  the  hearing
    before her on 9 January 2017.  As I say, that challenge is  effectively
    one of perversity and as such it does of course  necessarily  import  a
    high threshold.

 7. In my judgement that threshold is simply  not  reached  in  this  case.
    Judge Courtney's decision does not stop at analysing the position as it
    was when the family all lived together in Nepal in 2009/2010,  but  she
    also analysed the evidence as to  what  had  happened  since.  She  was
    entitled to ask herself the question of whether  the  2009  application
    should have succeeded, as indeed it is now clear that  it  should  have
    done. Moreover she did not fall into the trap of  deciding  the  appeal
    simply on the question of whether the sponsor had  from  time  to  time
    sent some money back to Nepal, or even whether there  was  a  real,  as
    opposed to a contrived, financial dependency at any  given  date.   She
    did look at the evidence  of  remittals  of  money  to  Nepal  and  the
    provision of the family home to the appellant as a place to  live,  but
    she looked at that evidence in the context of the evidence  as  to  the
    nature of the relationships that existed, and  persisted,  between  the
    various members of the family. She was entitled to accept  the  sponsor
    parents' evidence as honest and accurate.  She accepted the evidence of
    the declining health of the appellant's parents, and  their  increasing
    frailty, and she looked at their  dependence  upon  their  daughter  in
    their declining years as well as her  dependence  upon  them  over  the
    years, because of course the nature of the Article  8  appeal  required
    the judge not simply to focus upon the position of the  appellant,  but
    also to focus upon the Article 8 rights of her parents  who  living  in
    the UK, are in declining health.

 8. The real meat of the decision is to be found in paragraphs 22 to 27  of
    the decision and in my judgement that provides  a  more  than  adequate
    analysis and reasoning for the conclusion that family life between this
    adult daughter and her elderly parents existed when they left Nepal  to
    settle in the UK, and had persisted down to the date of the hearing.  I
    am not persuaded that the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Singh  or
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in PT (Sri Lanka) left the judge in
    a position where she was unable to reach that conclusion,  that  is  to
    say as the respondent's grounds suggest that it was a  conclusion  that
    was simply not open to her.  In my  judgement  it  is  plain  from  the
    relevant jurisprudence that such a conclusion was open to her, even  if
    it is possible that other judges would not have reached it.  As I  have
    indicated earlier there is no fault to be found in the reasoning or the
    analysis that Judge Courtney adopted, and since  the  finding  was  one
    that was open to her it is, in my judgement, unassailable.  I therefore
    dismiss the appeal and confirm her decision to  allow  this  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

