
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07321/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 21st May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Smith, Counsel instructed by Staines & Campbell
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  Respondent  as  the  Appellant  throughout  this
    decision as he was known before the First-tier Tribunal ("the FTT").

2.   I have granted the Appellant's application  for  anonymity  to  protect
    the identity of the Appellant's child.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth  is  15  August
    1978.  He  claims  to  have  entered  the  UK  in  2006.   He  made  an
    unsuccessful application under the EEA Regulations in 2007.  He made an
    application on 6 October 2016 for leave to remain. On 6  December  2017
    the Secretary of State made a deportation order pursuant to s5  (1)  of
    the 1971 Act because his deportation is conducive to  the  public  good
    (s.3 (5) of the 1971 Act). The order was made following the Appellant's
    conviction on 17 May 2017 for perverting  the  course  of  justice  for
    which he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six months.

4.   The Secretary of State's decision was that  deportation  was  conducive
    to the public good because he has been convicted of  an  offence  which
    causes serious harm. On 9 March 2018 the  Secretary  of  State  decided
    that the Appellant's deportation would  not  breach  his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the  1950  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision on human rights grounds and  his  appeal
    was allowed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  FTT")  Talbot
    following a hearing on 14 January 2019.  The decision  was  promulgated
    on 31 January 2019.  The Secretary of State was granted  permission  to
    appeal by FTT Judge I D Boyes on 27 February  2019.   Thus  the  matter
    came before me.  The details of the offence committed by the  Appellant
    are disclosed in the judge's sentencing remarks which are as follows:-

         "If you stand, please [MA].  You decided to drive  the  vehicle  in
         the early hours of the  morning  of  Boxing  Day  in  2015.   When,
         following an accident, the police attended, you deliberately  chose
         to lie about your identity, knowing that you were not  licenced  to
         drive in England, that you were not  insured  in  respect  of  that
         vehicle.  You also chose not to comply with the  Breathalyzer  test
         in that  time.   When  the  police  investigated  the  matter  they
         discovered that the identity you had given was not the correct  one
         and when they attended at the address they were able to  track  you
         down at, again, you sought to evade arrest  by  hiding  behind  the
         door.  When speaking with the probation officer the view they  have
         formed is that you were not entirely candid  in  regards  to  them,
         giving what they described, as I  say,  a  confusing  account.   In
         coming to my  sentence  I  have  taken  into  account  the  maximum
         sentence for this offence and the guidelines issued by the Court of
         Appeal and, as has  quite  rightly  been  stated,  the  offence  of
         carrying out acts intending to pervert the course of justice is  an
         incredibly serious one, it  goes  to  the  heart  of  our  criminal
         justice system and as a result sentences that are imposed  must  be
         of a deterrent nature because people cannot be allowed to do  this.
         It is a very, very serious offence."

The decision of the FTT

5.   At the hearing before Judge Talbot the Appellant gave oral evidence  as
    did, JA, the mother of the Appellant's child (G) and the Appellant's ex-
    partner.  In addition, there was a social worker's report  relating  to
    G. G is a British citizen. He was born here on 21 June 2008.

6.   The judge set out the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 6  to  12  and
    the evidence of JA at paragraph 13.  The Appellant's evidence was  that
    he and JA separated shortly after  G's  birth.  He  maintained  regular
    contact with G.  JA  married  another  man  on  14  March  2009.   That
    marriage broke down in 2014 and she obtained  a  non-molestation  order
    against her husband and they subsequently divorced.  The Appellant  and
    JA had "revived" their relationship.  The Appellant sincerely regretted
    his conduct which led to his arrest and was determined  not  to  offend
    again.  He was visited whilst in custody by JA and he  spoke  daily  to
    his son on the phone.  G was not informed of the true  reason  why  his
    father was away.  The Appellant has, since his release  on  immigration
    bail, on 23 February been living with JA and their son.  He is involved
    in JA's daily life.  He collects him from  school  and  is  in  regular
    contact with the school about G's progress.

7.   JA's evidence was that she and  the  Appellant  had  gradually  revived
    their relationship   following the breakdown of her marriage.   It  was
    very difficult for G to be apart from the Appellant whilst  he  was  in
    prison. He would be very unhappy if the Appellant were to be  deported.
    G is a sensitive child and would suffer emotionally.  JA expressed  her
    worry that she would struggle to raise him as a single  parent  and  to
    keep him away from "bad influences."  Her evidence was that she has  no
    family in the UK to support  her  and  depends  on  the  Appellant  for
    emotional and practical support.  She gave an example of when  she  had
    to go to the hospital following an ectopic pregnancy and the  Appellant
    arranged everything and looked after G.  In respect of the  Appellant's
    offending she described it as a "one-off incident".

8.   The judge had before him the report of a social worker,  Nicole  Louis,
    who had been instructed  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors.   The  judge
    recorded the social worker's experience namely that she is a registered
    social worker with fifteen years' experience of working  with  children
    and families.   She  interviewed  G  and  his  parents  separately  and
    together in the family home.  In addition, she interviewed  staff  from
    G's school and his GP, the Appellant's probation officer and  a  family
    friend.

9.   The social worker set out in considerable detail the  information  that
    she  had  gained  from  the  interviews  and  she  also  set  out   her
    conclusions.   The  judge  set  out  what  those  conclusions  were  at
    paragraph 14 of the decision.

         "14. She finds that the Appellant plays an equal role with [JA]  in
             caring for [G].  She directly observed the close rapport  that
             the Appellant enjoys with his son.  She notes that the  family
             life suffered significant disruption  and  [JA]  struggled  to
             cope when the Appellant  was  imprisoned  and  then  detained.
             This affected the family financially because [JA] had  to  cut
             down on her working hours.  It also had an  emotional  impact.
             Ms Louis would be concerned that Ms [A] would struggle to cope
             mentally and emotionally if the Appellant  were  deported  and
             this would in  turn  impact  on  her  ability  to  meet  [G's]
             emotional and psychological needs.  She is clear that it would
             not be in [G's] best interests for him to  be  separated  from
             his father and from her  own  experience  she  considers  that
             indirect contact though social media would not be an  adequate
             means to maintain the quality of the relationship.  She states
             that at this stage in his life, [G] needs to feel  secure  and
             the impact of separation from his father would be far-reaching
             and significant.  She is also clear that it would  not  be  in
             [G's] best interests for him to  have  to  relocate  with  his
             family to Ghana.  He has expressed his own wishes to Ms  Louis
             to remain in  the  UK  where  he  can  continue  enjoying  his
             established relationships  at  home,  in  school  and  in  his
             community."

10.  The judge heard submissions from both Ms  Hogben  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State at the hearing before  the  FTT  and  Ms  Smith  who
    represented the Appellant.  The judge recorded  the  submissions  made.
    There is no reference in Ms Hogben's submissions to the social worker's
    report.

11.  The judge made findings of fact and he found,  at  paragraph  21,  that
    the Appellant and his partner have a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with G.  This was an issue that was raised in the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter. The judge when assessing  "unduly  harsh"  directed
    herself f in respect of KO at paragraphs 22 and  at  paragraph  23  the
    judge had made the following findings

         "23. In applying the 'unduly harsh' test to this particular case, I
             find firstly that I found both the Appellant and  his  partner
             to be generally credible witnesses and  in  particular  to  be
             credible  in  their  evidence   concerning   the   Appellant's
             relationship with [G].  I therefore accept that he has been an
             active father since [G's] birth (notwithstanding the fact that
             due to his irregular status in the UK, he has not  been  in  a
             position to provide much in the  way  of  financial  support.)
             However, through the various ups and downs in his relationship
             with [JA] including her marriage to another man, the Appellant
             has been constant in maintaining regular contact with his  son
             and continuing to perform an active paternal role.   I  accept
             that during his mother's marriage to a Swedish national, [G's]
             significant bond was with the Appellant rather than  with  his
             stepfather and I note that since the breakup of the  marriage,
             there has in fact been no contact between [G] and his mother's
             ex-partner.  The fact that the  Appellant  maintained  regular
             contact with his son throughout this period suggests to  me  a
             commitment to his son which the Appellant genuinely intends to
             continue into the future.  The detailed and well-argued report
             of  the  social  worker  provides  further  evidence  of   the
             importance of the paternal relationship  and  the  close  bond
             that has been established between father and  son.   Ms  Louis
             has very clearly expressed her concerns that if father and son
             are separated, this will have a seriously  adverse  effect  on
             the child's development.  As well as the direct effect on  the
             child of missing his father, there is also the indirect effect
             on the child in terms of the adverse effect  on  the  mother's
             parenting that may follow from the Appellant's  absence.   The
             Respondent has acknowledged that the 'unduly harsh' test would
             be met if the  child  were  required  to  leave  the  UK.   On
             consideration of all the evidence before me and whilst  taking
             into  account  the  high   threshold   (as   stated   in   the
             jurisprudence), I am satisfied that the  'unduly  harsh'  test
             would also be met if [G] were to be separated from his  father
             by remaining in the UK whilst his father went back  to  Ghana.
             It follows  that  the  additional  test  of  'very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraph 339'
             does not apply."

12.  In relation to the wider  Article  8  assessment  the  judge  made  the
    following findings at paragraph 24.

         "24. This is a human rights appeal based on the family life of  the
             Appellant with his son.  Undoubtedly the Respondent's decision
             to deport the Appellant constitutes an interference  with  his
             family life rights of sufficient  gravity  as  to  engage  the
             Convention.   The  countervailing  public  interest   in   the
             prevention of crime  and  disorder  supports  the  Appellant's
             deportation as being in  the  public  interest.   I  note  the
             guiding principles in assessing Article 8  claims  by  foreign
             criminals set out in a series of important judgements  of  the
             ECHR including Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50, Maslov
             v Austria [2009] INLR 47 and Uner v Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR
             14.  I also note the dicta  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AJ
             (Zimbabwe)  (2016)  EWCA,  Civ  1012  concerning   the   three
             important facets of the public interest, namely: the  need  to
             deter foreign criminals from  committing  serious  crimes;  an
             expression  of  society's  revulsion  at  serious  crimes  and
             building  public  confidence  in  the  treatment  of   foreign
             criminals who have committed such crimes; and the risk of  re-
             offending.  (I also note the subsequent dicta of  Lord  Wilson
             in Hesham Ali (2016) EWCA, Civ 662).  However,  these  factors
             must be balanced against the interference with the Appellant's
             family life rights and in this connection the  best  interests
             of the child form a primary consideration.  Taking due account
             of the seriousness of the Appellant's offence, I am  satisfied
             that, as the consequences of the Respondent's  decision  would
             be 'unduly harsh' on his child [G], the public interest in his
             deportation is outweighed by the effect  on  the  family  life
             rights and most particularly the  rights  of  the  Appellant's
             child."

The grounds of appeal

13.  The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to show how  or  why
    it would be unduly harsh on the child to remain in the UK  without  the
    Appellant with reference to  MK  (section  55(5)  -  Tribunal  options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 as confirmed by the Supreme Court in  KO
    Nigeria [2018] UKSC 53.  It is asserted in the grounds that  the  judge
    relied on the social worker's report  and  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his partner.  The purpose of the social  worker's  report
    was to identify the child's best interests and not unduly harsh (in the
    context of the Immigration Rules and the statutory framework).

14.  Mr  Kotas  relied  on  the  Respondent's  skeleton  argument  and  made
    extensive oral submissions.  It was accepted that  the  judge  directed
    herself correctly in relation  to  KO.   However,  the  judge  did  not
    adequately reason how the  demanding  test  had  been  satisfied.   The
    judge's findings cannot support a conclusion that separation  would  be
    unduly harsh and that  the  elevated  test  had  been  satisfied.   The
    salient findings are at paragraph 23. The  two  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for finding that separation will have a seriously adverse  effect
    on the child's development was, firstly; a concern raised by the social
    worker and, secondly; the indirect effect on G following the impact  on
    his mother, JA, following from  the  Appellant's  deportation.   In  Mr
    Kotas'  view  these  two  reasons  are  no  more  than   the   ordinary
    consequences of deportation and are inadequate to sustain a  conclusion
    that separation would be unduly  harsh.   In  relation  to  the  social
    worker's Mr Kotas drew my attention to  section  5[1].    He  submitted
    that there was a high degree of speculation by the social worker  about
    what would happen in the absence of the Appellant. There  were  matters
    which simply should not  have  been  in  the  report  and  he  referred
    specifically to 5.14 and 5.16.  There is nothing, in his view,  in  the
    report which would take the consequences  of  deportation  beyond  what
    would be considered to be normal. Mr Kotas did not address  me  on  the
    assertion in the grounds that the social worker's evidence was partial.



15.  Mr Kotas referred me to the paragraphs of the decision in KMO  (section
    117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543  (IAC),  KMO  which  were
    approved by the Supreme Court in KO, at paragraph 33, and he  submitted
    that the judge attached weight to the financial circumstances which are
    not a relevant consideration.  He submitted that the Secretary of State
    does not understand why he lost the appeal.

16.  Miss Smith made oral  submissions  relying  on  her  detailed  skeleton
    argument, save that in respect of the serious harm matter she  conceded
    that this was not an issue before the Upper Tribunal. There had been no
    cross-appeal on that point. In her submissions the Secretary  of  State
    was simply rearguing the merits of the appeal and the grounds amount to
    nothing more than a disagreement with the findings.

17.  Ms Smith  submitted  that  the  judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his partner she was entitled to do.  They were both cross-
    examined at length by the Presenting Officer.  She referred me  to  the
    Appellant's partner's evidence as  set  out  at  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision.  It was not a matter of  the  judge  relying  wholly  on  the
    evidence of the social worker.  She referred me to the  experience  and
    qualifications of the social worker.  The social worker had not  simply
    relied on what the Appellant and his partner  told  her  there  were  a
    number of other sources.  She has specialist knowledge and that must be
    considered.  It was not the Appellant's case that the social worker had
    carried out a psychological assessment however the  conclusions  within
    her  remit  were  in  her  remit  considering  her  qualifications  and
    experience.  There were a number of reasons  why  the  judge  concluded
    that separation of the family would be unduly harsh.

18.  There was no challenge to the social worker's evidence before the  FTT.
    The report and must be considered in its totality as must the  decision
    of the judge.  It is not right to focus  simply  on  paragraph  23  the
    decision must be considered as a whole.  It does not properly represent
    the judge's decision to say that he gave two reasons only for  allowing
    the appeal (those identified in paragraph 23).  There  was  before  the
    judge evidence of the Appellant and his partner that was  accepted  and
    evidence from them and the social  worker  that  G  is  a  particularly
    sensitive child.  The decision is adequately reasoned and  the  factors
    considered cumulatively sufficient to satisfy the elevated test.

The Legal Framework

Automatic Deportation under UKBA 2007

19.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act.  Section 117D of the same Act and

    "117C     Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals

           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.

           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the
                public interest requires deportation unless there  are  very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                Exceptions 1 and 2.

           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                taken into account where a court or tribunal is  considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted.

    117D Interpretation of this Part

           (1)    In this Part-

                "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
                Human Rights;

                "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
                and who-

                    (a)     is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous
                        period of seven years or more;

                "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                    (a)     is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the
                        meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 -  see  section
                        33(2A) of that Act).

           (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                (b)    who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence, and

                (c)    who-

                    (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                        at least 12 months,

                    (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has  caused
                        serious harm, or

                    (iii)  is a persistent offender.

           (3)    For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject
                to an order under-

                (a)    section 5 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                    1964 (insanity etc),

                (b)    section 57 of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                    1995 (insanity etc), or

                (c)    Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                    Order 1986 (insanity etc),

                has not been convicted of an offence.

           (4)    In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain length of
                time-

                (a)    do not include a person who has received a  suspended
                    sentence (unless a court subsequently  orders  that  the
                    sentence or any part of it (of whatever  length)  is  to
                    take effect);

                (b)    do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a
                    period of imprisonment of that length of  time  only  by
                    virtue  of  being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
                    amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                (c)    include a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or
                    ordered or directed to be detained,  in  an  institution
                    other  than  a  prison  (including,  in  particular,   a
                    hospital or an institution for young offenders) for that
                    length of time; and

                (d)    include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment  or
                    detention, or ordered or directed to be detained, for an
                    indeterminate period, provided that it may last  for  at
                    least that length of time.

           (5)    If any question arises for the purposes of this  Part  as
                to whether a person is a British  citizen,  it  is  for  the
                person asserting that fact to prove it."

Immigration Rules

    "Deportation and Article 8

    "A398.   These rules apply where:

           (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
                deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

           (b)    a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                against him to be revoked.

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

           (a)     the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is
                in the UK, and

                (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                (ii)   the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                    least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  the
                    immigration decision; and in either case

                    (a)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                        the country to which the person is to be  deported;
                        and

                    (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                        in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                        or

           (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen  or
                settled in the UK, and

                (i)    the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                    (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration
                    status was not precarious; and

                (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                    the country to which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,
                    because of compelling circumstances over and above those
                    described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                (iii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                    in the UK without the person who is to be deported."





Application of the Legislation and the Immigration Rules

20.  In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53 Lord Carnwath  (giving  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court)
    analysed the exception, based on  the  deportees  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, in Section 117C (5) NIAA 2002  and  paragraph  399(a)
    (IR).  At [15], he explained that he started from the presumption  that
    the  provisions  were  intended  to  be  consistent  with  the  general
    principles relating to the "best interests" of children, including  the
    principle that "a child must not be blamed for matters which he or  she
    is not responsible, such as the conduct of a  parent"  (see  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC  74  per  Lord
    Hodge at [10]).  He concluded that the exception was self-contained and
    so, in deciding whether or not it applied, the  decision  maker  should
    only consider the  factors  specified,  and  disregard  the  degree  of
    seriousness  of  the  parental  offending  and  other  public  interest
    considerations (at [20] and [23]).

21.  Lord Carnwath gave guidance on the meaning of  "unduly  harsh  at  [23]
    and

         "23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             'reasonableness' under Section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context.  'Unduly' implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal  in
             IT   (Jamaica)   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department[2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1  WLR  240,  paragraphs
             55, 64) can it be equated with a  requirement  to  show  'very
             compelling reasons'. That would be in effect to replicate  the
             additional test applied by Section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
             sentences of four years or more."

22.  Lord Carnwath cited with approval  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MK (Sierra  Leone)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "...'unduly   harsh'   does   not   equate   with    uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable, or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a
         considerably more elevated threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this  context,
         denotes something  severe  or  bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of
         pleasant or uncomfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb
         'unduly' raises an already elevated higher standard."

23.   In  the  recent  case  RA  (Section  117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:
    seriousness) (Iraq) [2009] UKUT 00123 the Upper Tribunal  concluded  as
    follows:-

         "(1) In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the  Supreme  Court
             of the test of  'unduly  harsh'  in  Section  117C(5)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  formulated  by
             the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does  not  mean
             that the test includes the way in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
             applied its formulation to the facts of the case before it.

         (2)  The court decided that the way in which a  court  or  Tribunal
             should approach Section 117C issue remains as set out  in  the
             judgment of Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) & Another v  Secretary
             of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662."

24.  The Upper Tribunal said in respect of the test to be applied the  Upper
    Tribunal in response to submissions that they were obliged to adopt the
    same approach as the Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) two children aged at
    or around 7 said as follows:-

         "14. We reject the submissions although the application of a  legal
             test to a particular set of facts can sometimes shed light  on
             the way in which the test falls to be applied, it is the  test
             that matters.  If this were not so, everything from the law of
             negligence to human rights would become irretrievably mired in
             a search for factual precedence.

         15.  What might at first appear to be hard-edged findings  of  fact
             often turn out to be evaluative assessments. On analysing  the
             above passages from MK (Sierra Leone), that  is  the  position
             here. The Upper Tribunal's conclusion that children aged 7 are
             at a  "critical  stage  of  their  development"  was  such  an
             assessment, based on the facts  before  it.  It  was  not  the
             laying bare of an obvious fact, of which any  other  court  or
             Tribunal must take "judicial notice". One  could  envisage  an
             equally valid argument that a child of 2 or 3 is at a critical
             stage of  its  development;  or  a  child  at  or  approaching
             puberty, and so on. Childhood is a  developmental  progression
             towards becoming an adult.

         ...

         17.  As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test  of
             'unduly harsh' has a dual aspect.  It is not  enough  for  the
             outcome to be 'severe' or  'bleak'.   Proper  effect  must  be
             given to the adverb 'unduly'.   The  position  is,  therefore,
             significantly far removed from the test  of  "reasonableness",
             as found in Section 117B(6)(b)."

Conclusions

25.  There is no challenge of substance to the findings of fact made by  the
    FTT or to the judge's self-direction.  There  was  before  the  FTT  no
    challenge to the report of the independent social worker.  Mr Kotas has
    before me raised challenges to the conclusions reached  by  the  social
    worker.   The  thrust  of  the  grounds  is  that  her  conclusion   is
    inadequately reasoned.  Mr Kotas in oral submissions asserted  that  in
    the alternative the conclusions reached  by  the  judge  are  perverse.
    However, this was not an issue raised in the grounds.

26.  In support of the Secretary of State's case Mr Kotas drew my  attention
    to particular sections and conclusions reached by  the  social  worker.
    There is no challenge to the experience or qualifications of the social
    worker.  It has not been asserted at any stage by  the  Appellant  that
    the social worker was instructed  to  consider  the  issue  of  "unduly
    harsh" and indeed this would be beyond the social worker's remit as  it
    is a legal test for the judge to assess.  In this context the judge was
    unarguably aware having properly directed herself that the child's best
    interests as assessed by the social worker was  not  the  determinative
    issue in this appeal.  The  evidence  of  the  report  was  capable  of
    carrying  weight  in  the  unduly  harsh  assessment.   The  judge  was
    unarguably entitled to attach weight to the conclusions reached by  the
    social worker.  There are parts of the social worker's report  which  I
    was referred by Mr Kotas that may involve an  element  of  speculation,
    but the matters to which the judge attached a  particular  weight  (set
    out at paragraph 14 of the decision) were not those to which  Mr  Kotas
    referred drew my attention.  In any event, it is difficult to  see  how
    an assessment  of  unduly  harsh  would  not  involve  some  degree  of
    speculation.  What the judge has done in this case is applied  a  legal
    test to a particular set of facts and made an evaluative assessment  on
    the evidence before him

27.  It is wrong to  focus  on  the  two  reasons  given  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 23 of the decision.  The decision must be read as a whole  to
    be properly understood. JA described the difficulties which would arise
    from the Appellant's deportation and how that would affect G  whom  she
    described as a sensitive boy.  I do not accept that the  assessment  of
    unduly harsh was informed by financial concerns in  the  event  of  the
    Appellant's deportation.  This was simply a factor that  was  put  into
    the mix in order to assess whether the cumulative effect of deportation
    would be unduly harsh on G.  The judge identified a number  of  adverse
    effects arising from deportation.  She was entitled to  take  the  view
    that cumulatively they amount to unduly harsh.

28.  The decision whilst not inevitable was a decision upon which the  judge
    was entitled to reach based on the lawful and sustainable findings.  In
    the case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v Garzon  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1225, there was no  material  misdirection  and  all  relevant
    considerations were taken into account, but  the  SSHD  challenged  the
    weight given by the FTT to various factors, and the FTT's conclusion. I
    am mindful of what McFarlane LJ said at [28] and [30]:

         "28....an appellate court must afford due deference and respect  to
         the evaluation of an expert tribunal charged with  administering  a
         complex area of law in challenging circumstances (per Baroness Hale
         in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] 1
         AC 678 at paragraph 30)... There is no error of law  ...The  appeal
         solely turns on the attribution of weight.  The tribunal heard oral
         evidence...

         "30. Whilst  another  specialist  tribunal  might  have  reached  a
         contrary conclusion, it is, in my view, not possible to  hold  that
         the FTT in the present case  arrived  at  a  conclusion  which  was
         insupportable on the evidence or otherwise perverse..."

29.  There is no error of law and the decision of the  judge  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 is maintained.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 15 May 2019 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------

[1] 5)   ANALYSIS


5.1  In this report, I have considered the relevant factors presented to  me
    involved in [G] and his parents lives.  I have  taken  account  of  the
    [G's] age, wishes and feelings.


5.2  I have conducted my interviews to answer the following questions:


HOW WOULD [G], AND THE FAMILY AS A UNIT, BE IMPACTED IF [MA]  WERE  DEPORTED
TO GHANA?


5.3  This report has highlighted that [G] and  his  mother's  life  suffered
    significant disruption when [MA] was incarcerated and then detained.


5.4  In my view, this seems a fitting place to start to gain better  insight
    into how [MA] unwanted absence from the home is likely  to  impact  the
    family.


5.5  The dynamics of the family had been  disrupted  when  [MA]  was  absent
    from the home, and they had changed for the worse.  Specifically,  [JA]
    said that she struggled to cope with managing day  to  day  tasks,  for
    example, taking and collection [G] to and from school.


5.6  This also impacted her financially as it meant she was unable  to  work
    as frequently as she would have liked.  It also caused a great deal  of
    stress which caused her to have high blood pressure.


5.7  [JA] described having to heavily rely  on  the  practical,  and  likely
    emotional, support of her sister, who no longer lives in the UK.


5.8  Therefore, the disruption to the family was  considerable  and  it  had
    far-reaching impact, which included physical and emotional issues.


5.9   In  addition,  [JA]  and  [MA]  both  alluded  to  them  having   some
    difficulties in their relationship which contributed to him moving  out
    of the home  for  a  time.   It  is  likely  that  the  stress  of  his
    immigration status exasperates that, in particular,  his  inability  to
    work to make financial contributions toward [G] and the household.


5.10 Considering this, it is my view that [JA] would be very unprepared  for
    the responsibilities necessary to take adequate  care  of  [G]  without
    [MA] consistent input.  I believe this to be  especially  true  as  she
    continues to recover from an ectopic pregnancy.


5.11 I would be concerned that along with the  stress  of  the  prospect  of
    [MA] being deported, her ability  to  cope  mentally  and  emotionally,
    would be limited.


5.12 [JA] has clearly depicted how much she  relies  on  [MA]  to  help  her
    raise [G], for example, he does the school run, cooks and cleans, which
    allows her the ability to work so they can have some level of financial
    autonomy and provide for [G],  in  terms  of  social  activities  which
    assists his development.


5.13 If she were unable to work, she would not be able  to  meet  [G]  basic
    care needs of food, shelter, clothing and  social  activities,  all  of
    which play a major role in his emotional and physical well-being.


5.14 Additionally, it  is  likely  that  [JA]  could  become  depressed  and
    anxious, as well as experience high blood pressure again due to  stress
    if [MA] were to be deported.


5.15 Such symptoms are also likely to significantly impact  her  ability  to
    meet [G]  emotional  and  psychological  needs  because  she  would  be
    emotionally unavailable to see or tend to him.  This would  undoubtedly
    leave [G] very vulnerable emotionally and practically.


5.16 For example, Miss [A] described [G] as being  a  very  sensitive  child
    who requires reassurance and consistent support.  It stands to  reason,
    therefore, that if [MA]were to be deported, and  [JA]  could  not  meet
    [G's] emotional or practical needs, he  is  likely  to  seek  attention
    elsewhere, such as from a gang  or  other  adult  strangers,  which  is
    likely to place him at risk of exploitation and significant harm.


5.17 Some response by children to  manage  trauma  in  their  life  includes
    tearfulness, sensitivity, sleep problems, poor  concentration,  getting
    into  trouble  at  school,  withdrawal  from  loved  ones,   displaying
    attention-seeking behaviour, angry or violent  outbursts,  self-injury,
    developing distorted images of themselves, developing eating  disorders
    or even substance abuse.1


5.18 Research highlights that by the age  of  six  humans  are  starting  to
    navigate the wider world and that emotional security is maintained when
    they take risks and chances in their exploration; but when they  always
    know that their home environment is a place of safety.2


5.19 Research also highlights that the adolescence stage of the  life  cycle
    is the second most crucial stage of development, next to  the  first  3
    years of life, as the forming of  the  individuals  identity  is  being
    formed and external influences, such as family and peer groups,  having
    a significant impact on the development of  identity,  self-esteem  and
    sense of the world; all of which contribute to  the  development  of  a
    healthy emotional homeostatis.3


5.20 This stage is crucial for the children because one is at the  stage  of
    adolescence, whilst the other two are on the cusp of  this  development
    stage.  In order to successfully manage the challenges that  they  will
    face, the children require the stability and support of  their  family.
    It is crucial for the boys that their father is able to assist them  in
    the  development  of  their  identity  through  this  stage  of   their
    development.4

    1 Crawford, K. and walker, J., 2005
    2 Howe, D., 2011
    3 Smith, P. et.al., 2011
    4 Crawford, K. and walker, J., 2005

5.21 This is pertinent as it relates to [G] as I would be concerned that  he
    would likely display several of the symptoms, outlined in section  5.17
    of this part of the report if his father were deported, and how this is
    likely to impair his  learning,  social,  emotional  and  psychological
    development.


5.22 [G] needs stable attachment figures at this time  in  his  life  and  a
    robust support network to assist them through this period of his  life,
    and that includes both of his  parents.   If  his  father  were  to  be
    deported, it is likely that his ability to make a successful transition
    to adolescent would be significantly compromised.


5.23 For example, [G] may struggle to develop a deep level of closeness  and
    attachment to others because he may be fearful that they  too  will  be
    sent away and that he will be abandoned.  This  is  likely  to  have  a
    greater impact on the  relationships  he  will  go  on  to  have,  both
    platonic and non-platonic.


5.24 Additionally, research has shown that,  "Childhood  circumstances  such
    as poor  attachment,  neglect,  abuse,  lack  of  quality  stimulation,
    conflict and family  breakdown  can  negatively  affect  future  social
    behaviour, educational  outcomes,  employment  status  and  mental  and
    physical health.339 Conversely, children and young people who have good
    personal and social relationships with family and friends  have  higher
    levels of wellbeing.5


5.25  Developments  in  theories  around  attachment  also  highlight   that
    children do not require  a  secure  emotional  base  to  make  positive
    changes.  Rather, their  caregivers  having  an  understanding  of  the
    child's attachment behaviours at any given time and responding to those
    appropriately while nurturing  the  child  to  use  healthy  attachment
    behaviours in favour of destructive ones is key to helping them  thrive
    in their overall development.6


5.26 Research also shows that "Parental mental illness  is  associated  with
    increased rates of mental health problems in children and young people,
    with an estimated one-third to two-thirds of children and young  people
    whose parents have a mental health  problem  experiencing  difficulties
    themselves.7


5.27 As such, it is my view that at this  stage  in  his  life,  [G]  really
    needs to feel secure, which  he  does  right  now  because  his  father
    resides with him, and his family is intact.


5.28 Having considered all of the above, it is my view  that  [G]  would  be
    very negatively impacted if his father were to be  deported,  owing  to
    the significant disruption that the family would face if [MA]  were  to
    be deported.


5.29 The  family  would  first  be  impacted  emotionally,  psychologically,
    financially and then practically.  The impact would be far-reaching and
    significant enough to impair [G] in the immediate and  distant  future,
    and it is likely to disrupt his global development.


WOULD IT BE IN [G]'S BEST INTEREST FOR [MA] TO DEPORTED  TO  GHANA  &  COULD
[G] RELOCATE WITH HIS FATHER?


5.30 [JA] and [MA] describe a much  different  picture  now  that  [MA]  has
    returned home on bail and since they have been residing together  as  a
    family again.


5.31 For example, they have a clear plan and structure which allows them  to
    share  the  responsibility  of  raising  [G],  both   practically   and
    emotionally, which both view to be helpful for [G] and to them  as  his
    parent.

    5 Bell, R.et al., 2013 & NetCen Social research, 2013
    6 Critenen, P., 2012
    7 Manning, C. and Gregoire, A.2009; Royal College of Psychiatry, 2012 &
    Goodman R, et.al, 2003

5.32 I observed [G] and his father had a deep bond and  this  was  exhibited
    in the way  they  communicated,  for  example,  [MA]gave  a  particular
    whistle which [G] knew and responded to warmly.


5.33 In my view, [G] relationship with his father was  one  of  respect  and
    love, and he appeared to have a positive attachment to both his  father
    and his mother.


5.34 If [MA] were to deported, [G's] relationship with his father  would  be
    severed because it is highly unlikely that they could maintain a  long-
    distance relationship.


5.35 Furthermore, it is highly unlikely that he could find employment  owing
    to his lack of formal education and possibly the countries inability to
    provide employment.


5.36 As such, [MA] would not have the means to maintain any form of  contact
    with his son, either by phone, internet or post; so their  relationship
    and attachment would be severed.


5.37 Furthermore, if he could, it is highly unlikely that he could  maintain
    on a consistent enough basis, which is likely to cause [G] distress and
    worry for his father, and anxiety at the fact he could not see or speak
    to his father.


5.38 It would serve to be as negative input rather than positive as  far  as
    helping [G's] emotional and psychological development.


5.39 As a British national,  [G]  has  visited  Ghana  once,  and  while  he
    enjoyed his stay there, he clearly expressed having no desire  to  live
    there because he would miss his friends.


5.40 This demonstrates that [G] has an established and fulfilled  life  here
    in the UK, and he and his parents play  an  active  role  within  their
    community.


5.41 For example, they go to and are active within their  church  community,
    and [G] attends a school where he has positive relationships  with  his
    peers and teachers.


5.42 If [G] were to live in Ghana, he would lose relationships  in  exchange
    for a life far more unstable, inconsistent and it would be lacking  the
    security currently afforded him here as a  British  child  living  here
    with both is parents.


5.43 In order for [G] to have the best possible outcomes in life,  he  needs
    emotional stability and good network of support.  His  family,  friends
    and  church  community  provides  both  of  these  for  him,  so  [G's]
    development in these areas would likely be impaired and his development
    negatively impacted if he were expected to go to Ghana with his father.


5.44 Having worked with numerous  families  over  the  past  four  years  in
    similar situations to that of [G] and his family, it is  my  experience
    that communication by use of  modern  social  media  would  be  grossly
    inadequate to repairing attachment fractures caused by separation.   It
    is  also  an  ineffective  method  for  families  to   develop   enough
    interpersonal interaction that  maintains  their  relationship  to  the
    quality required for it to be of benefit to the child.


5.45 It is imperative that any  decision  being  made  about  [G]  does  not
    prejudice his  welfare  but  rather  makes  his  welfare  of  paramount
    concern.


5.46 For these reasons, it is my view that it  would  be  inappropriate  for
    [G] to move to Ghana because it would not be in his  best  interest  or
    for his ongoing development.


