
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  appeal number: HU/07760/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 November 2018                      |On 16 November 2018              |
|                                             |

                                   Before













                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  WAQAR [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC,
    promulgated on 21 March 2018.

 3. The nub of the first ground of appeal  is  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner continuing in Pakistan;  whether  there  were
    medical facilities in Pakistan to  meet  her  medical  needs;  and  the
    burden on the appellant to show that facilities were not available.

 4. The judge's decision is short and  clear.   There  is  reference  to  a
    number of factors relied upon to show insurmountable obstacles  -  lack
    of ties in Pakistan, inability to speak Urdu  or  Punjabi,  and  family
    ties in the UK - which might go towards making such a case,  but  which
    even in combination would probably fall short.  The key finding however
    is at paragraph 17, accepting medical  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    partner was unfit even to travel to  Pakistan.   The  grounds  make  no
    challenge to that finding.  If she is unfit to travel to Pakistan,  the
    quality of medical treatment there is irrelevant.

 5. The conclusion that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  inevitably
    followed, which met the terms of the rules, and in turn established the
    case on human rights grounds.

 6. In absence of any error disclosed by ground 1, ground 2 is  immaterial.
    Once insurmountable obstacles had been established, there is nothing in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act which might  have  brought  about  another
    outcome.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            Dated 9 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




