
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07081/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 September 2017                  |On 10 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                         Mukundkumar Patel Jigishben
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, instructed by  Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Turquet promulgated on 5 May  2017  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her  human
    rights claim.  It is at the outset of this case I  think  important  to
    set out in some detail the history of how this appeal came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant and her husband have been present in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2001 having entered as visitors.  The husband subsequently made a
    claim for asylum which was refused and eventually he was as it  appears
    granted permission to stay under the Legacy Programme.

 3. The Legacy Programme gave rise to a significant amount of litigation in
    the higher courts primarily arising in the judicial review of decisions
    under that process and it is unnecessary at least  for  these  purposes
    for me to go into these in any great detail suffice  to  say  that  the
    programme is sufficiently set out in e well-known cases  such  as  most
    recently in Hamzeh v SSHD [2013] EWHC 4113 (Admin) an in  SH  (Iran)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1469.

 4. For whatever reason it appears that although the appellant and  at  all
    times it is said being treated as a dependant of the husband under  his
    immigration claim initially  the  asylum  claim  and  subsequently  for
    whatever reasons it appears that she was not considered when a decision
    was made to grant her indefinite leave to remain on that basis.

 5. It is not at all clear to me why, if it is now said  that  the  central
    issue of this case is the differential treatment of a husband and wife,
     this was not addressed first when the decision was made in respect  of
    the husband or in subsequent correspondence asking  for  clarification.
    Further, no proper reason is given why this important  factor  was  not
    specifically drawn to the attention of the Secretary of State  when  an
    application was made for leave in line nor were there subsequent proper
    representations made after the decision in respect of which  gave  rise
    to this appeal. It appears it was only  after  the  matter  had  to  be
    adjourned that this issue was addressed.  It is recorded and there does
    not appear to be a dispute in  this  in  Judge  Turquet's  decision  at
    paragraph 25 that the Home Office's older  live  cases  unit  requested
    information about the  previous  application  of  3  January  2017  and
    solicitors had only responded on 18 April 2017 just two days before the
    hearing of that appeal.  It therefore appears from the material  before
    me that that issue is yet to be resolved.

 6. Turning to the substance  of  the  decision,  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the couple were in an subsisting  relationship  certainly
    it does not appear to have been  in  dispute  before  the  judge.   The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied the requirements of paragraph EX1.
    of Appendix FM were met nor was the Secretary of State  satisfied  that
    there were reasons why although the requirements of the Rules were  not
    met the appellant should nonetheless be granted leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge found first, the requirements of  EX.1  were
    not met and  second,  that  none  of  the  other  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules  were  met  for  example  paragraph  276ADE  and  she
    considered having addressed herself in line with Agyarko  both  in  the
    Court of Appeal  and  later  inthe  Supreme  Court  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that there were reasons why having  taken  into  account  the
    public interest the removal of the appellant was disproportionate.

 7. The challenges in the grounds are:

          i) that the judge failed to have adequate  consideration  to  the
             Article 8 proportionality issue in which case the issue of the
             Legacy Programme is raised;

         ii) that the judge failed properly adequately to consider and deal
             with insurmountable obstacles issue under paragraph EX.1; and,

        iii) that  there  was  inadequate  consideration  with  regards  to
             paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 8. I  deal  with  the  third  ground  last  because  I  have  received  no
    submissions on that and it does not appear that Mr Kannangara wishes to
    pursue that issue he certainly did not do so in submissions.  I observe
    in respect of this ground that it is couched in terms of the ties which
    exist rather than any addressing of how the Rules  are  now  formulated
    which is to whether there are very significant obstacles.  The  grounds
    fail properly to identify why  or  what  those  are  and  there  is  no
    submission put to me to show that the judge  reached  conclusions  with
    regards to insurmountability or otherwise obstacles which were not open
    to her.  The reasoning set out at  paragraph  36  of  the  decision  is
    sufficient and adequate to deal with all the  issues  and  nothing  has
    been said to me today to persuade me otherwise.

 9. Turning to the second ground Mr Kannangara candidly accepted before  me
    and I consider he was right to do so that he could not argue  that  the
    judge's approach to EX.1 was not one open to  her.   Having  considered
    the fact that the matter for  myself  immaterial  I  am  not  satisfied
    bearing in mind what was said in Agyarko in the Supreme Court  building
    on the jurisprudence of the Strasbourg Court that there is anything  in
    this case other than the matter which I will turn to next  capable   of
    taking this out of the usual run of cases, bearing in mind  that  there
    had to be sufficiently compelling circumstances or at  the  very  least
    something unusual to differentiate this case from the general  position
    that where a family life has been established as it  clearly  has  here
    certainly been built upon in this  country  since  2001  where  neither
    party had leave to remain is something which would  require  compelling
    or other exceptional circumstances.

10. That brings to me the first ground of appeal which is the one which was
    the subject  of the greater part of submissions before me.  It is  said
    that the judge erred in failing to take into account that the applicant
    had the appellant been treated differently from  her  husband  in  that
    although he had and for all intents and purposes there is no difference
    between his case and her case her being dependent on him such that  she
    should have been granted indefinite leave to remain  under  the  legacy
    programme in line with her husband.

11. I find no merit in the submission that that the  judge  ought  to  have
    taken into account the fact that no decision had been  made  under  the
    Legacy Programme.  On the basis of the material before me and certainly
    on the basis of the material before  the  judge  as  is  shown  in  her
    decision, there does not appear to have been any decision reached  with
    respect to appellant.

12. There is no basis on which she could have been said nor does it  appear
    to have properly been argued to the judge that the failure to reach the
    decision under the Legacy Programme was in itself unlawful or  in  that
    there was any reason why this was a significant  factor  given  that  a
    decision was yet to be  made.   Further  it  would  appear  that  if  a
    decision is made then it will be  challengeable  either  by  way  of  a
    further appeal or by way of judicial review.

13. I do note that there is a large body of case law regarding  the  Legacy
    Programme but I am not aware nor has either party drawn to my attention
    any cases in which there have been a situation like this where there is
    a husband and a wife who have been treated separately.  Given that  the
    matter is yet to be decided upon by the Secretary of State it could not
    have been proper for the judge to attach weight to that as  that  would
    have involved her speculating as to how the Secretary  of  State  would
    approach the decision.  Accordingly, for these reasons I consider  that
    the judge did not err in not attaching weight or  taking  consideration
    into the decision  and  she  reached  a  decision  which  was  properly
    reasoned and was one to which she is entitled to come.

14. For these reasons I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  9 October 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 9 October 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

