
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07659/2019

                                                               HU/07661/2019

                                                               HU/07698/2019





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2020                 |On 01 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                               MS KALPANA RAI

                              MR MOHAN SHER RAI

                              MR DIL KUMAR RAI

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Everest Solicitors; no submissions received

For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Background

       1. These  joint  appeals  come  before  me  following  the  grant  of
          permission to appeal to the appellants  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
          Rintoul on 6 August 2020 against the determination  of  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Hatton promulgated on 17 January 2020  following  a
          hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 January 2020.


       2. The appellants are siblings aged 42, 39 and 37 at the date of  the
          hearing. They are Nepalese nationals.  They  seek  to  join  their
          father, the sponsor, as adult dependent children. The sponsor is a
          retired Gurkha soldier with settled status in the UK since October
          2015. He has been married twice and has outlived  both  wives.  He
          has six children from his second wife. One of them  qualified  for
          entry and accompanied him to the UK.


       3. The applications were made on 28 December 2018 and refused by  the
          ECO on 11 March  2019.  The  decision  was  upheld  by  the  Entry
          Clearance Manager on 5 August 2019 after the  appellants  filed  a
          human rights appeal[1]. They claim that they have family life with
          their father and that they remain dependent upon him.


       4. The ECO was not satisfied that they met the  requirements  of  EC-
          DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM because they had failed to show that they
          were unable to care for  themselves  on  a  daily  basis  and  had
          demonstrated no exceptional circumstances. Additionally, they  had
          each other to rely on. The applications were  also  refused  under
          article 8 because the respondent found that  they  had  failed  to
          demonstrate that they were financially and  emotionally  dependent
          upon their father beyond that normally expected between  a  parent
          and adult children. They had been living apart since their  father
          settled in the UK in October 2015.  Their  personal  circumstances
          were considered but nothing was found which warranted a  grant  of
          leave outside the rules. The relevant case law on Gurkha  children
          was taken into account but it was noted that the  sponsor  applied
          for settlement when the appellants were already adults and in  the
          knowledge that adult children did not  automatically  qualify  for
          settlement. It was not accepted that they had  established  family
          life with the sponsor over and above that between  adult  children
          and parents, nor that they had  demonstrated  real,  committed  or
          effective support from him. The issue of the historical  injustice
          was also considered but it was found that the effect of  this  was
          not such that they had been prevented from leading normal lives.


       5. The appeals came before Judge Hatton who heard oral evidence  from
          the  sponsor  and  his  UK  based  daughter.  He   commenced   his
          consideration  of  the  evidence  by   considering   whether   the
          appellants were capable of satisfying the relevant  provisions  of
          the immigration rules. For the reasons set out at 21 to 37, he was
          not satisfied that the rules  had  been  met.  He  considered  the
          respondent's published policy guidance on  Gurkha  family  members
          but found that the appellants could not meet the  age  requirement
          because they had all been well over 30 years old at the  time  the
          applications were made. Additionally, he was  not  satisfied  that
          the appellants were financially and emotionally dependent  on  the
          sponsor because from the evidence it was apparent  that  the  vast
          majority of the sponsor's income came from payments into his  bank
          accounts by his daughter in the UK. The  judge,  therefore,  found
          that although payments  were  made  to  the  appellants  in  their
          father's name; in substance, the funds came from  the  appellants'
          sister. The judge was not satisfied that the  sponsor  would  have
          been able to make periodic payments to the appellants  if  he  did
          not receive these regular sums of money from his daughter.


       6. The judge also considered that the appellants were able to support
          themselves by undertaking manual work.  He  noted  that  they  had
          worked the family land to grow crops to feed themselves  and  also
          worked the neighbouring land for food. He further noted  that  the
          second appellant had worked in Kuwait for three years. He attached
          little weight to the documents purportedly  issued  by  the  local
          municipality  certifying  the   appellants   as   being   "totally
          unemployed" because contrary to the sister's  oral  evidence  that
          all official documents were written in Nepalese,  these  documents
          were in English. This was put to the sister  who  then  maintained
          that they were translations but the judge  noted  that  there  was
          nothing on any of the documents to  suggest  that  they  had  been
          certified as translations. The judge also found that, further, the
          policy requirements were not met because the appellants  had  been
          living apart from their father for over two years at the time  the
          applications were made.


       7. The judge then proceeded to consider article 8. He  was  satisfied
          that the appellants had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
          their father but he found that it did not constitute  family  life
          within the meaning of article 8 (1) because there was insufficient
          evidence that the level of dependency  between  the  parties  went
          beyond the range  of  normal  emotional  ties.  He  properly  self
          directed that each case had to be analysed on its own merits as to
          whether or not family life existed and that there was  no  general
          proposition that article 8 could never be engaged when the  family
          life sought to be established was between adult children and their
          parents. He had regard  to  the  exceptional  position  of  Gurkha
          veterans and  their  families  but  in  view  of  the  appellants'
          manifest failure to meet several of the requirements of the policy
          he considered that their circumstances were incapable of  engaging
          article 8. He concluded that the  refusal  did  not  constitute  a
          disproportionate interference with the appellants'  rights  within
          the meaning of article 8(2). Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.




       8. The  grounds  are,  as  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  observes,
          unnecessarily  lengthy.  They  essentially  take  issue  with  the
          judge's finding of family life and  I  shall  deal  with  them  in
          greater detail below. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  the
          basis that the  judge  had  "just"  arguably  failed  to  consider
          dependence on the sponsor  for  accommodation  but  Judge  Rintoul
          queried whether this would be material, given the other  findings,
          and he found the other grounds to be weak.


          Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

       9. The matter would ordinarily have been  listed  for  a  hearing  at
          Field House following the grant of permission but due to the Covid-
          19 pandemic and need to take precautions against its spread,  this
          did not happen and instead directions were sent to the parties  on
          6 August 2020 along with the grant of permission, and again on  20
          August 2020. They were asked to  present  any  objections  to  the
          matter being dealt with on the papers  and  to  make  any  further
          submissions on the error of law issue within certain time limits.


      10. The Tribunal has received written submissions from the  respondent
          but  there   has   been   no   response   from   the   appellants'
          representatives. I now consider the matter.


      11. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


      12. I have had careful regard to all the  evidence  before  me  before
          deciding how to proceed. The respondent has raised no objection to
          the matter being considered on the  papers.  The  appellants  have
          failed to respond in any way despite being issued directions twice
          by the Tribunal. I also note  that  the  respondent's  submissions
          were forwarded to them on 21 August 2020 so in  effect  they  have
          had three opportunities to reply.


      13. In the absence of the appellants' non compliance despite  repeated
          opportunities  to  do  so,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would   be
          appropriate to proceed to consider the matter on the papers. I  am
          aware that a full account of the facts are set out in  the  papers
          on file and that the issues to  be  decided  are  straightforward.
          There are no matters arising from the papers which  would  require
          clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed for  that
          purpose. I consider that a speedy determination of this matter  is
          in the appellants' best interests. I am satisfied that I  am  able
          to fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me
          and I now proceed to do so.


                Submissions


      14. The respondent's submissions are dated 21 August 2020.


      15. For the respondent, Mr Clarke opposes the appellants' appeals  and
          submits that the judge found that neither emotional nor  financial
          dependency had been established. He points out  that  the  grounds
          fail to challenge the finding that the sponsor merely  acts  as  a
          conduit for the remittances sent effectively  by  the  appellants'
          sister which put paid  to  any  argument  as  to  the  appellants'
          financial dependency upon the sponsor.


      16. It is submitted that the judge did not  consider  the  appellants'
          inability to meet the terms of the policy as determinative because
          he went on to consider article 8. However, Mr Clarke submits  that
          it was an unavoidable fact that financial and emotional dependency
          were factors for consideration under the policy and that the judge
          cannot be criticized therefore for referring back on  his  earlier
          findings when considering article 8. It is submitted that  in  the
          absence of the required dependency, the grounds fail to articulate
          how the relationship between the sponsor and the appellants can be
          elevated as being beyond normal emotional ties.  The  evidence  of
          communication  it  itself  did  not  support  the  contention   of
          emotional dependency and that cohabitation  over  five  years  ago
          cannot disturb the finding of family  life  at  the  date  of  the
          hearing. Mr Clarke relies on Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630  where  the
          court held at paragraph 24: "In the case of adults, in the context
          of immigration control, there is no legal or  factual  presumption
          as to the existence or absence of family life for the  purpose  of
          article 8". He submits that  the  judge  did  take  the  sponsor's
          pension into account but that he found that without the input from
          his daughter in the UK, he would not be able to afford to  support
          the appellants.


      17. As to  the  argument  in  the  grounds  that  the  appellants  are
          unmarried  and  therefore  culturally  part   of   the   sponsor's
          household, Mr Clarke submits  that  this  is  unsupported  by  any
          independent evidence and in effect invites a finding  that  family
          life should be found  to  be  established  in  the  cases  of  all
          unmarried Nepalese appellants. It is submitted  findings  must  be
          made based on evidence and not presumptions and that the  argument
          has ne regard to the appellants' living and  working  arrangements
          for the last five years.  It is also pointed out that the findings
          as  to  the  documentary  evidence  from  the   municipality   are
          unchallenged.


      18. On the issue of accommodation, Mr Clarke submits that this element
          alone cannot be regarded as material particularly in  the  absence
          of  emotional  dependency  or  evidence   that   the   appellants'
          possession of the property is anything more than expedient to  its
          upkeep and maintenance.


                  Discussion and conclusions

      19. I have considered all the evidence, the determination, the grounds
          for permission and the respondent's submissions.


      20. The issue to be determined is  whether  the  judge  erred  in  his
          findings on family life and his conclusions under article 8.


      21. The grounds for permission commence by putting  forward  arguments
          against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  refused
          permission to appeal. As permission was  subsequently  granted,  I
          have no need to consider those arguments and focus on  the  single
          ground that has been put forward  but  which  is  subdivided  into
          three points.


      22. Ground one (although no other grounds have been  put  forward)  is
          that there were errors of approach when considering the engagement
          of article 8(1). There are three sub-headings  :  (i)  "Improperly
          raising the evidential burden by requiring evidence of  dependency
          when  all  that  is  required  is  real,  effective  or  committed
          support"; (ii) relying on failure to meet Annex K as  evidence  of
          lack engagement (sic)  of  article  8(1);  and  (iii)  failure  to
          consider evidence of ties beyond normal emotional  ties".  I  take
          each in turn.


      23. With respect to the  first  argument,  the  judge  had  regard  to
          Kugathas and Ghising which are both cited in the grounds.  He also
          had regard to the nature of the support  the  appellants  received
          from their father. No challenge has been raised in respect of  the
          judge's finding that the sponsor in effect simply  forwards  money
          on an occasional basis to the appellants which comes to  him  from
          his daughter in the UK. Without those funds, he would not be in  a
          position to send money to the appellants  and  so  the  appellants
          have failed to establish that that they are in  receipt  of  real,
          effective or committed  support  from  their  father.  Whilst  the
          grounds  selectively  refer  to  the  judge's  finding  that   the
          appellants receive  modest  sums  from  their  father,  they  fail
          entirely to engage with the finding that  those  sums  emanate  in
          fact from the appellants' sister.


      24. The grounds maintain that it was agreed at the  hearing  that  the
          appellants could not  meet  the  provisions  of  the  respondent's
          published policy on Gurkhas and their families at Annex K  of  the
          IDIs at Chapter 5. As far as I can see, this is  not  recorded  in
          the determination and the skeleton argument refers  several  times
          to the policy (at 4, 27-30  and  46).  In  any  event,  the  judge
          properly considered it and correctly found that the provisions had
          not been met because the appellants were all well over the 30 year
          age limit and because they had lived apart from their  father  for
          three years plus at the time the applications were made as opposed
          to the two years or less that the policy envisages. The  complaint
          now is that the judge relied on the inability of the appellants to
          meet the provisions of the policy when considering article  8.  It
          is argued that the policy is not determinative of  article  8  and
          that decision makers should proceed to consider  article  8  after
          considering whether the policy requirements have been met.


      25. That is, however, exactly what the judge has done.  At  paragraphs
          38-65 he considers the policy and gives full reasons  for  why  he
          finds that this has not been met.  He then  proceeds  to  consider
          article 8 (at 66-75). As Mr Clarke points out in his  submissions,
          given that the policy calls for an assessment  of  the  dependency
          between the applicants and their parent in the UK, it  was  wholly
          reasonable for the judge to refer back to the findings he had made
          on  that  issue  when  assessing  article  8,  family   life   and
          proportionality. There is nothing in the determination to indicate
          even remotely that the judge considered  his  findings  under  the
          policy to be determinative of article 8 issues and the grounds  do
          not point to any part of the judge's reasoning or  conclusions  to
          suggest otherwise. Had the judge considered the  failure  to  meet
          the provisions of the policy to be determinative,  he  would  have
          said so and there would have been no need for him to undertake  an
          article 8 assessment. What the  judge  did  when  considering  the
          issues of article 8 was to refer to the findings  he  had  already
          made on family life and dependency which  were  also  relevant  to
          this assessment. In addition, having accepted  that  there  was  a
          genuine relationship between the sponsor and  the  appellants,  he
          had regard to whether there was  anything  more  than  what  would
          normally be expected  between  them.  In  so  doing,  he  properly
          directed himself (at 68-69). It was open to him to find  that  the
          modest sums that were  sent  to  them  in  effect  came  from  the
          appellants' sister, that the appellants had lived apart  from  the
          sponsor for some five years and over three years at  the  time  of
          the application, that telephone contact (which the sponsor claimed
          in oral evidence was every day, every week or every month) did not
          in itself show anything over and above  what  one  would  normally
          expect, that despite the issue of historic injustice the decisions
          did not  show  unfairness  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
          circumstances which warranted a grant of leave outside  the  rules
          in these cases. Those are all findings  which  were  open  to  the
          judge on the evidence before him.


      26. It is also argued that the judge failed to consider matters  which
          show that more than normal emotional ties existed. These are  said
          to  be  cohabitation,  financial  dependence,  dependence  on  the
          sponsor for accommodation and emotional ties. These were, however,
          matters that were considered but, in any event, on  the  available
          evidence, they are not capable of sustaining  a  claim  of  family
          life engaging article 8.


      27. The fact that the appellants lived  with  the  sponsor  until  his
          departure in 2015[2] does not mean that they continue  to  have  a
          family life with him. No applications were made for  them  at  the
          time of the applications made by  the  sponsor  and  his  youngest
          daughter in 2015 and indeed it  took  over  three  years  for  the
          appellants to submit their entry clearance applications after  the
          sponsor and their sister had settled in the UK. They have, in  the
          meantime, had each other to turn to for family  life  as  well  as
          their two older sisters who remain in Nepal with  their  families.
          Furthermore,  following  the  sponsor's  departure,   the   second
          appellant moved away to Kuwait to work for  three  years  and  the
          appellants have worked on a neighbouring  farm  where  it  appears
          their work was paid for in kind.


      28. The judge accepted that there was evidence that  the  sponsor  had
          sent small sums of money to the appellants  however  as  he  found
          those sums would not have been sent had the sponsor not been given
          the money by his daughter. Without her support, the sponsor  would
          not have been able to send money to the appellants or to let  them
          withdraw his pension in Nepal, although by his own admission  that
          was a meagre sum. That finding is unchallenged.


      29. I accept that the judge did not specifically  refer  to  the  fact
          that the appellants continue to live in the family  home  however,
          this omission does not  render  the  determination  unsustainable.
          Given the numerous other findings, key matters being unchallenged,
          this cannot possibly alter the outcome of the appeal.


      30. The grounds refer to emotional ties. It is argued that it  is  the
          culture of Nepal for  unmarried  children  remain  part  of  their
          parent's household. There was, however,  no  independent  evidence
          before the judge as to Nepalese cultural norms and no  reason  for
          him to have made a finding  of  family  life  given  the  specific
          circumstances of the appellants based  on  mere  assumptions.  One
          could just  as  easily  argue  that  if  unmarried  children  were
          considered to remain part of a parent's household, they would  not
          be left behind for numerous years before attempts  were  made  for
          them to join the absent parent. Evidence of messages  between  the
          parties has been adduced but in the absence  of  any  translations
          for the messages, it is impossible to know what the nature of  the
          contact amounts to or to assess whether it can  be  said  to  show
          emotional dependency.


      31. On the basis of the evidence before the judge, the  findings  were
          properly made and are fully sustainable. No  errors  of  law  have
          been established.


          Decision

      32. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
          errors of law and it is upheld. The appeals are dismissed.


                 Anonymity


      33. No anonymity order has been sought at  any  stage  and  I  see  no
          reason to make one.




        Signed


              R. Keki?

              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 28 September 2020








-----------------------
[1] Although it is claimed in the skeleton argument that it is unclear
whether the decisions were reviewed by the ECM, the papers clearly show
that they were.

[2] The reference???????????????????????????????????????h????????????????
in the skeleton argument to the appellants' parents applying for entry
clearance in 2009 and it being granted in 2010 (at 30) is erroneous. The
application for entry clearance was made in 2015 and the sponsor was the
only parent who applied; the appellants' mother having passed away in 2013.



