
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07148/2018
                                                               HU/07150/2018
                                                               HU/07151/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2019                |On 31st December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     OA
                                     OE
                                     CN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, instructed by Baron Grey Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as OA, OE and CN. This direction  applies  to,
amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For the reasons given in a decision  promulgated  on  25th  January
         2019, I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy
         who refused  the  appellants'  human  rights  claims.  The  resumed
         hearing was listed on a number of occasions but adjourned to  await
         a decision by the respondent on a linked application - the  partner
         of OA who had pending an application for leave to remain on a  '10-
         year route' because of his relationship with a child from a  former
         relationship.

      2. A decision on that application has now been taken and  he  now  has
         leave to remain until 15th January 2022.

      3. As acknowledge by Mr Melvin,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the
         genuine and subsisting relationship between that person  and  these
         three appellants; nor is it doubted that the best interest  of  the
         children is that they remain in the care of that person and OA with
         whom they enjoy family life. Those are two of the findings of  fact
         made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  they  have  not  been
         challenged by the respondent.

      4. Mr Melvin did not seek to withdraw the  decisions  which  were  the
         subject  of  the  appeals   but   acknowledged   that   given   the
         relationships involved he did not seek to oppose the appeals  being
         allowed.

      5. In the light of the evidence before me  and  Mr  Melvin's  lack  of
         opposition I allow the appellants appeals against  the  refusal  of
         their human rights claims.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and was set aside.

    I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing them.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 20th December 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
