
                                           [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07328/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2019                           |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                  Moses [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by A Vincent
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 13 April 1974.  He has
    two children who were born on 26 April 2004 and 24 May 2005.  Both
    children are citizens of Nigeria who have lived in the UK for more than
    seven years.

 2. In June 2016, the appellant, who has been in the UK since March 2006,
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years'
    continuous lawful residence.  On 7 March 2018 the application was
    refused under paragraphs 276D and 322(5) of the Immigration Rules on
    the basis that the appellant had given incorrect information about his
    income on a previous application.  The respondent also refused the
    application on the basis that removing him from the UK would not be
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge Aujla.  In a decision promulgated on 8 November 2018 the
    judge dismissed the appeal.  The judge found that the appellant had
    intentionally understated his income in order to reduce his tax
    liability and on that basis concluded that it was reasonable to refuse
    his application under paragraph 322(5).

 4. The judge also considered the appellant's relationship with his two
    children and concluded that he did not have a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with them for the purposes of article 8 ECHR.  At
    paragraph 30 he stated:

         "30. The Appellant stated that he had two children.  They were
             living with their mother who was his wife and from whom he was
             separated since 2015.  He stated that the children's mother
             had status in the United Kingdom but he was not able to give
             further details about her status.  He saw the children once a
             week.  He also saw them in holiday time as well.  He played an
             active role in their upbringing.  He went to see the teachers
             at school.  He saw the children on Sundays.  He paid for their
             travel when he saw them. There was no cross-examination.  In
             answer to a question from me, the Appellant stated that there
             was no witness statement from the children's mother about his
             role in the children's [sic] upbringing.  She had equally not
             come to give evidence. "

 5. At paragraphs 43 and 44 he stated:

         "43. I have considered the appellant's claim that he was in a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with his children.  I have
             considered the letter from the school as well as the letter
             from the dentist.  Those letters were written no doubt at the
             request of the appellant by those who did not scrutinise his
             credibility.  Whilst I accept that he may well have attended
             dental appointments with his children and may even have
             attended a few school evenings, the remainder of this evidence
             is tainted by my serous concerns about his credibility.  If
             the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with the children and that relationship was at risk if the
             appellant were removed, his wife would be aware of that and
             would be concerned if she was concerned about the welfare of
             the children.  The evidence of the appellant's wife, who was
             the children's mother and primarily concerned with their
             welfare as a mother, would be most important for me to
             consider especially as the children were living with her and
             not the appellant.  There was no evidence from the children's
             mother.

         44.  I have considered the evidence presented to me.  I find that
             whilst there were two letters showing that the appellant had
             contacted the children those letters did not without more
             demonstrate that he was in a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with the children.  Parental relationship no
             doubt was something much more than attending a few parents'
             evenings at school since September 2016 or dental appointments
             with the children since 2013.  There was no evidence of any
             financial support provided by the appellant to the children.
             There was no evidence of any set pattern of his contact with
             the children.  Most important of all, there was no evidence
             from the children's mother about the level of involvement that
             he had in the children's upbringing.  Having considered the
             evidence presented to me, I find that there was no genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship between the appellant and the
             children for the purposes of Article 8."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 6. There are seven grounds of appeal.  The first five relate to the
    decision concerning paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.
    Permission to appeal in respect of these grounds was refused by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jackson, who limited permission to appeal to grounds 6
    and 7, which relate to whether the appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his children.

 7. Grounds 6 and 7, in summary, contend that the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal, properly understood, establishes that the appellant has
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with his children and that to
    draw the contrary conclusion is inconsistent with the evidence.  In
    particular, the grounds argue that it was irrational for the judge to
    reject or attach little weight to the evidence from the children's
    school and dentist that the appellant attends appointments in relation
    to the children.  The grounds also contend that the appellant's
    evidence that he provides financial support to the children was
    unchallenged and therefore it was an error for the judge to conclude
    that financial support was not provided.

 8. In addition, the grounds argue that the judge's conclusions were
    contrary to the guidance in SR (subsisting parental relationship -
    s.117B(6)) [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC) where a distinction is drawn between
    an active role in a child's upbringing for the purposes of E-LTRPT.2.4
    and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship for the purposes of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 9. At the error of law hearing Mr Karim argued that I should consider the
    grounds of appeal in respect of which permission had been refused on
    the basis that Section 5 and the Overriding Objective in the Tribunal
    Procedure Rules permit me to do so.  I refused, as I was not persuaded
    there was a good reason to depart from the grant of permission and Mr
    Karim was unable to cite any authority where a Tribunal had taken such
    a course of action.

10. In his submissions, Mr Karim highlighted paragraph 30 of the decision
    where the judge summarised the appellant's account of his relationship
    with his children.  The appellant was not cross-examined and Mr Karim
    argued that the implication of this was that evidence had been accepted
    by the respondent.  He maintained that the appellant's evidence, as set
    out in paragraph 30 of the decision, was adequate to establish a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his children.

11. Mr Karim also argued that the judge was wrong to say that the appellant
    did not financially support the children when it had been accepted by
    the respondent that he paid for some school items.

12. Mr Karim was also critical of the judge disregarding the letter from
    the school and dentist on the basis that the authors of the letters did
    not scrutinise the appellant's credibility.  He argued that this was
    irrelevant as the letters pertained to facts regarding the extent of
    the appellant's contact with the children and it was irrelevant that
    the authors of the letters would not have considered the appellant's
    credibility.

13. Ms Pal submitted that although the appellant was not cross-examined the
    position of the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal (as set out in
    paragraph 32 of the decision) was that the evidence did not show that
    the appellant supported his children, or that he was in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with them.  She argued that the judge had
    clearly had regard to all material evidence, including in particular
    the letters from the school and dentist, and it was open to the judge
    to conclude that this evidence, combined with the appellant's own
    evidence, was not sufficient to establish that there was a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship.

Analysis

14. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    ("the 2002 Act") sets out requirements that, if met, mean that there
    will not be any public interest in a person's removal from the UK.  One
    of the requirements is that the person must have a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.

15. An appellant can have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with his biological child even if he does not have an active role in
    the child's upbringing so long as there is some degree of ongoing
    direct parental care.  In SR (Subsisting Parental Relationship) [2018]
    UKUT 334, the appellant was found to have a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with his child even though he had not been taking
    an active part in his upbringing and only saw the child for 3 hours
    every two weeks.

16. Reviewing the decision as a whole, I have reached the conclusion that
    the judge set the bar too high for the appellant to establish that his
    parental relationship with his children is genuine and subsisting.  The
    documentary evidence before the First-tier Tribunal showed that the
    appellant attends dental appointments and school evenings for his
    children and that he purchases some items for them.  It is also
    apparent from the evidence that he spends time with the children
    (although the judge found that there was no evidence of a set pattern
    to the contact).  The judge has failed to explain why this level of
    direct parental care - which appears to be greater than that provided
    by the appellant in SR - is insufficient to amount to a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship as that term has been interpreted by
    the Upper Tribunal in SR as well as by the Court of Appeal (although in
    a different context) in VC (Sri Lanka) 2017 EWCA 1967.  This is a
    material error of law.

17. I have decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    determined afresh. My reason for so doing is that, if a judge were to
    find that the parental relationship is genuine and subsisting, he or
    she would then need to consider the best interests of the children as
    well as whether expecting them to leave the UK is reasonable under
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Such an assessment is likely to
    require considerable fact finding. I therefore consider the First-tier
    Tribunal to be the appropriate forum for this decision to be remade.


    Decision


18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.


19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
    before a different judge.


    |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 14 March 2019                 |


