
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/07038/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23rd November 2017                      |On 4th January 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Archana Pydegadu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken of Counsel instructed by Novells Legal
Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Hembrough
    made following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 21st March 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 5th January 1998.   She
    came to the UK on 1st June 2008  with  her  parents  and  sister.   Her
    father then worked as a chef in London with the assistance of  a  bogus
    indefinite leave to remain stamp.  When that was discovered all of  the
    family members were served with notice  of  liability  to  removal,  in
    2010, and further representations were made throughout 2011, 2012, 2013
    and 2014.  At that point the respondent made a fresh decision  refusing
    the human rights application but granting a full right of appeal, which
    was dismissed by Judge Gandhi following a hearing in May 2015.

 3. The present appellant was named in that  appeal.   Shortly  before  she
    became 18 she made an application in her own right, on the grounds that
    she was a minor who had been living in the UK for a  continuous  period
    of over seven years and it was not reasonable to expect her  to  leave.
    It was the refusal of this decision which was the subject of the appeal
    before Judge Hembrough.

 4. The judge set out the appellant's  immigration  history  and  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant and her parents.  He also considered evidence
    from church members where the appellant worships.  He then set out  the
    relevant case law and concluded that, whether considered as a child  or
    as an adult,  her  removal  was  necessary  and  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aims identified by the respondent.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had materially erred in law  by  failing  to  adequately  consider  the
    appellant's private life in the UK and had not properly considered  the
    relevant case law.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  Hollingworth  but,
    upon reapplication, was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer who, in
    the grant of permission, stated that it was arguable  that  significant
    weight had not been given in the decision to the appellant's length  of
    residence or the formative years in which that residence took place.

 7. On 4th October  2017  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 8. Mr Aitken relied on his grounds and argued that  the  judge  had  given
    insufficient weight to  the  appellant's  private  life.   It  was  not
    reasonable, given her length of residence in the UK, that she should be
    removed.  He referred in particular  to  paragraph  49  in  R  (on  the
    application of MA Pakistan & Ors) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 which held, inter
    alia, that the fact that a child had been in the  UK  for  seven  years
    would need to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the  proportionality
    exercise, first because of its relevance to determining the nature  and
    strength  of  the  child's  best  interests;  and  second,  because  it
    establishes as a starting point that leave  should  be  granted  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the  contrary.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge, in referring to whether there  were  serious  obstacles  to  the
    appellant returning to Mauritius had conflated different  legal  issues
    and had thereby erred in law.

 9. Mr Melvin relied on  his  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    situation of the family as a whole had already been litigated  in  2015
    by Judge Gandhi.  This application had been made  simply  in  order  to
    prevent the removal of the family and was an attempt to  circumnavigate
    the Rules.  In any event, the question of reasonableness had been dealt
    with adequately by the judge.

Findings and Conclusions

10.  The  decision  of  Judge  Gandhi  was  the  starting  point  for   the
    consideration of Judge Hembrough, but because the appellant had not yet
    reached seven years residence in 2015, Judge Hembrough was required  to
    engage with the question of whether there  were  powerful  reasons  why
    leave should not be granted, even though the factual matrix  which  the
    appellant relied on was essentially the same as  that  which  had  been
    before Judge Gandhi.

11. Whilst the judge did not set out the test in terms, I am satisfied that
    the judge did not err in law for the following reasons.

12. First, although Mr Aitken sought to persuade me that there had  been  a
    conflation of the legal issues, this is not the case.   The  judge  set
    out whether the appellant could  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE, not only in relation to 276ADE(1)(vi), but also 276ADE(iv)  and
    (v).  It was not an error to  consider  the  Rule  as  a  whole,  which
    required an examination of the serious obstacles test.

13. Furthermore,  the  question  of  whether  there  would  be  substantial
    obstacles to her integration is  not  irrelevant  to  the  question  of
    whether it would be reasonable  for  the  appellant,  as  a  qualifying
    child, to return.  The judge was correct to take into account the  fact
    that the appellant would be returning to her country of nationality and
    throughout the time she has been in the UK has  been  living  with  her
    Mauritian family and mixing with the  Mauritian  diaspora  in  the  UK.
    Moreover, as a Mauritian citizen, she would enjoy freedom of  religion,
    expression and movement and,  as  the  judge  pointed  out,  there  are
    several universities and places of higher learning in  Mauritius  whose
    courses and qualifications are accredited by  universities  here.   The
    appellant has completed her A  levels  in  the  UK  and  there  was  no
    satisfactory explanation as to why she would not be able to  study  her
    proposed subject, Travel and Tourism, in Mauritius.  The  evidence  was
    that there had been no enquiries made.

14. The judge rejected the contention made on behalf of the appellant  that
    she would be  destitute  in  Mauritius.   He  considered  that  it  was
    reasonable to anticipate that her  parents  would  be  able  to  obtain
    employment in the Mauritian tourism  industry,  since  her  father  had
    worked as a chef in London.

15. Mr Aitken was wrong to argue that the judge had not  identified  strong
    reasons why the appellant should not be removed. The judge acknowledged
    that the appellant had been in the UK for over seven years, and  during
    her formative years, but was entitled to highlight the fact  that,  not
    only were there were no barriers to her returning to Mauritius with her
    family, there were strong public interest arguments in  their  removal.
    Her father had obtained a false stamp on his passport which enabled the
    family to enter and had then failed to leave for seven years after they
    had been served with notice of liability to removal.

16. The appellant's arguments amount to a  disagreement  about  the  weight
    which the judge attached to the appellant's residence  in  the  UK  but
    disclose  no  error  of  law.   This  is  a  careful   and   thoughtful
    determination.  The judge reached a conclusion which was  plainly  open
    to him for the reasons which he gave.

Notice of Decision

17. The original decision stands.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

18. No anonymity direction is made.





[pic]
Signed                              Date 1 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
