
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07474/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 September 2018                    |On 13 November 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Yassin El Maya
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                          (extemporaneous judgment)

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Morocco against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person.

 2. I was surprised that the appellant was not represented before  me.   In
    the First-tier Tribunal he was represented by experienced Counsel, Mr D
    Bazini, who settled the grounds of appeal and a message from clerk came
    to me yesterday asking for a time marking.  I  do  not  know  that  the
    barrister who was seeking the time marking was the barrister instructed
    to appear today but the message came from the same clerk. Clearly there
    was a professional interest in  the  case  yesterday.  I  expected  the
    person representing the appellant to have been here today.  Certainly I
    said nothing to discourage someone from attending on time.  That  said,
    when it was convenient to deal with the  case  at  approximately  11.30
    a.m. there was no appearance from the appellant or  his  representative
    or any explanation for absence and  I  decided  to  continue  in  their
    absence having discussed the case with Mr Bramble for the Secretary  of
    State.

 3. This is not straightforward.  Mr Bazini's first point in his grounds is
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge wrongly and inappropriately  decided
    that the marriage was one of convenience.   This  had  never  been  the
    Secretary of State's case and had  not  been  argued.  The  finding  is
    worrying for two reasons.  First, I wonder why the judge took the point
    at all and second, I wonder how much that  unexpected  and  potentially
    illuminating adverse finding impacted on the other adverse findings  in
    the case.  Maybe the answer is "not at all" but the concern is that  it
    might have done and could it give the appearance of injustice if I went
    through the decision and separated out those findings relating entirely
    to whether or not there was a marriage  of  convenience  from  and  the
    findings about whether or not there was a subsisting marriage.

 4. The second area of dispute  has  been  characterised  as  a  procedural
    irregularity although that may not really be right.  The  complaint  in
    the grounds, as I understand them,  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to acknowledge a concession by the Presenting Officer.  I accept
    Mr Bramble's submission that there was no concession or  at  least  the
    word "concession" should not have been used in the grounds  because  it
    gives a wrong impression of what had happened.  I am not persuaded that
    the Presenting Officer formally conceded any part of the case  but  the
    Presenting Officer did accept that there were credible elements in  the
    appellant's case and, as I understand it, made submissions on the basis
    that notwithstanding there being credible and consistent answers  there
    were also difficulties.  This is not a case where, as far as I can see,
    a concession has been ignored.

 5. The way the Presenting Officer put the case in the First-tier  Tribunal
    though does lead to what I think might be called the third point,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not consider the  case  in  the  round  but
    rather focused on points that were against the case without being  seen
    to weigh them against points in favour.  Mr Bazini's  grounds  go  some
    way to showing that some of the  points  taken  against  the  appellant
    might not have been well-founded at all. I have reflected on  that  but
    there is an unchallenged finding that there was an obvious and  glaring
    difficulty in the evidence and that is that the parties to the  alleged
    marriage could not agree  where  they  spent  the  evening  before  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That  inconsistency,  in
    many circumstances, might be  a  telling  point.   Possibly  it  is  so
    telling that it is decisive. However when I consider the matter in  the
    round, and bearing in mind the possibility of prejudice because  of  an
    inappropriate fixation with whether or  not  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience, I cannot be satisfied that it  is  right  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for that one point.

 6. The other points are not established.

 7. It follows therefore that I am not satisfied  that  this  is  a  lawful
    decision because it concerns itself with irrelevant matters and  I  set
    it aside.

 8. This case has to be  determined  again  and  at  the  moment  the  most
    practical way of dealing with that is to send it back to the First-tier
    Tribunal where it can be decided again.  That therefore is my decision.

Decision

 9. The appeal is allowed.  The decision is set aside and I direct the case
    be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 November 2018                |


