
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07300/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 11 February 2020                         |on 2 March 2020                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                  NORA [D]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
        legal errors in the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        O'Keeffe, promulgated on 5 June 2018,  dismissing  the  appellant's
        appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  12  June  2017
        refusing her human rights claim.







   Background


     2. The appellant, a national of the Philippines, was born in 1974. She
        entered the UK pursuant to a domestic worker (visitor) visa  on  26
        June 2006  after  working  in  Syria  as  a  domestic  worker.  She
        overstayed. The appellant  began  a  relationship  with  [ST]  (the
        partner) in 2009 and they  underwent  an  Islamic  ceremony  on  15
        December 2009. He is a Syrian national who was issued on 4 November
        2013 with a UK residence  permit  as  a  refugee,  valid  until  27
        October 2018. He has now been issued with further leave  to  remain
        as a refugee valid until 6 December 2021.


     3. An application by the appellant for leave to remain on human rights
        grounds made in 2013 was refused on 26 February 2014, and an appeal
        against this decision was dismissed  by  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Aziz on 5 May 2015. The daughter of the appellant and  her
        partner was stillborn on 2 February 2015.  The  appellant  and  her
        partner were legally married on  8  May  2016.  The  appellant  was
        granted 3 months leave to remain on  compassionate  grounds  on  11
        July 2016.


     4. In her decision of 12 June 2017 the respondent  accepted  that  the
        appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
        partner (a finding reinforced by Judge O'Keeffe in  her  decision).
        The  respondent  was  not  however  satisfied   that   there   were
        'insurmountable obstacles', as understood by reference to EX.1  and
        EX.2 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, preventing the couple
        continuing their relationship  in  the  Philippines.  Nor  was  the
        respondent satisfied that the appellant met the requirements for  a
        grant of leave to remain based on her private  life  in  accordance
        with paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  considering
        whether there were  any  exceptional  circumstances  sufficient  to
        warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  the
        respondent noted that the loss of the appellant's child had been  a
        very traumatic experience causing depression, and that  she  wished
        to remain in the UK in order to visit the grave, but the respondent
        was  not  satisfied  this  was   a   sufficiently   compelling   or
        compassionate  reason  to  grant  leave  to  remain   outside   the
        Immigration  Rules.  The  respondent  stated  that  treatment   for
        depression was available in the  Philippines,  that  the  appellant
        still had family members  in  that  country,  and  that  she  could
        maintain  contact  with  her  partner  through  modern  methods  of
        communication and that he could, in  any  event,  relocate  to  the
        Philippines. The appellant appealed this decision pursuant to  s.82
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


     5. In dismissing the appeal Judge O'Keeffe found that the  appellant's
        spouse would be able to join her in the Philippines using either  a
        renewable visit visa or by making an application for more permanent
        residence. In an 'error of law' decision promulgated on 17  January
        2019 the Upper Tribunal concluded that this finding was marred by a
        material legal error. The judge  acted  in  a  procedurally  unfair
        manner by failing to grant an adjournment application to enable  Ms
        Bianca Ndirika, a trainee solicitor who previously accompanied  the
        appellant to the Philippines embassy but who was ill on the day  of
        the hearing, to attend and give evidence of  her  interaction  with
        the  embassy  staff.  Although  there  was  no  challenge  to   the
        assertions in Ms Ndirika's statement by the Presenting Officer  the
        judge only attached 'some weight' to the statement in circumstances
        where, had Ms Ndirika been able to attend the hearing, she may have
        been able to address the judge's  concerns.  The  judge  failed  to
        engage with or consider relevant elements of Ms Ndirika's statement
        and gave inadequate reasons for only attaching 'some weight' to the
        unchallenged assertions.

     6. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside,  and
        directions were issued for the provision  of  further  evidence  to
        enable the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision.

The hearing to remake the decision

     7. The appellant relied on  a  number  of  documents  including  three
        witness statements from herself, two witness  statements  from  her
        partner and evidence of his grant of Refugee Leave,  three  witness
        statements from Ms Tarek Gotti - a close friend of  the  appellant,
        the witness statement of  Bianca  Ndirika  dated  17  May  2018,  a
        statement dated 23 April 2019 from Nichola Hunt - Office Manager at
        Oaks solicitors,  documents  relating  to  the  stillbirth  of  the
        appellant's child, and documents concerning the appellant's  mental
        health (including evidence of counselling and therapy  received  by
        the appellant  due  to  her  bereavement,  her  witnessing  of  the
        Grenfell fire and loss of friends to the fire, and her  immigration
        case).   The    documentary    evidence    additionally    included
        correspondence sent by Oaks Solicitors to the  Philippines  embassy
        in London, a completed 'Report of  Marriage'  form  issued  by  the
        Philippines embassy, an application and receipt for a visitor  visa
        made by the applicant's partner and submitted  to  the  Philippines
        embassy,  and  a  letter  from  the  Philippines  embassy  to  Oaks
        Solicitors dated 3 February 2020.


     8. At the commencement of the hearing I  provided  both  parties  with
        downloaded details I obtained from the Philippines embassy website.
        I described to both parties  the  full  circumstances  in  which  I
        located the details and the limited  scope  of  my  online  search.
        There was no objection from either party to the  admission  of  the
        downloaded documents or the limited search that I had undertaken.

     9. Having considered the totality of the evidence  made  available  to
        him Mr Whitwell indicated  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
        content of any of  the  documents  or  statements  upon  which  the
        appellant relied. The central issue in the appeal was whether there
        were insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and  her  partner
        continuing their  family  life  in  the  Philippines.  Mr  Whitwell
        indicated that the unchallenged  evidence  tended  to  support  the
        existence of insurmountable obstacles given  the  appellant's  very
        particular circumstances. In these circumstances it was unnecessary
        to call the appellant, her  partner  and  the  other  witnesses.  I
        indicated that I would allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
        requirements of Appendix FM were met, with reference  to  EX.1,  in
        light of the appellant's unusual and particular circumstances. I am
        grateful to Mr  Whitwell  for  his  fair,  measured  and  carefully
        considered approach to this appeal.

Findings and reasons

    10. It was not in dispute that the appellant met the  Relationship  and
        Suitability requirements of Appendix FM for the  grant  of  limited
        leave to remain as a partner (the appellant's partner is in the  UK
        with Refugee Leave). It was agreed that the sole issue was  whether
        there were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family  life
        with her Syrian partner continuing in the Philippines (there was no
        suggestion that the couple could relocate to Syria).


    11.   EX.1 of Appendix FM states, so far as material,

             EX.1. This paragraph applies if
             ...
             (b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.


             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner.

    12. The burden of proof rests on the appellant to demonstrate that,  on
        the  balance  of  probabilities,  there  would  be   insurmountable
        obstacles to  family  life  continuing  with  her  partner  in  the
        Philippines.


    13.  I have considered in detail the unchallenged evidence relating  to
        whether  the  Syrian  partner  is  likely,  on   the   balance   of
        probabilities, to be able to relocate to the Philippines.

    14. I have first considered the evidence of Ms Bianca Ndirika. She  was
        a trainee solicitor from Oaks Solicitors, the  firm  instructed  by
        the appellant. Ms Ndirika accompanied the appellant on  8  November
        2017 to the Filipino embassy in London  to  ascertain  whether  the
        appellant's partner would be able to reside in the Philippines. The
        appellant's circumstances were described to a member of staff  from
        the visa section who was asked whether  it  was  possible  for  the
        partner to obtain a spousal visa to enable him to enter and  reside
        in the Philippines. The staff member told Ms Ndirika that there was
        no agreement between Syria and the Philippines for Syrian nationals
        to have permanent residence, and that if  the  appellant's  partner
        was to apply for  permanent  residence  his  application  would  be
        rejected. The staff member said that his only option  would  be  to
        apply for a visit visa which  would  enable  him  to  stay  in  the
        Philippines for up to 30 days. If he was successful he  would  only
        be allowed to stay for 30 days and, on expiry, would need to  apply
        for a new visa. Ms Ndirika and the  appellant  then  met  with  the
        Consul who confirmed that the appellant's partner would not be able
        to get permanent residence in the Philippines. When  asked  whether
        it was possible to get a statement to this effect the  Consul  said
        it was not possible and that this information had been imparted  in
        confidence.  The  Consul  referred  to   an   internal   memorandum
        specifying that Syrian nationals were restricted from  residing  in
        the Philippines. The memorandum was shown to Ms Ndirika but a  copy
        could not be provided as the Philippines authorities did  not  want
        their position to be common knowledge as it  may  destabilise  good
        relationships with Syria. Ms Ndirika read the  memorandum  and  saw
        that  different  restrictions  applied  to  nationals  of   certain
        countries. Syria was in 'Category B'. Ms Ndirika recalled that  the
        paragraph preceding the list of countries in Category  B  indicated
        that nationals of these countries had to meet certain conditions in
        order to apply for permanent residence, but she  did  not  describe
        any of those conditions. The Consul elaborated and said that  these
        conditions were designed to  make  it  impossible  for  Syrians  to
        reside in the Philippines. In the final paragraph of her  statement
        Ms Ndirika said that she and the Consul agreed  that,  due  to  the
        nature of the information, she would prepare a statement herself to
        say what she had  seen  and  heard  but  that  no  names  would  be
        disclosed. There was no challenge to the content or accuracy of  Ms
        Ndirika's statement, either in the First-tier Tribunal  or  in  the
        Upper Tribunal.


    15. The website  of  the  Philippines  embassy  in  various  countries,
        including Singapore, Argentina,  and  the  Scandinavian  countries,
        contains exactly the same information  concerning  residence  visas
        for spouses of non-Filipino nationals. This is  the  13A  Non-Quota
        Immigrant Visa. The information sets out what  is  required  for  a
        person to be issued with a permanent residence visa as a spouse  of
        a Filipino national.  The  visa  can  however  only  be  issued  to
        nationals of countries contained in an exhaustive  list.  The  visa
        cannot be issued to nationals of countries  not  contained  in  the
        list. Syria is a  country  not  contained  in  the  list.  This  is
        generally consistent with the information provided to Ms Ndirika at
        the Philippines embassy in London. The  appellant's  partner  would
        not therefore be able to  obtain  a  permanent  residence  visa  to
        enable him to reside in the Philippines.

    16. The applicant's partner lodged an application, on the advice of the
        Philippines embassy, for a 30-day visitor visa  to  enable  him  to
        enter the country with the hope of then being  able  to  obtain  an
        extension of the visa. The application was made on 23  April  2019.
        No issue has been taken with the bona fides of the application  and
        all the required documentation, including  a  CRB  report  and  the
        partner's valid travel document were provided (the partner does not
        have a Syrian passport). The appellant's  solicitors  sent  several
        chasing letters to the Philippines embassy.

    17. The Philippines embassy replied in a letter dated 3 February  2020.
        This read,

             Dear Sir/Madam,


             With reference to  your  letter  22  January  202,  please  be
             informed that the Embassy has not received clearance from  the
             Department of Foreign Affairs to issue a visitor's visa to  Mr
             [ST], a Syrian national on  refugee  status  who  holds  a  UK
             Travel Document.


             It was clearly explained to Mr  [T]  when  he  applied  for  a
             Philippine  visa  in  April  that  the  processing   of   visa
             application for travel document holders  would  take  no  less
             than three (3) to four (4) months. He was also  told  that  he
             will be notified via telephone or email upon  receipt  of  the
             clearance but if he fails to receive such  notification  after
             the specified period, his visa  application  shall  be  deemed
             refused without any further notice from the Embassy.


             While  Mr.  [T]  is  not  precluded  from  re-applying  for  a
             visitor's visa to the Philippines, the Embassy doubts if there
             would be any change in the outcome if his circumstances remain
             the same.

    18. The letter was signed by the Deputy Chief  of  Mission  and  Consul
        General.


    19. It was not suggested by either party that there was any  likelihood
        that Mr [T]'s circumstances  would  change  in  the  future.  I  am
        consequently satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that, on
        the balance of probabilities, her partner is  unable  to  obtain  a
        permanent residence visa to enable him to reside in the Philippines
        with her, and that he is unable to obtain even  a  visitor's  visa.
        The  unchallenged  evidence  before  me  leads  inevitably  to  one
        conclusion -  that  the  appellant's  partner  will  be  unable  to
        relocate  to  the  Philippines  and  that  this  would  cause  very
        significant difficulties in continuing their family  life  together
        outside the UK.

    20. I  note  once  again  that  the  appellant  meets  the  Suitability
        requirements and that the Relationship requirements are met. I note
        the  medical  evidence  indicating  that  the  appellant  has  been
        exhibiting symptoms of PTSD as a result of the  stillbirth  of  her
        child (the appellant regularly visits the child's  grave)  and  her
        witnessing of the Grenfell fire. The statements from the  appellant
        and her partner suggest they have a strong  relationship  and  that
        the appellant has strong elements of dependency upon  her  partner.
        It is readily apparent that the  relationship  cannot  continue  by
        remote means of communication. I am satisfied that, having holistic
        regard to the evidence before me,  and  for  the  reasons  set  out
        above, that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
        relationship continuing outside the UK. Given  that  the  appellant
        meets the requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  her  human  right  claim
        succeeds.


Notice of Decision

The human rights appeal is allowed

D.Blum                                  13 February 2020

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




