
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07028/2016
     HU/07033/2016
     HU/07036/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 02 July 2018                              |On 31 July 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                 Noella [M]
                                    [R A]
                                    [W A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Eteko, Iras and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The grounds of appeal relied upon at the First-tier related  to  family
    and private life and anonymity was not ordered and I see no  reason  to
    make an order now. The Appellant appeals with permission granted in the
    Upper Tribunal 03 May 2018,  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Cameron), promulgated on 7  August  2017,  in  which  the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal finding the removal  decision  to  the
    DRC does not place the UK in breach of international obligations  under
    article 8 ECHR.

 2.  The  appellant  was  granted  permission  to  challenge  the   judge's
    assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of   requiring   the   appellant's
    qualifying child to remove to the DRC.

 3. By way of background the principal appellant has 35-year-old DRC  woman
    born in 1980 who came to the United Kingdom  with  leave  of  the  work
    permit holder in February 2007. Her leave expired in 2010 and  she  has
    remained here without permission ever since. The father of the children
    is also a DRC  citizen,  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  leave,  his
    application for regularisation under the legacy programme  having  been
    refused in 2012. The couple have 2 children both born in  the  UK,  the
    eldest in 2009 and another in 2011. At  the  time  of  application  and
    respondent's refusal neither were a "qualifying child" in  the  context
    of section 117 B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
    however by the time of hearing on 7th of August 2017 the  eldest  child
    had achieved 7 years residence.

 4. The grounds complain since that the judge has taken immigration control
    as his primary consideration rather than  the  best  interests  of  the
    child. Following the case of MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  alive  LJ
    held that the factor 7  years  residence  must  be  given  "significant
    weight" and there would need to be strong  reasons  for  leave  not  be
    granted in such circumstances...".  Before  me  Mr  Eteko  argued  that
    immigration  control,  here  represented  by  the  adverse  immigration
    history of the parents, is not a strong reason.

 5. The grounds fail to recognise that the reasonableness of removal  of  a
    qualifying child has been decided to  include  public  interest  points
    arising from the parents' adverse  immigration  history.  There  is  no
    "rule" that an adverse parental immigration history  cannot  amount  to
    strong reasons for leave not to be granted to a qualifying  child.  The
    position is fact sensitive in every case.

 6. I rejected Mr Eteko's submission that at paragraph  94  the  judge  has
    adopted the wrong test in the context of proportionality by referencing
    the absence of substantial  difficulty,  exceptional  circumstances  or
    unjustifiable harshness on removal to the DRC. The judge is not setting
    out the test or yardstick but referring to the effect of  removal.  The
    decision must be read in the round and [94] follows  on  correct  self-
    direction and a detailed consideration of all the factors raised.

 7. The judge correctly identifies the relevant test  at  [30]  referencing
    the case of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11,  to
    the point that the balancing  assessment  of  proportionality  must  be
    struck in the context of the provisions concerning qualifying  children
    at section 117B (6) including public interest  matters,  and  correctly
    self directs at [89] that the weight to be given to the public interest
    can be reduced where children are involved.

 8. The judge accepts that there are problems in Kasai, finding  that  they
    fall short  of  international  protection  thresholds  or  constituting
    significant obstacles to reintegration to the DRC, because they are not
    issues that generally affect ordinary civilians. The judge  finds  that
    the family could return there. Alternatively, the judge finds that  the
    family could return to the capital of  the  DRC,  Kinshasa,  where  the
    mother was born and where she was immediately prior  to  travelling  to
    the United Kingdom. The  judge  assesses  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be with their mother wherever she goes. The judge  assesses
    the position in the United Kingdom accepting that the evidence is  that
    the 8-year-old child is settled and  doing  well  in  school  here  and
    enjoys relationships outside of the family in particular in relation to
    his football. The judge factors in  the  length  of  residence  of  the
    qualifying child and his birth here, as well as the ability  to  adjust
    at his age with the support of his parents,  his  DRC  nationality  and
    exposure to the language, whilst recognising that integration  may  not
    be immediate or initially comfortable taking account that he  does  not
    read or write in his mother tongue and that  living  in  the  DRC  will
    result in his quality of life being  reduced  to  that  that  could  be
    expected  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Nonetheless  the  judge  finds  it
    reasonable to expect  him  to  do  so  bringing  forward  the  findings
    concerning the parents' ability to re-integrate  in  the  DRC  and  the
    strong public interest in the removal of the family  arising  from  the
    adverse immigration history.

 9. The judge conducted a nuanced and complete  balancing  exercise  taking
    into account all of the factors raised by the appellants.  The  reasons
    more than adequately explain to the appellants that the strong  reasons
    making removal of  the  qualifying  child  reasonable  is  the  adverse
    parental immigration history. That was a position which was open to the
    judge on the evidence and is not perverse.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  reveals
    no error of law and stands.

11. Signed
     [pic]                      Date 23 July 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



