
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07739/2015
     HU/07742/2015
     HU/07744/2015
     HU/07748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 October 2017                         |On 28 December 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 niyomi [g]
                                horathal [d]
                                    [h d]
                                    [n d]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   Mr A Burrett (Counsel)




                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondents are nationals of Sri Lanka.  The first and  second  are
    a married couple and the third and fourth are  their  children.   Their
    appeals against decisions to refuse their human rights applications, in
    which they sought leave to remain, were allowed by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Chowdhury ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 12 January
    2017.

2.   Before the First-tier Tribunal, the  respondents  were  represented  by
    Counsel.  There was no appearance by or on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State.  The judge found  the  respondents  to  be  credible  witnesses,
    having heard from the first and second of them.  She found, in relation
    to the Secretary of State's finding that the second respondent obtained
    an English language test certificate by fraud or deception,  that  this
    case was not made out.  She went on to find that the appeals fell to be
    allowed as the  decisions  to  refuse  the  human  rights  claims,  and
    consequent removal to Sri Lanka, would be disproportionate.  She  found
    that the third respondent's appeal should be allowed in  the  light  of
    his particular needs.

3.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended, first, that the judge erred in  finding  that  she  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof in relation to the allegation  of  fraud
    or deception.  Witness statements filed on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State explained the careful means  by  which  deception  or  fraud  was
    uncovered and a spreadsheet provided  evidence  to  demonstrate,  on  a
    balance of probabilities, that the second respondent  obtained  a  test
    certificate improperly.  It appeared that the judge had  misinterpreted
    the evidence.

4.   In a second ground, it was contended that the judge erred in her  human
    rights assessment.  In particular, the proportionality  assessment  was
    tainted  by  the  error  in  respect  of  the  finding  on  the  second
    respondent's use of deception.  So far  as  the  third  respondent  was
    concerned, the judge failed to identify evidence regarding the negative
    impact she found which would result from his removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  As he was only 6 years old, his family and private life  ties
    would be centred on  his  sibling  and  parents.   Moreover,  any  ties
    established  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  made  when  the   family's
    immigration status was precarious.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  28
    July 2017.  The judge  granting  permission  found  that  the  "generic
    evidence" relied upon by the Secretary of State was arguably sufficient
    to meet at least the primary evidential  burden,  whereas  the  judge's
    analysis appeared not to reflect this.

6.   The respondents provided a Rule  24  response  on  an  uncertain  date.
    They contended that the judge had properly directed herself and applied
    guidance given in SM and Qadir and Gazi, cases referred to expressly in
    the decision.  The judge heard all the evidence  and  was  entitled  to
    find that the Secretary of State  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    showing that the second respondent's  test  results  were  fraudulently
    obtained.  The judge plainly considered the "generic evidence", as part
    of the analysis.  The Secretary of State did not seek to challenge  the
    Article 8 assessment, save in relation to the  finding  that  fraud  or
    deception existed.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Walker, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  said  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected herself in relation to the test certificate aspect  of  the
    case.  The Tribunal was provided with the  usual  evidence  in  such  a
    case.  As the English language test results were undermined, the  basis
    of the leave to remain given to the second appellant was removed.

8.   The second ground concerned an error in the  human  rights  assessment.
    In  paragraph  25  of  the  decision,  the   judge   found   compelling
    circumstances but the  proportionality  assessment  was  tainted.   The
    judge found that removal would have a  negative  impact  on  the  third
    respondent, at paragraph 35 of the decision.  This finding was based on
    his particular health needs.  However, there were facilities  available
    to cater for these in Sri Lanka.  Family  and  private  life  would  be
    centred on the entire family.  The judge had failed to engage with  the
    high threshold set out in the judgment in Agyarko.

9.    In  summary,  the  judge  misdirected  herself  regarding   the   test
    certificate and had failed to show  that  the  respondents  would  face
    insurmountable obstacles to integration into Sri Lanka.

10.  Mr Burrett said that reliance was placed upon  the  Rule  24  response.
    The Secretary of State had not provided a representative at the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  Her case was contained in the  decision  letter
    and the evidence made available.  The judge had properly taken  all  of
    this into account and was entitled to find that the  second  respondent
    took the English language test and that the respondents  were  credible
    witnesses.

11.   The  respondents  provided  a  bundle  and  the  judge  took   witness
    statements into account.   She was not required to  do  more  than  she
    did.  In essence, the judge preferred the respondents' evidence to  the
    evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State.   Taking  into  account
    what was in the decision letter, the overall conclusion was open to the
    judge.  The  respondents  had  provided  an  explanation  to  meet  the
    Secretary of State's case, assuming that the evidence  relied  upon  by
    her was sufficient to meet  the  initial  evidential  burden.   As  the
    Secretary of State provided no  representative,  there  was  no  cross-
    examination.  The respondents' evidence amounted to a rebuttal  of  the
    Secretary of State's case.

12.  In a brief response, Mr Walker said that paragraphs 17 and  18  of  the
    decision showed the judge's error.  She found that there was  a  dearth
    of evidence relating to the second respondent's case in particular, but
    this was not so.  Although there was no Presenting Officer on the  day,
    the evidence was sufficiently particularised, so as to bear directly on
    the second respondent's case.   The  judge  made  no  express  findings
    regarding  the  explanation  offered  to  address  the  evidence   made
    available by the Secretary of State.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.  The decision shows clearly that the judge accepted  the  case  advanced
    by the respondents, having heard from the first and second of them  and
    having taken into account documentary evidence.  The Secretary of State
    made  available  witness  statements  from  Ms  R  Collings  and  Mr  R
    Millington.  The  judge  referred  to  this  evidence  as  having  been
    "comprehensively  criticised"  in  case  law  which  she  referred  to,
    including the Upper Tribunal decisions in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT  229
    and Gazi [2015] UKUT 327.  She referred to the evidence  as  disclosing
    "hardly any useful  particularised  information  with  regard  to"  the
    second respondent.  This is a  reasonable  assessment  of  the  witness
    statements themselves.  However, the Secretary of State relied on other
    evidence in addition, including an  ETS  spreadsheet  which  the  judge
    referred to in paragraph 14 of her decision.  The clear conclusion that
    fraud or deception had not been established by the Secretary  of  State
    does not reveal any engagement with or analysis of the spreadsheet.  It
    is also clear from paragraph 14 of the decision  that  the  judge  took
    into account the respondents' bundle, consisting of 148 pages, although
    there is no reference to  any  particular  document  contained  in  it,
    notwithstanding the relevance of several items to the contested  issues
    in the appeals.  Mr Burrett suggested that it was here, in the  bundle,
    that the response to the Secretary of State's case  was  to  be  found,
    assuming that the witness statements from Ms Collings and Mr Millington
    were sufficient to at least meet the initial evidential burden.

14.  Dealing first with the witness statements which appear in  the  bundle,
    the second  respondent's  statement  appears  at  pages  3  to  6.   At
    paragraph 3, she asserts that her test certificate was not  forged  and
    refers to communication with her sponsoring college.  There  is  little
    else  concerning  the  test  or  certificate.   Her  husband's  witness
    statement appears at pages 6 and 7 but adds little.  What is  important
    in the bundle, and which the decision  makes  no  mention  of,  is  the
    correspondence between pages 128 and 135 and  the  statement  from  the
    second respondent which then follows, at pages 136 to 138.

15.  This evidence shows that the second  respondent's  sponsoring  college,
    having been  notified  that  the  test  certificate  and  results  were
    withdrawn  following  the  ETS  investigation,  sought  to  arrange  an
    interview with her to discuss  her  position.   The  initial  date  was
    replaced by a subsequent one in view of her  pregnancy.   Following  an
    interview on 16 October 2014, the college emailed on 24 October with  a
    decision to withdraw sponsorship and expel the second  respondent  from
    her course.  The basis of the decision was that she was unable  to  say
    what the structure of the TOIEC test was or which  particular  sections
    were included.  In a statement made  on  30  October  2014,  after  her
    college's decision, the second respondent complained that she  was  not
    given an opportunity to sit a special  test,  described  as  a  secured
    English language test.  Instead of offering her that  opportunity,  her
    sponsoring college questioned her about her attendance and the previous
    TOEIC test.

16.  The sponsoring college made clear their  finding  that  they  were  not
    satisfied that they should prefer  the  second  respondent's  assertion
    that her certificate was valid, when compared with information supplied
    by UKVI and ETS.  Their overall conclusion was that the  documents  she
    provided  to  them,  which  led  to  their  sponsorship  of  her,  were
    "misleading".

17.   This  was  extremely  important  evidence   which   required   careful
    assessment.   Set  against  that  evidence,  the  single  sentence   at
    paragraph 16 of the decision, which records  that  the  judge  had  the
    benefit of hearing oral  evidence  and  had  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    respondents' credibility, is  too  fragile  a  basis  for  the  overall
    conclusion. If the judge were to find that the Secretary of  State  had
    failed to discharge the burden upon her, engagement was  required  with
    evidence  which  showed  that  the  sponsoring   college's   conclusion
    regarding the test certificate was similar to the adverse finding  made
    by the Secretary of State.

18.  I conclude that the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  are  made
    out.   The  conclusion  that  there  was  no  fraud  or  deception  was
    insufficiently reasoned and the Article 8 assessment which followed was
    based on an insufficiently reasoned premise.  The  Secretary  of  State
    did not provide a representative but, nonetheless, her case and all the
    salient features of the  evidence  required  assessment  and  analysis.
    Some of  the  respondents'  evidence  was  capable  of  supporting  the
    Secretary of State's case, rather than undermining it.

19.  The decision contains a material error of law and must be  remade.   It
    is clear that the appropriate venue is the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    decision will be remade at Hatton Cross,  before  a  judge  other  than
    Judge R Chowdhury.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a judge  other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity  and  I  make  no  direction  or
order on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

