
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07119/2019
                                                               hu/10168/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2021                  |On 01 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              TUKI MAYA GURUNG
                                BHUWAN GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on  24  January  2020  of
    First-tier Tribunal  J  C  Hamilton  which  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals against refusal of entry clearance as the adult  dependents  of
    their mother.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nepal. The first appellant was  born  on
    13 December 1986. The second appellant maintains his true date of birth
    is 8 September 1983 albeit his passport states that his date  of  birth
    is 8 September 1986. The appellants are brother and sister.

 3. The appellants applied to join their mother,  the  widow  of  a  Gurkha
    soldier.   The  first  appellant  applied  on  30  December  2018.  Her
    application was refused on 7 May 2019.  The second appellant applied on
    8 February 2019 and his application was refused on 26 April 2019. Their
    appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds were then linked  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and dismissed, as above, by the First-tier Tribunal in  a
    decision dated 24 January 2020.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not  accept  that  the  appellant's  had  a
    family life with the  sponsor.  The  judge  placed  adverse  weight  in
    paragraphs 37 and 55 on the sponsor having chosen to come to the UK and
    having lived apart from the appellants for 5 years. The judge found  in
    paragraph 40  that  the  second  appellant  could  be  expected  to  be
    independent where there were employment options in  the  Nepal  tourist
    industry. The judge also found in paragraphs 45 and 46 that the sponsor
    gave discrepant evidence on  how  long  she  had  supported  the  first
    appellant in Kathmandu.

 5. Before me, it was accepted  for  the  respondent  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge erred in the approach taken in  all  those  findings  as
    they were not in accordance with the lawful approach to the  assessment
    of family life set out in case law  concerning  applications  by  adult
    dependents of Gurkhas, in particular Jitendra Rai v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320. The judge was not permitted to weigh  against  the  appellants
    the sponsor's decision to come to the UK and the time spent  living  in
    different countries in the manner he did.  The  judge  had  to  address
    whether there was a family life  at  the  time  of  departure  and  not
    whether, in the interim, a burden had arisen on the second appellant to
    show that he was no longer supported by or dependent on his mother. The
    evidence of the sponsor  on  funds  sent  to  the  first  appellant  in
    Kathmandu was not clearly discrepant, the sponsor referring to how long
    there had been funding for a particular course rather than how long  in
    total she had been providing funds for the first appellant to  live  in
    Kathmandu. The  respondent  also  conceded  that  the  errors  of  were
    material, infected the  holistic  assessment  of  whether  family  life
    existed and were such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  had
    to be set aside to be remade de novo.

 6. The position taken by the respondent was in line  with  my  preliminary
    view of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  the  same
    reasons, therefore, I find an error on a point of law and set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade de novo.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

 8. The appeals will be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 16 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
