
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07787/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 18 March 2020                           |On 28 April 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 HAMID DIAF
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Woodhouse of SH Solicitors LTD
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. On 29 November 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a judge  of  the  First-
       Tier Tribunal had erred in law in a manner material to  the  decision
       to allow the appeal and set  aside  that  decision.  Directions  were
       given to enable the Upper Tribunal to rehear the appeal with  a  view
       to substituting a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

Background


    2. The appellant has filed an  up-to-date  witness  statement  dated  14
       January 2020 in which he confirmed he arrived in the  United  Kingdom
       in 2001 and claims not to have returned to Algeria since.

    3. The appellant has a wife whom he married in an  Islamic  ceremony  in
       2008 and they have three young children, twins aged 11 and one aged 7
       at the date of the signing of the statement. The two  older  children
       were registered as British citizens on 15 October 2019.

    4.  The  appellant  has  provided  a  marriage  certificate   confirming
       registration of the marriage pursuant to the Marriage Act 1949  on  2
       September 2011.

    5. The appellant claims it will be unduly harsh for him to have to leave
       the United Kingdom especially as he served his  prison  sentence  and
       because the original offence took place over 10  years  ago  with  no
       evidence of reoffending in the interim.

    6. The appellant claims to be a reformed character  who  now  has  three
       young children to look after whom he wishes to  be  a  positive  role
       model for. The appellant claims to have  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship" with the children. The  appellant  claims  that  it  is
       disproportionate and unjust for the respondent to remove him from the
       United Kingdom or to expect the children to leave the United  Kingdom
       and move to a foreign country.

    7. The appellant claims he is an essential figure in the  lives  of  his
       children whom  he  loves,  cares  for,  and  provides  emotional  and
       psychological support to. The appellant claims the children need  him
       in their lives. The appellant refers  to  routines,  traditions,  and
       habits enjoyed within the family.

    8. The two older children are due to start secondary school in September
       which the appellant claims will be a stressful and difficult time for
       them when they will need security at home that  he  will  provide  by
       supporting them during this transition. The appellant claims the boys
       also need a male figure in their life to guide them and who they  can
       relate to them, support them, and understand them.

    9. The appellant confirms his wife, who  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  at  college,  has  now  found
       employment as a Care Worker from December 2019 which enables them  to
       improve the family's standard of living. The appellant claims  if  he
       is removed it will set his wife back considerably as she will have to
       stop focusing on her career and carry out  the  tasks  the  appellant
       does at home which may well mean having to give up her job.

   10.  The  appellant  claims  if  deported  the   consequences   will   be
       "excruciatingly unbearable" for his wife and  children  as  his  wife
       will not be able to continue with  her  job  as  she  will  not  have
       childcare, will have to run the house by herself as well as earning a
       living and meet all the  expenses.  The  appellant  claims  that  the
       pressure and burden will cause his wife to fall into depression.

   11. The appellant asserts that his human rights will be breached if he is
       removed and separated from his  wife  and  children  in  addition  to
       breaching their rights too.

   12. The appellant's wife has also provided an updated statement dated  14
       January 2020 confirming her circumstances have not changed materially
       since the last statement. The latest statement confirms the  comments
       made  by  the  appellant  regarding  marriage  and  registration   of
       marriage, composition  of  family,  and  that  as  a  result  of  the
       appellant's immigration status which prevents him  from  working  she
       has studied in order to  obtain  employment  to  support  the  family
       financially.

   13. The appellant's wife states her husband  looks  after  the  children,
       takes them to school and collects them, and supported  her  to  allow
       her to complete her studies and work.  They  have  distributed  their
       responsibilities and if removed from the United Kingdom there will be
       a huge burden placed upon her  to  continue  working  whilst  looking
       after the three children.

   14. The appellant's wife confirms her husband is a  positive  role  model
       for the children and an amazing father and  that  the  children  rely
       upon him on a daily basis. Her husband loves cooking and the children
       help him to cook.

   15. The appellant's wife confirms she commenced a job as a care worker in
       December 2019 and is excited at the prospects of having a career. She
       states she shall be unable to continue working without her  husband's
       support.

   16. The appellant's wife also confirms all the children are boys who  can
       be loud and boisterous and have a lot of energy and claims she  shall
       not be able to cope and looking after them by herself.

   17. The marriage certificate states the appellant's occupation is a  chef
       and his wife is a full-time mother.

   18. In his witness statement of 24 June 2019 the appellant stated that in
       addition to Level I and 2 Diploma qualifications as a  chef  he  also
       has a qualification in barbering and IT and will be able to work  and
       support his family if he is allowed to stay.

   19. There is also within the bundle  copies  of  the  appellant's  wife's
       certificates of achievement and a copy of statement of main terms  of
       employment from  Sandwell  Care  Services,  which  is  a  zero  hours
       contract, showing her rate of pay per hour. Documents have also  been
       provided confirming tax credit paid to the appellant's wife.

Submissions


   20. There was no factual dispute between the parties  and  in  accordance
       with the directions given at the error of  law  hearing  the  parties
       witness statements stood as their evidence in  chief.  There  was  no
       cross-examination by Mr McVeety enabling the matter to proceed by way
       of submissions only.

   21. The relevant immigration history showed that  the  appellant  entered
       the United Kingdom on 9 November 2001 and was served with  papers  as
       an illegal entrant although he failed to maintain  contact  with  the
       immigration  authorities  and  absconded.  The  appellant  was   next
       encountered when arrested by the police in 2003 for being  drunk  and
       disorderly but was not  prosecuted  remained  in  the  UK  thereafter
       illegally.

   22. On 18 November 2005 at the City  of  London  Magistrates  Court,  the
       appellant was  convicted  of  battery,  assaulting  a  constable  and
       possessing  a  listed  false  instrument.  On  2  February  2006  the
       appellant was sentenced to a total of 6 months imprisonment.

   23. On 30 November 2005, the appellant claimed asylum which  was  refused
       by the Secretary of State. The appellant's attempt to  challenge  the
       decision by way of statutory appeal was unsuccessful and  on  18  May
       2006 the appellant became appeal rights exhausted, although  remained
       in the United Kingdom illegally thereafter.

   24.  The  appellant  next  came  to  the  attention  of  the  immigration
       authorities on 14 November 2006 when the appellant  was  arrested  by
       the police at a money exchange where he  was  attempting  to  cash  a
       cheque using a false French ID document. The  appellant  admitted  to
       the police using that document in order to work in the United Kingdom
       illegally following which he was served with illegal entry papers  as
       an illegal entrant working in  breach  of  working  restrictions  and
       released on bail pending his trial.

   25. On 12 March 2008 the appellant married  a  Moroccan  national  in  an
       Islamic ceremony in London although at that time  both  were  in  the
       United Kingdom illegally and neither had applied for a certificate of
       approval from the UK Border Agency prior to their marriage.

   26. On 6 January 2009 the appellant's wife gave birth to twin boys.

   27. On 9 February 2009 at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
       convicted    of    knowingly    possessing     a     false/improperly
       obtained/another's ID document and breach of conditions  and,  on  16
       February 2009, was sentenced to  12  months  imprisonment  for  false
       documents and 11 days for breach of licence. The  appellant  did  not
       appeal against either conviction or sentence.

   28.  On  11  November  2009  the  appellant  was  served  with  a  signed
       Deportation Order and reasons for deportation notice.  The  appellant
       appealed against the decision to deport him on 16 December 2009.  The
       appeal was dismissed on 23 December 2009 and  an  application  for  a
       High Court Review refused on 18 January 2010.

   29. On 1 April 2010 further representations were made on the  appellant's
       behalf said to constitute a fresh application for asylum and on human
       rights grounds which were refused, and the appellant  issued  with  a
       refusal to revoke the Deportation Order decision on 4 May  2011.  The
       refusal was certified pursuant to section 94(2) of the 2002 Act.

   30. On 18 August 2011 the appellant challenged the certification  by  way
       of an application  for  Judicial  Review  which  was  refused  on  15
       September 2011 as the case was  considered  to  be  'totally  without
       merit' and the order no bar to removal.

   31. On 18 October 2011 the Home Officer was  advised  that  the  Algerian
       Embassy in London had agreed to issue the appellant with an Emergency
       Travel Document following which he was detained on 24 October 2011 to
       affect his removal from the United Kingdom.

   32. On 31 October 2011, following service of the removal  direction,  the
       appellant's  solicitors   submitted   further   representations   and
       contacted the Algerian Consulate in an attempt to stop them issuing a
       travel document to the appellant. The respondent  was  advised  on  3
       November 2011 that the Consulate would not issue a travel document as
       they  stated  they  had  been  advised  there  were   representations
       outstanding.

   33. The further representations were treated as an application to  revoke
       the Deportation Order and refused on 7 November 2011. The appellant's
       solicitors stated they were planning to lodge an appeal  against  the
       decision to refuse to revoke the Deportation Order, even though there
       was no such right of appeal, which  changed  to  an  application  for
       judicial review which was submitted on 23 November  2011.  Permission
       was refused on 24 January 2012 as the application was  considered  to
       be 'totally without merit'.

   34. On 2 May 2012 and 13 July 2012 further representations were  received
       and on 8 May 2012  the  appellant  granted  bail  and  released  with
       reporting restrictions.

   35. On  7  December  2012,  the  further  representations  were  rejected
       pursuant to paragraph 353 Immigration Rules as  not  amounting  to  a
       fresh claim.

   36. Further submissions then followed dated 4 February 2015,  1  December
       2015, 20 July 2016, and 9 February 2017, which were  rejected  on  18
       August 2017 pursuant to paragraph 353. An  application  for  judicial
       review on 23 November 2017 challenging the fresh claim  decision  was
       lodged although permission refused on 2 May 2018 on the papers.

   37. On 27 September 2018, at a renewed oral permission hearing, the Upper
       Tribunal was advised there had  been  a  significant  change  in  the
       appellants circumstances as his partner and three children  had  been
       granted Residence Permits confirming a right to remain in the  United
       Kingdom until 19 January 2021 as a result of which  the  Home  Office
       was ordered to reconsider the decision of 18 August  2017,  rendering
       the judicial review claim academic.

   38. The further representations were considered in the impugned  decision
       of 16 April 2019 which refused the human rights  claim  made  by  the
       appellant as an exception to his deportation from the United Kingdom,
       in which is the decision appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal.

   39. Mr McVeety's position was that although the evidence established  the
       appellant's removal would be harsh upon the family  who  remained  in
       the United Kingdom it will not be 'unduly harsh'. It was not  doubted
       that the children will be upset and that their lives will change  but
       that was the impact of the deportation of the appellant as  a  result
       of his criminality.

   40. It is not disputed that the appellant has not  reoffended  since  the
       index offence, but it cannot be challenged that the  appellant  is  a
       foreign national criminal subject to a Deportation Order in  relation
       to which there is no limitation period upon  when  the  same  can  be
       enforced.

   41. Mr McVeety submitted there was no evidence such  as  from  a  medical
       professional or Social Worker  highlighting  particular  difficulties
       within the family unit or that they had needs  beyond  the  norm.  In
       particular, there was no evidence of  any  adverse  impact  upon  the
       children if the appellant were to be removed.

   42. Mr McVeety submitted that as the appellant could  not  establish  his
       removal will be 'unduly harsh' under the Rules it  was  necessary  to
       consider whether he could  succeed  outside  the  Rules  pursuant  to
       article 8 ECHR although, as the appellant cannot satisfy  the  Rules,
       more will be required which was not shown to exist in this appeal.

   43. Mr McVeety submitted the public  interest  required  the  appellant's
       deportation from the United Kingdom and it was not made out that  the
       public interest should be reduced for the reasons relied upon by  the
       appellant. The severity of the offence did not tail off over time and
       the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  was  not  sufficient  to
       warrant the appeal being allowed.

   44. On behalf of the appellant Mr Woodhouse submitted that  the  tribunal
       had evidence from the parents even if there was nothing from a Social
       Worker or medical professional.

   45. It was submitted the quality of the relationship  between  the  child
       and the appellant is relevant and  that  the  appellant's  wife,  the
       children's mother, would not be able to work  if  the  appellant  was
       removed.  It was argued the bond between the children in this case is
       unique and that the appellants removal will be 'unduly harsh' on  all
       members of the family.

   46. Mr Woodhouse submitted that even if the appellant  failed  under  the
       Immigration Rules he  can  succeed  outside  the  rules  pursuant  to
       article 8 ECHR for the  reasons  set  out  at  [9]  of  the  skeleton
       argument. That paragraph referred to the decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in Akinyemi  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  2098  which  held  the  public
       interest in deportation is not fixed and has a  movable  quality.  It
       was argued Section 117C of the 2002 Act  does  not  change  this.  Mr
       Woodhouse submitted the  public  interest  in  deportation  has  been
       reduced as a result of the passage of  time  since  the  offence  was
       committed and the fact the appellant has not  offended  further,  and
       that when balancing the appellant's case against the public  interest
       it was not proportionate for the appellant to be removed.

   47. Mr Woodhouse submitted the passage of  time  did  make  a  difference
       warranting weight being given in the appellant's  favour,  especially
       as it was in the best interests of the children for them to  be  able
       to remain in the UK.

   48. It was further submitted the Strasbourg case law  did  not  impose  a
       test of "undue harshness" on an appellant in cases such as this.

The law


   49. The legal framework

       When a person who is not a British citizen is convicted in the UK  of
       an offence for which he is sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
       at least 12 months, section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 requires
       the Secretary of State to make a deportation order in respect of that
       person (referred to in the  legislation  as  a  "foreign  criminal"),
       subject to section 33. Section 33  of  the  Act  establishes  certain
       exceptions, one of which is that "removal of the foreign criminal  in
       pursuance  of  the  deportation  order  would  breach...  a  person's
       Convention rights": see section 33(2)(a).


       The right protected by article 8 is  a  qualified  right  with  which
       interference may be justified on the basis of various legitimate aims
       which include the prevention of disorder or crime. The way  in  which
       the question of justification should be approached where a  court  or
       tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made  under  the
       Immigration Acts breaches article 8 is governed by Part 5A  (sections
       117A-117D) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       (inserted by amendment in 2014).


       Section 117B lists certain public interest  considerations  to  which
       the court or tribunal must have  regard  in  all  such  cases.  These
       include the considerations that:


           "(1)   The maintenance of effective immigrations controls is  in
           the public interest.


           ...


           (4)    Little weight should be given to -


                (a)    a private life, or


                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.


           ..."


       Section 117C lists additional considerations to which  the  court  or
       tribunal must have regard  in  cases  involving  "foreign  criminals"
       (defined in a similar way to the 2007 Act). These considerations are:




           "(1)   The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
           interest.


           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation  of
           the criminal.


           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.


           (4)    Exception 1 applies where  -  (a)  C  has  been  lawfully
           resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's life,  (b)  C  is
           socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,  and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.


           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least four years,  the  public
           interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2.


           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
           taken into account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a
           decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent  that
           the reason for the decision was  the  offence  or  offences  for
           which the criminal has been convicted."


           "Foreign criminals" who fall within section 117C(3) because they
           have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
           months but less than four years have been  referred  to  in  the
           case law as "medium offenders" - in contrast  to  those  with  a
           sentence of four years or more, who are  described  as  "serious
           offenders".


   50. In CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20-21] it was found:

           "20    Paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration  Rules  state  the
                practice  to  be  followed  by  Home  Office  officials   in
                assessing a claim that the deportation of a foreign criminal
                would be contrary to article 8. Paragraphs 398-399A  are  in
                very similar terms to section 117C(3)-(6) of the  2002  Act.
                However,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  pointed  out  in  NE-A
                (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                [2017] EWCA Civ 239, para 14, although the Immigration Rules
                are relevant because they reflect the responsible minister's
                assessment, endorsed by Parliament, of  the  general  public
                interest, they are not legislation; by contrast, Part 5A  of
                the 2002 Act is primary legislation which  directly  governs
                decision-making by courts and tribunals  in  cases  where  a
                decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of   State   under   the
                Immigration Acts is challenged on  article  8  grounds.  The
                provisions of Part  5A,  taken  together,  are  intended  to
                provide for a structured  approach  to  the  application  of
                article 8  which  produces  in  all  cases  a  final  result
                compatible with article 8:  see  NE-A  (Nigeria),  para  14;
                Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
                UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536, para 36. Further, if in applying
                section 117C(3) or (6) the conclusion is  reached  that  the
                public interest "requires" deportation, that  conclusion  is
                one to which the tribunal is bound by law  to  give  effect:
                see Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
                [2016] EWCA Civ 803;  [2016]  1  WLR  4204,  para  50;  NE-A
                (Nigeria), para 14. In such a case there is no room for  any
                further assessment of  proportionality  under  article  8(2)
                because these statutory  provisions  determine  the  way  in
                which the assessment is to be carried out in accordance with
                UK law.


           21 In these circumstances it seems to me that  it  is  generally
                unnecessary for a tribunal or court in a  case  in  which  a
                decision to deport a "foreign  criminal"  is  challenged  on
                article 8 grounds to refer to  paragraphs  398-399A  of  the
                Immigration Rules, as they have no additional part  to  play
                in the analysis."


Discussion


   51. The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in  failing  to  consider  and
       follow the guidance provided by the Senior Courts when assessing  the
       merits of the appeal.

   52. A further recent authority from the Court of Appeal, handed  down  on
       the 22 November 2019, is SSHD v KF (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  2051
       which confirmed the current position at [31] in  which  Lord  Justice
       Baker, when giving the lead judgement, stated:

           "31.   For those lawyers, like my  Lord  and  myself,  who  have
                spent many years practising in the family jurisdiction, this
                is not a comfortable interpretation to apply.  But  that  is
                what Parliament has decided, and it is important to bear  in
                mind the observations of Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica)  at
                paragraph 46:


                    "When a parent is deported,  one  can  only  have  great
                    sympathy for the entirely  innocent  children  involved.
                    Even in circumstances in which they can  remain  in  the
                    United  Kingdom  with  the  other  parent,   they   will
                    inevitably be distressed. However, in section 117C(5) of
                    the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its  will  that,
                    for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one  to  four
                    years, only where the consequences for the children  are
                    'unduly harsh' will deportation be constrained. That  is
                    entirely consistent  with  Article  8  of  ECHR.  It  is
                    important that decision-makers and, when  the  decisions
                    are  challenged,  tribunals  and  courts   honour   that
                    expression of Parliamentary will."


   53. It was not disputed by Mr McVeety that the  appellants  children,  if
       deprived of the appellants company during their formative years,  may
       be at risk of suffering some form of emotional harm but to be 'unduly
       harsh' it is necessary to look for consequences  characterised  by  a
       degree of harshness over and beyond what every child would experience
       in such circumstances.  The  evidence  provided  did  not  show  this
       threshold had been met, let alone crossed.


   54. As found in KF at [30]


           "... Looking at the facts as found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           that led to the conclusion  that  family  would  suffer  adverse
           consequences as a result of the deportation, and  in  particular
           the consequences for the respondent's  son  separated  from  his
           father, it is difficult to identify anything which distinguishes
           this case from other cases where  a  family  is  separated.  The
           First-tier Tribunal judge found that the respondent's son  would
           be deprived of his father at a crucial time  in  his  life.  His
           view  that  "there  is  no  substitute  for  the  emotional  and
           developmental benefits  for  a  three-year-old  child  that  are
           associated with being brought up  by  both  parents  during  its
           formative years" is indisputable. But those benefits are enjoyed
           by all three-year-old children in the care of both parents.  The
           judge observed that it was a "fact  that  being  deprived  of  a
           parent is something a child is likely to find traumatic and that
           will potentially have long-lasting adverse consequences for that
           child" and that he was entitled to take judicial notice of  that
           fact. But the "fact" of which he was taking "judicial notice" is
           likely to arise in every case where a child  is  deprived  of  a
           parent. All children should, where possible, be brought up  with
           a close relationship with both parents. All children deprived of
           a parent's company during their formative years will be at  risk
           of suffering harm. Given the changes to the  law  introduced  by
           the amendments to 2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court,
           it is necessary to look  for  consequences  characterised  by  a
           degree of harshness over  and  beyond  what  every  child  would
           experience in such circumstances.


   55. Whilst the appellant's deportation will have  a  considerable  impact
       upon his wife it is not established that  the  consequences  will  be
       'unduly harsh' on her either. Although the appellant's  wife  clearly
       wishes her husband to be able to remain in the United Kingdom and for
       their family unit to continue to move forward,  the  reality  of  the
       appellant's deportation is that she will become a  single  parent  as
       are many women in this country. It may mean the appellant's wife will
       have to make alternative arrangements for childcare and may  have  to
       give up her job and become dependent upon the State until  such  time
       as alternative arrangements enabling her to return  to  work  can  be
       made. Whilst the appellant's wife should be commended for the  effort
       she has made to date  that  is  not  the  determinative  factor.  The
       appellants wife, who is on a zero hours contract, may able be able to
       work whilst the children are at school, hence maintaining her  career
       and income (supplemented by tax credits).


   56. The evidence, again, fails to establish that the consequences for the
       appellant's wife will be other than those normally flowing  from  the
       effect of the  appellant's  deportation.  It  is  not  made  out  the
       appellant's wife will be unable to care for the children or meet  the
       children's needs, both emotionally and physically. It is not made out
       that any personal trauma or difficulty she  may  experience  will  be
       such as to create a real risk of harm to the  children  or  create  a
       situation that can be properly categorised, in law, as being  'unduly
       harsh'.


   57. It is accepted the best interests of the children are to be  able  to
       remain in the United Kingdom with both their parents but that is  not
       been shown to be the determinative factor.


   58.  Whilst  Mr  Woodhouse  submitted  Strasbourg  case  law   does   not
       specifically referred to an 'unduly harsh' test it does refer to  the
       need for a balancing exercise and provides a margin  of  appreciation
       to the Higher Contracted States as to how that  is  interpreted.  The
       United Kingdom has brought into force section 117 C of the  2002  Act
       containing  how  it  believes  the  question   of   whether   it   is
       proportionate to remove an individual subject to a deportation  order
       should be assessed. I was not referred to any authority showing those
       statutory provisions have been found to be contrary to ECHR,  despite
       numerous challenges being made on that basis. It is within the margin
       of appreciation for the United Kingdom to find that unless  a  person
       establishes their deportation will  be  'unduly  harsh'  upon  either
       their children or partner with whom they have the requisite degree of
       relationship, their removal will be proportionate. It must  be  borne
       in  mind  that  the  legitimate  aim  relied  upon   in   deportation
       proceedings to justify removal is different from  that  in  any  non-
       deportation appeal.


   59. Despite the strength of the heartfelt  plea  that  the  appellant  be
       allowed to remain in the United Kingdom,  insufficient  evidence  has
       been provided to establish  the  appellant's  deportation  will  have
       'unduly harsh' consequences upon those he loves.


   60. The immigration history above  shows  the  appellant  has  never  had
       lawful leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and,  therefore,  any
       protected right he is seeking to rely upon has been developed  during
       a time his immigration history has been precarious, warranting little
       weight being attached to  it  under  both  domestic  legislation  and
       Strasbourg jurisprudence.


   61. There is simply not the evidence on  which  this  tribunal,  properly
       directed as to the law, can conclude  that  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant will lead to his partner and children suffering a degree of
       harshness beyond what would necessarily be involved for  any  partner
       or children of a foreign criminal facing  deportation.  The  evidence
       does not provide a basis  upon  which  the  appellant  can  establish
       Exception 2 under s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399 of  the
       Immigration  Rules,  and  accordingly  under  s.117C(3)  the   public
       interest requires that he be deported.


   62. Exception 1 was not pleaded and cannot be satisfied on the  facts  in
       any event.


Decision

   63. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity.

   64. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 March 2020

