
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  HU/07799/2017
                                                               HU/07801/2017
                                                               HU/07803/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 January 2018                    |On 22 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     WUK
                                     SK
                                     WK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Malik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born in 1980, 1992 and  2012.
    They are husband, wife and their child.

 2. They appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 29 June 2017
    to refuse their application for leave to remain on human rights grounds
    (family and private life).

 3. The reasons for refusal, in summary,  were  that  the  first  appellant
    (WUK) did not meet the  suitability  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because he had used deception in an ETS  English  language  test.
    He  and  his  wife,  the  second  appellant,  also  did  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements. In addition, section EX.1. was not satisfied.

 4. The applications were also refused under paragraph 276  ADE(1).   Also,
    it was considered that there were no  exceptional  circumstances  which
    merited the grant of leave outside the Rules.

 5. They appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 7 June 2018, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Andonian dismissed the appeals.

 7. They sought permission to appeal which was granted on 1 November 2018.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. At the error of  law  hearing  before  me  the  thrust  of  Mr  Malik's
    submissions in line with the grounds was  that  the  decision  was  not
    adequately reasoned.  Some of it, not helped by numerous  typographical
    errors was incoherent and overall it showed a lack of clarity with  the
    result that the judge failed coherently to explain how he  reached  his
    conclusions on the key matters in dispute.

 9. Ms Cunha's response was that while the decision was, indeed, disjointed
    and hard to  follow  such  was  not  fatal.   For  reasons  which  were
    discernible he had concluded that it was reasonable for the family, all
    Bangladeshi citizens, to return to their home country.   In  particular
    he had dealt with the child noting that she is not a "qualifying child"
    and that although  she  is  autistic  there  is  support  for  autistic
    children in Bangladesh.  His  conclusions  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  Further his conclusions on the ETS issue were sustainable.

Consideration

10. It is regrettable that the judge did not apply his mind to setting  out
    his decision in a properly structured manner.  As both  parties  agreed
    the result is a decision which is  both  disjointed  and  difficult  to
    follow.   The  first  thirty-two  paragraphs  narrate  the  immigration
    history, a recitation of  the  appellants'  case  as  set  out  in  the
    application, and the reasons for refusal in response.  However, at [33]
    the judge appeared to accept  large  parts  of  the  respondent's  case
    without explaining why.  He stated:-

         "Based on all the above matters, the evidence clearly showed to  me
         that there was no  reason  for  the  appellants  to  stay  in  this
         country.  However, I also had to consider the fact that  the  child
         was autistic before a final decision was made on this appeal."


11. It is notable that this passage referenced [12-32],  and  at  [12]  the
    judge set out the  respondent's  assertion  that  the  first  appellant
    cheated on an ETS test apparently accepting that assertion without  any
    explanation why.

12. Following [33] the judge then set out his consideration of the  child's
    (third appellant) welfare given that it is  accepted  she  has  autism,
    reaching his conclusion on this issue at [43-47].

13. The judge then went on at [48-51]  to  the  first  appellant's  further
    evidence as to his daughter's needs and  situation;  to  refer  to  his
    wife's evidence as to their daughter under the  incoherent  sub-heading
    "The appellant is what the second appellant" at [62], and then  to  set
    out further reasoning on this topic at [63-67]  under  the  sub-heading
    "Conclusions;" then to  consider  evidence  of  the  first  appellant's
    brother relevant to this issue at [68]; then at [69] to state  that  he
    had read the grounds of appeal and to provide further reasoning at [70-
    73].

14. A decision is not  meant  to  be  a  work  of  literature.   Occasional
    typographical  errors  or  infelicities  of  language  are  not  fatal.
    Unfortunately, there is an excess of such errors  in  the  decision  (a
    small sample includes: at [60], the sub-heading  at  [62],  also  [70],
    [71], [73]).

15. I agree with the grounds that, overall, with  respect  to  [34-51]  and
    [62] and [63-73] the judge's reasoning is again dense,  disjointed  and
    difficult to follow and fails to  differentiate  between  the  parties'
    positions and the judge's findings and the reasons for these  findings.
    At [44] he appeared to reach a final decision  on  the  case  but  then
    pressed on to further consideration.

16. Further, he stated at [43] "It was accepted that because of  her  young
    age and due to having spent the entirety  of  the  (sic)  life  in  the
    United Kingdom with her Bangladeshi parents and for the reasons  stated
    above, there are no insurmountable obstacles to  her  and  her  parents
    removal from  the  United  Kingdom.   There  are  no  very  significant
    obstacles therefore in that regard."

17. Ms Cunha did not demur from the  submission  that  there  was  no  such
    concession by the appellants, and  I  see  nothing  in  the  record  of
    proceedings to indicate there was such.

18. On the issue of the child's (third appellant) autism I would  add  that
    the judge failed to show that he had had any regard to a country expert
    report (31 May 2018) which was before him, by Dr Amundsen.

19. The grounds, in addition, made an attack on the judge's conclusions  on
    the ETS deception claim (at [52-61]).  I do not consider  it  necessary
    to decide that matter not only because the  judge  had  apparently  (at
    [33]) decided against the appellant earlier without giving reasons, but
    because the decision considered as a whole does not show that the judge
    considered  the  appeal  and  the  evidence  before  him  with  anxious
    scrutiny.  The way he expressed himself with a lack of clarity  and  at
    times incoherently, leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  decision  is
    fundamentally flawed.

20. Further, the expressions of conclusions and reasoning on  an  issue  at
    one point in the  decision,  which  is  then  the  subject  of  further
    reasoning concerning evidence relevant  to  that  issue  later  in  the
    decision,  and  in  no  coherent  order,  leaves  the  reader  with  no
    confidence that the judge had considered all of the  evidence  relevant
    to a particular issue in the round and at one time, instead of  forming
    premature conclusions having  only  considered  some  of  the  relevant
    evidence.

21. I conclude that  the  material  error  is  that  the  decision  is  not
    adequately reasoned.

22. The result is that the case must be remitted for a fresh hearing on all
    matters with no findings preserved.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate  under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2
    to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues.  No  findings  stand.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Andonian.

24. An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the appellants are  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway  21 February 2019

