
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07559/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2017 and 20 July 2017        |On 3rd August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     au
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Chohan
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 15th June 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He arrived in the UK on  1st
    March 2010 as a visitor and overstayed.  He made a late asylum claim on
    3rd March  2012  which  was  refused  and  the  subsequent  appeal  was
    dismissed on 24th March 2015.  On 7th July 2015 he applied for leave to
    remain in the UK on family life  grounds  which  was  refused  on  30th
    September 2015.  He appealed to an Immigration Judge.

 3. Judge Chohan recorded that, although the previous judge who  had  dealt
    with the asylum appeal did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner, with whom he  had
    had a religious marriage on 15th March 2012, it was now conceded by the
    Presenting Officer that there was  no  challenge  to  the  relationship
    between the appellant and Mrs K.

 4. Mrs K is of Bangladeshi origin but has  not  been  back  there  for  22
    years.  This is her third marriage.  The  first  was  arranged  by  her
    family in 1993 and was abusive.  The appellant's partner had a son, JA,
    born on 20th July 1994 from that  relationship.   She  then  married  a
    Pakistani national, whom she divorced and he was deported to  Pakistan.
    There are two children of that relationship, ZF born on 5th March  2006
    and AF born on 21st July 2008.

 5. All of the children are British nationals.

 6. The judge considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles to Mrs
    K establishing herself in Bangladesh with the appellant.  With  respect
    to the children, he said that there was very little evidence before him
    in respect of the degree and substance of the parental relationship and
    he said that it was "not the strongest of relationships".

 7. The judge concluded that the children could either stay in the UK  with
    their mother but  they  were  young  enough  to  adapt  to  a  life  in
    Bangladesh, would have been exposed to Bangladeshi customs and  culture
    and language and it was reasonable to expect them to go there  although
    they were not required to do so.

 8. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that once  the
    judge had found there to  be  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and minor children it was irrelevant for  him  to
    assess  the  strength  of  it  and   the   error   had   infected   the
    proportionality assessment as well as  the  issue  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the children to relocate.

10. Second, the judge had failed to have regard to Section 117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and failed to have  regard
    to MA (Pakistan) and Others R (on the application of) v UT (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In that case  the
    respondent accepted that it would be  relatively  rare  for  it  to  be
    reasonable to expect a British child to leave the UK which  was  echoed
    in the Immigration Directorate Instruction Family  Migration,  Appendix
    FM, Section 1.0b Family Life (as a partner or parent) and private life:
    10 year route dated August 2015.  Finally the judge had failed to  have
    regard to the judgment in Zambrano.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused but upon renewal granted  by
    myself on 14th December 2016.

Submissions

12. Mr Kotas accepted that the judge had erred in seeking to go behind  his
    finding that the appellant and Mrs K were in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship by making observations on the evidence in relation to  the
    strength of that relationship. He also  accepted that  it  was  obvious
    that the appellant had stepped into the shoes of the children's father.
     He did seek to argue however that the error did not affect the judge's
    assessment of whether it was reasonable for the children to  leave  the
    UK which was a holistic question to be considered in the light  of  all
    of the evidence, including the appellant's immigration history and  the
    fact that his spouse entered into the relationship knowing that he  had
    no right to be in the UK.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law.

13. I disagree with Mr Kotas' submission.  It is quite  apparent  from  the
    determination that the prism through which the  judge  was  considering
    whether it would be reasonable for the children to leave the UK was the
    assessment that the relationship between them and their stepfather  was
    not of the strongest.  It is clear from the judge's reasoning  that  it
    was his view that there was no requirement for them to leave the UK and
    they could perfectly well stay here with their mother.

14. The fact is  however  that  the  youngest  child  has  lived  with  the
    appellant since she was 3 years old and her brother since he was 5.  It
    is not disputed that they have never had any  relationship  with  their
    natural father.  Moreover there are a number of  other  factors  to  be
    taken into account. The children's half brother lives with them and  is
    attending an HND Business Management course studying full-time  at  the
    London School of Science and Technology.

15. In MA the Court of Appeal held, at paragraph 19, per Elias LJ:

         "19. In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
             tribunals need to ask when applying Section  117B(6)  are  the
             following:

             (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation?  If  so,  section
                  117B is inapplicable and instead the  relevant  code  will
                  usually be found in section 117C.

             (2)  Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with the child?

             (3)  Is the child a qualifying child  as  defined  in  section
                  117D?

             (4)  Is it unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom?"

         20.  If the answer to the first question is no  and  to  the  other
             three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that Article  8
             is infringed."

16. At  paragraph  35  of  the  judgment  the  respondent's  representative
    suggested that it would be relatively rare for it to be  reasonable  to
    expect a child who is a British citizen to leave the  UK,  and  so  the
    consequence  of  the  appellant's  approach  would  be  to  allow  many
    applicant parents who have unjustifiably and unlawfully stayed  in  the
    UK to remain  here  by  clinging  to  the  coat  tails  of  the  child.
    Nevertheless the Court of Appeal chose to follow the  argument  of  the
    appellants.  Whilst the Court acknowledged that appellant's immigration
    history was poor, the children are not to be blamed for the  fact  that
    he overstayed his visa and their mother  entered  into  a  relationship
    with him knowing that he had no right to be in the UK.

17. The judge did not properly address himself to paragraph  117B(6).   Had
    he done so,  and  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the children he  should  then  have  moved
    straight on to the issue of whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK and not to seek to qualify the nature  of  the
    relationship.

18. The error in the judge's assessment of  the  quality  of  the  parental
    relationship infected his approach to the question  of  proportionality
    and accordingly the decision has to be remade.

19. Initially it was hoped that the  appeal  could  proceed  straight  away
    since the appellant was  in  court  and  available  to  give  evidence.
    However there was no interpreter booked and none available.   Mr  Kotas
    indicated that  he  had  a  number  of  questions  for  the  appellant,
    particularly in relation to the circumstances  to  which  he  would  be
    returning in Bangladesh which were clearly relevant to the question  of
    the reasonableness of the children's life there.

20. It emerged at the hearing that the appellant's wife  is  expecting  his
    child, the baby being due on 18th April 2017.  Since the  appeal  could
    not be concluded today it was  agreed  between  all  parties  that  the
    sensible course would be for the  appellant's  representative  to  file
    further evidence, by 15th May 2017, with the Presenting Officer's  Unit
    following the birth of the child.  That evidence will be considered  by
    the respondent who will then be in a position to  notify  the  Tribunal
    whether a further hearing is necessary.

Resumed Hearing

21. At the resumed hearing Mr Kotas  indicated  that  he  had  no  wish  to
    challenge the evidence.  The appeal hinged on whether it was reasonable
    to expect the appellant's two stepchildren and his own child  to  leave
    the UK.  It was not contested that he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with them.  In view of the ages of the children -
    they are 9 and 11 - the Secretary of State would need  to  show  strong
    reasons why they would be  required  to  leave  the  UK  and  the  only
    argument which he could advance in her favour  was  the  importance  of
    immigration control and the lack of evidence of the  appellant's  means
    in the UK.

22. Mr Chowdhury submitted that the appeal ought to  be  allowed.   It  was
    plainly unreasonable for the British children to be required to go  and
    live in Bangladesh.  Their best interests should prevail.

Findings and Conclusions

23. Paragraph EX.1(a) states that this paragraph applies if

         "(a)

             (i)  The applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who -

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years or was under the age  of
                      18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                      on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb)     is in the UK;

                  (cc)  is  a  British  citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least the seven years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

             (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK."

    EX.1(a) is mirrored by the provisions of Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act which states that

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child and

          b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

24. In this case the two British national stepchildren have  no  connection
    with Bangladesh whatsoever.  Their  father,  with  whom  they  have  no
    contact, is a Pakistani national.  They themselves were born in the  UK
    and have lived here all their lives.  They enjoy family life with their
    half-brother J, who is now 22 years of age but lives with them  in  the
    family home and is in full-time education.

25. As Mr Kotas realistically conceded, in order to make out her  case  the
    Secretary of State would have to  show  powerful  reasons  why  it  was
    reasonable to expect these children to go and live in  Bangladesh.   To
    do so would be to seriously disrupt their relationship with their half-
    brother, with  whom  they  have  lived  all  their  life.   Their  best
    interests are clear.  It is to remain in their country  of  nationality
    with their family.

26. The balance of this argument lies with the appellant.  It would not  be
    reasonable to expect these children to leave the UK and  Mr  Kotas  did
    not seek to persuade me otherwise.

Decision

27. The original judge erred in law.   The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 2 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor







