

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07962/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 November 2018                    |On 14 November 2018                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               PETER ROBINSON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') dated 16 May 2018, in which Mr Robinson's  appeal
          against a decision to make a  deportation  order  was  allowed  on
          human rights grounds.  I shall refer to the appellant as the  SSHD
          and the respondent as  Mr  Robinson  for  the  remainder  of  this
          decision.




       2. Mr Robinson is  a  citizen  of  Serbia.   He  entered  the  United
          Kingdom ('UK') with his parents in 1971  when  he  was  15  months
          old.  In 1974 he was granted indefinite leave to remain  alongside
          his parents.  In 1977 he was the subject of a care order  and  did
          not return to live with his parents until he was 16.   His  mother
          returned to Serbia in 1989/1990.  She died in Serbia  in  2009/10.
            He received a conditional discharge  for  theft  in  2011.   His
          father died in 2015.  On 24 October 2016 he was  sentenced  to  18
          months imprisonment for causing death by dangerous  driving.   The
          pre-sentence report  indicates  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
          suggest that he was driving in a reckless or dangerous manner  and
          he appeared genuinely remorseful.  The offence was  considered  to
          be a tragic accident or momentary lapse of concentration  and  his
          reoffending risk was assessed to be low.



Procedural history


       3. In a decision dated  16  July  2018,  the  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')
          granted permission to appeal on the basis that arguably:


              i) further evaluation of the public interest in Mr  Robinson's
                 removal  was required, as against what the  FTT  considered
                 to be the very significant obstacles to his integration  in
                 Serbia.


             ii) Given that he had spoken Serbian to his parents  before  he
                 was taken into care, the FTT was  not  entitled  to  assume
                 that he would not be able to pick it up again.

       4.  The  UT's  first  observation  appears  to  be  based  upon   the
          understanding that the public interest must  be  further  factored
          into the exceptions set out at section 117C  of  the  Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - see the guidance in MM  (Uganda)
          v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450.  This submission does  not  appear  in
          the SSHD's grounds of appeal.


       5. The UT's second observation is based upon the  SSHD's  grounds  of
          appeal,  which  entirely  focus  upon  the  contention  that   the
          findings of fact in support of the  conclusion  that  Mr  Robinson
          would face very significant obstacles in integrating  into  Serbia
          were not open to the FTT.

       6. The matter now comes before me to  decide  whether  the  decision
          contains an error of law.

Hearing

       7. Mr Diwnycz made it clear at the beginning of the hearing that  he
          did not wish to  rely  upon  the  UT's  first  observation,  when
          granting  permission  to  appeal.   He  correctly  accepted  that
          following KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  (24  October  2018)
          exception 1 in section 117C of the 2002  Act  left  no  room  for
          further balancing and is self-contained - see [21]  and  [22]  of
          the judgment in KO.


       8. Mr Diwnycz agreed with me that this left  one  ground  of  appeal
          relevant to the third criterion in section 117C(4)  of  the  2002
          Act, i.e. sub-section (c), it being accepted  that  (a)  and  (b)
          were met.  Mr Diwnycz submitted that the FTT was not entitled  to
          make the factual findings it did,  in  support  of  its  ultimate
          conclusion that Mr Robinson would face very significant obstacles
          to integration in Serbia.

       9. I invited Mr Diwnycz to explain in what way the  factual  finding
          that Mr Robinson would find it difficult to 'pick up' Serbian was
          erroneous in law.  He accepted that he was unable to  do  so  and
          accepted that the FTT was entitled to make this finding of fact.

      10. Mr Diwnycz made a brief passing reference to SSHD v Garzon [2018]
          EWCA Civ 1225, but accepted when pressed that  this  case  is  of
          very limited assistance here.  The case dealt with the concept of
          'very compelling circumstances' in section  117C(6)  and  in  any
          event the factual matrix was very different.

      11. Having heard from  the  SSHD,  I  did  not  need  to  trouble  Mr
          Robinson, and indicated that there was no error of law in the FTT
          decision.  I now give my written reasons for this.

Discussion

Findings of fact

      12. The FTT heard  oral  evidence  from  Mr  Robinson  and  two  close
          friends.  The FTT clearly considered detailed evidence  explaining
          Mr Robinson's troubled history as a child.  Contrary to  the  UT's
          observation when granting permission to appeal, the FTT noted  the
          date of the care order.  Mr Robinson was made  the  subject  of  a
          care order in 1977 when he had just turned 8 [3] and  he  remained
          living apart from his family until he was 16 [27].  Even  when  he
          returned to his family, he lived with  his  father  and  then  his
          mother briefly, as  his  father  threw  him  out  and  his  mother
          returned to Serbia [27].  The FTT was therefore  well  aware  that
          he must have spoken  some  Serbian  when  he  was  young  but  was
          entitled to accept the  evidence  that  his  knowledge  was  "very
          limited" at [51] given his extended period of time in  care.   The
          FTT was also entitled to reject  the  SSHD's  submission  that  he
          would find it very difficult to  "pick  it  up"  for  the  reasons
          provided:  he  had  a  difficult  upbringing  which  affected  his
          educational achievements.


      13. I do not accept that the FTT 'assumed' that Mr Robinson would  not
          be able to pick up Serbian to the extent required in normal  life.
           The FTT clearly considered with care  the  evidence  advanced  by
          the  appellant  to  explain   why   he   would   have   particular
          difficulties in the use of the language  of  Serbia  and  has  not
          erred in law in accepting that evidence.

High threshold

      14. The FTT directed itself to the high threshold  required  at  [45],
          [53] and [55].  The submission in the grounds of appeal  that  the
          FTT, did not apply the requisite threshold, merely disagrees  with
          the findings of fact reached.  The FTT was entitled to  find  that
          the high threshold of very significant  obstacles  to  integration
          was  met  given  the  following  accepted  findings  of  fact:  Mr
          Robinson will be 50 in 2019 but spent almost the entirety  of  his
          life in the  UK,  having  arrived  as  a  toddler  in  1971;   the
          majority of  his  childhood  was  spent  in  care  and  he  had  a
          difficult upbringing which affected his educational  achievements;
          he has no close family or friends in  Serbia  but  has  his  step-
          mother and entire friendship network in the UK, who  he  is  close
          to; he knows little about Serbia apart from  six  visits  when  he
          was younger but he has not returned for 27 years; he is unable  to
          read or write Serbian and will not be able to pick  it  up.   This
          difficulty in communication will  be  a  barrier  to  finding  and
          sustaining employment, and he will be entirely unable  to  support
          himself in  Serbia.   The  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
          obstacles to integration for Mr  Robinson  are  very  significant,
          when these matters are viewed cumulatively.  This is  not  a  case
          of mere 'culture shock'.  Rather, the FTT has  identified  why  in
          this particular case  there  would  be  obstacles  that  meet  the
          threshold of "very significant".  The FTT  was  entitled  to  take
          into account Mr Robinson's very lengthy residence from  a  toddler
          in the UK and the communication difficulties he  would  have  with
          the Serbian language.

Decision

      15. The FTT decision does not contain a material error of  law  and  I
          do not set it aside.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
8 November 2018
