
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07707/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2021                        |On 19 March 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                SAMSUN NESSA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  She appealed to a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of  3
    April 2019 refusing her application for entry  clearance  to  join  her
    British citizen husband in the United Kingdom.

2.   The couple married in 1969 and have six children, five of whom live  in
    Bangladesh and the sixth who has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    2000.  The appellant's husband, the sponsor, came to the United Kingdom
    in 1989.  He did not return to Bangladesh until 2014 when he stayed for
    three months and subsequently visited Bangladesh in 2015 for two months
    and in 2018 for a month.  His evidence was that  he  was  not  able  to
    travel to Bangladesh before 2014 as he did not have the relevant  leave
    and thus would have been refused entry  on  return.   Photographs  were
    provided showing the appellant and the  sponsor  attending  a  registry
    office in 2018 to obtain a marriage  certificate  which  they  had  not
    obtained at the date of their marriage in 1969 because  they  were  not
    issued at the time.

3.   There was an issue as to whether or not  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    had been able to interview the sponsor.  In his oral evidence  he  said
    that he had received  and  answered  two  phone  calls,  on  the  first
    occasion he confirmed his name and indicated  that  he  did  not  speak
    English, and on the second occasion he was asked  if  he  had  made  an
    appeal for his wife and when he confirmed he had, the call ended.

4.   In the refusal letter it was stated that despite  several  attempts  to
    contact the sponsor no interview with him  was  concluded.   The  Entry
    Clearance Manager provided records showing that attempts were  made  to
    contact the sponsor on 2 and 3 April 2019 and the interview arrangement
    team tried on numerous occasions but there was no reply.  The judge did
    not find the sponsor's evidence in relation  to  this  to  be  credible
    commenting that if he had spoken to the ECO she saw no  reason  at  all
    why there would have been an error made in the witness statement.

5.   In his evidence the  sponsor  also  said  that  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom he had maintained contact with his wife via the telephone using
    cash prior to phone cards being available and he used to call her  from
    his sister's phone but he now had a mobile phone.

6.   The judge had concerns about the evidence as set out in  particular  at
    paragraph 15 of her decision.  She found it surprising that  there  was
    only the sponsor's evidence to support his wife's appeal and a complete
    lack of supporting evidence from the  UK  based  family  members.   The
    sponsor was asked why his son who was based in the United  Kingdom  had
    not given a witness statement or evidence.  The son  had  attended  the
    hearing and the sponsor said he attended the  solicitors'  office  with
    him, but the judge considered it to be somewhat unusual that he had not
    provided any evidence in support of his  mother's  appeal  and  clearly
    would be in a position to add valuable  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    nature of his parents' relationship, since that had been doubted.

7.   In addition, the sponsor's sister lived in the United Kingdom  and  the
    judge considered she could have confirmed the relationship as well.  As
    regards the absence of evidence to confirm family  life  prior  to  the
    sponsor's arrival in the United Kingdom, the sponsor was  asked  as  to
    why, for example, there were not photographs showing his family life in
    Bangladesh prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom.  He said that it
    was a long time ago and the judge accepted that this was not  a  matter
    that had been raised by the ECO in the decision letter but she did  not
    see any explanation or reason to ignore why the UK based family members
    had chosen not to support the appeal.

8.   The judge was also concerned at the lack of knowledge of the  appellant
    of her husband's life in the United Kingdom.  She  knew  nothing  about
    his work or where he  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  judge
    considered that was not consistent  with  a  subsisting  marriage.   It
    seemed to her incredible that the appellant would not enquire as to the
    work the sponsor did.  She was able to say what he had done by  way  of
    work when in Bangladesh.  The judge had expected that his  job  in  the
    United Kingdom as a chef was one that she would  have  expected  to  be
    within the appellant's knowledge.  She did not  accept  that  this  was
    down to cultural difference and a lack  of  education.   She  concluded
    that  if  they  talked  as   frequently   as   was   claimed   it   was
    incomprehensible that the appellant would be unaware of  her  husband's
    circumstances.

9.   In addition, the appellant had  said  that  the  sponsor  lived  alone,
    which contradicted the sponsor's evidence that he lived  with  his  son
    when not working.   The  judge  did  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant would be unaware of this.

10.  The judge also identified discrepancies between  the  evidence  of  the
    couple.  In her interview the appellant said that the  sponsor  visited
    Bangladesh in 2016 and 2018 and not 2014, 2016 and  2018.   She  claims
    that they communicated by telephone and letters,  whereas  the  sponsor
    said that he never wrote to his wife because  she  could  barely  read.
    When he was asked about what she had said at interview and her claim to
    have received letters he said in his evidence:  "if  by  chance  I  did
    write a letter I don't remember but my wife does not  really  read  and
    write, she's quite old".  In addition, the appellant said at  interview
    that they spoke on the telephone daily, whereas the sponsor  said  they
    spoke sometimes today, sometimes tomorrow, then sometimes five days  or
    after a week and it could be once a week or four times  a  week.   When
    his wife's account was put to him he said that to her  daily  would  be
    like every two days.  He referred to her age and implied that  she  got
    confused and was uneducated and the judge found this to  be  a  further
    attempt to address a clear inconsistency.

11.  The judge went on to consider relevant  guidance  in  GA  [2006]  UKAIT
    00046 in assessing the issue of whether the  relationship  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  It was  noted  that  the  word  "subsisting"  was  not
    limited to considering whether there had been a  valid  marriage  which
    formally  continued  but  required  an  assessment   of   the   current
    relationship between the parties and a decision as to  whether  in  the
    broadest sense it comprised a marriage that can properly  be  described
    as subsisting.

12.  The judge also considered Goudey [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC), where it  was
    held that it was not necessary to produce particular evidence of mutual
    devotion before entry clearance  could  be  granted,  and  evidence  of
    telephone cards was capable of being corroborative of the contention of
    the parties that they communicated by telephone even if such data could
    not confirm the particular  number  the  sponsor  was  calling  in  the
    country in question.  It was not a requirement that  the  parties  also
    wrote or texted each other.  Also, it was said there that  where  there
    were  no  countervailing  features  generating  suspicion  as  to   the
    intentions of  the  parties,  such  evidence  might  be  sufficient  to
    discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  the  claimant.   The  judge  also
    considered guidance in Naz [2012] UKUT 00040 (IAC) where  it  was  held
    that it was for a claimant to establish that the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met or that an immigration decision would be  an
    interference with established family life.

13.  The judge went on to say that having considered  all  of  the  evidence
    provided including the errors made in interview she did not  find  that
    given the length of marriage and separation and in the context of  this
    case the couple's marriage was anything other than a formality.  Having
    found that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules she went on  to  consider  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant and in light of her finding in  respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules the length of time the couple have spent apart, the fact that the
    sponsor of course could return to Bangladesh to resume the family  life
    they had shared over 30 years ago,   there were no features which could
    amount to the decision being disproportionate and that as a consequence
    the claim failed outside the Rules, bearing in mind also  the  guidance
    in respect of proportionality in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

14.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had not taken proper account of the evidence such as the
    telephone cards, the genuineness of the  reason  why  the  sponsor  was
    unable to visit the United Kingdom  before  2014,  the  length  of  the
    marriage and the evidence of  ongoing  communication  on  the  evidence
    given by the sponsor.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

15.  In his submissions, which also relied on  the  skeleton  argument  that
    had been put in, Mr Timson argued that the judge had not disputed  that
    the couple had six children  and  that  the  sponsor  had  returned  to
    Bangladesh when he was able to do so.  It was not suggested that he had
    visited anyone other than his wife.  Money had been sent and  no  issue
    it seemed was taken regarding the fact  that  the  wife  lived  in  the
    family home.  Essentially, where there was no issue about the  marriage
    and the existence of the six children and the fact that the sponsor had
    returned to Bangladesh as soon as he could and sent money, there was  a
    lot of evidence of telephone calls, the case was one that  should  have
    been allowed.  The judge had given insufficient credit to the appellant
    in respect of the evidence.  The appeal had been dismissed because of a
    few inconsistencies but all the positives seemed not to have been given
    much weight.  It would be an odd situation if  the  marriage  were  not
    subsisting and yet the husband had come back three times and it  should
    be questioned  why  he  would  not  do  if  the  relationship  was  not
    subsisting.  The most concerning thing was the point  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 19 where the judge said that she could not find that  in  the
    context of this case the couple's marriage was anything  other  than  a
    formality.  It seemed clear that the judge was suggesting that  due  to
    the fact they had  been  married  and  the  length  of  separation  the
    appellant raised the children with the sponsor's financial  support  it
    would only be the additional point concerning the overwhelming evidence
    that the marriage was subsisting.  The sponsor was now in his 70s.   As
    regards the minor discrepancies as to whether he was contacted  by  the
    ECO or not, he had not been interviewed and that was  the  main  point.
    The relationship was a lengthy one.  He had  continued  to  send  money
    when the children were no longer of school age and that was relevant as
    they were now adults.  There were  other  relatives  and  the  son  had
    attended the hearing with his father and it could not be  adverse  that
    other family members were not there.  They would be able to  attend  if
    there was a rehearing.

16.  Ms Isherwood argued that  on  the  last  point  Mr  Timson  was  giving
    evidence.  The burden of proof was on the appellant and she  could  ask
    for witnesses to attend if she wanted them to do so.  It could  not  be
    said that the five children in Bangladesh were not supported  by  their
    father as the evidence had not been provided on that.

17.  The issue was as set out at paragraph 11 by the judge, that of  whether
    or not the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting.   It  was  not  a
    question of whether  the  couple  were  married  or  whether  they  had
    children but it was the subsistence of the relationship.  The judge had
    set out the contradictions in the evidence.  The judge  had  noted  the
    frequency of the contact and there  was  a  contrast  in  the  couple's
    evidence.  Even if the appellant did not know about  the  circumstances
    in the United Kingdom, that was what the judge was considering.   There
    was a lack of photographs about earlier family life and the  judge  was
    entitled to look at the evidence as a  whole.   There  was  a  lack  of
    evidence from family members.  The judge had noted the case  law.   She
    had not ignored any evidence.  The findings were open to  her  and  she
    had identified the problems she had with the  evidence  and  it  was  a
    question of whether the test was met in the circumstances.  The  appeal
    should be dismissed.

18.  By way of reply Mr Timson argued that it was not  a  matter  of  giving
    evidence about money sent when the children were adults.  The judge had
    not disputed that evidence of  money  sent  from  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant and that it continued after the children  became  adults  and
    this was relevant to the genuineness of the relationship.   As  regards
    knowledge the judge seemed to hold against the couple because  of  just
    two  or  three  points.   As  regards  awareness   of   the   sponsor's
    circumstances the judge did not believe the appellant would not know if
    the test were to be met but it was the Goudey problem and little  could
    be known about jobs  in  such  circumstances.   People's  relationships
    differed and  it  was  hard  to  understand  perhaps  but  nevertheless
    genuine.  There was no overwhelming adverse evidence.  Paragraph 19 was
    the essential problem of the decision.  The appeal should be allowed.

19.  I reserved my decision.

20.  The key point, as identified by Ms Isherwood  in  her  submissions,  is
    the question of whether the relationship is genuine and subsisting  and
    whether the judge was entitled as a matter of law to find that  it  was
    not.  It is not a question whether the couple are married or the number
    of children that they  have  but  whether  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    sufficient to support her conclusion that the requirements of the Rules
    were not met and that the appeal could not succeed outside the Rules.

21.  The judge set out  her  concerns  in  some  detail,  in  particular  at
    paragraph 15, where she found to  be  of  particular  significance  the
    absence of supporting evidence which could have been provided  and  the
    ignorance of the appellant about her  husband's  circumstances  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I do not think weight of  any  significance  could  be
    attached to the issue about the interview, and I do not  consider  that
    the judge attached more than minimal weight to that.  She was  entitled
    to note the inconsistencies at paragraph 17 of her decision and went on
    thereafter as I have noted above to set out the  relevant  guidance  in
    authorities such as GA and  Goudey.   It  is  clear,  as  she  said  at
    paragraph 19 of her decision, that  she  considered  all  the  evidence
    provided in coming to her conclusion that the requirements of the Rules
    were not met.  The discrepancies and inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
    were not matters which the judge could be expected to ignore, and in my
    view she gave proper weight to them.  She  was  clearly  aware  of  the
    existence of the telephone cards and equally was entitled  to  conclude
    as she did that if the couple talked as frequently as  claimed  it  was
    incomprehensible that the appellant would be unaware of  her  husband's
    circumstances.

22.  The points made by Mr Timson are in the end, in  my  view,  matters  of
    disagreement only.  It has not been shown that the  judge  erred  as  a
    matter of law in her evaluation of the evidence or her  application  to
    the law of her proper  findings  in  respect  of  that  evidence.   The
    challenge  is  one  of  disagreement  only,  and  the  judge  came   to
    conclusions that were open  to  her  on  her  proper  findings  of  the
    evidence before her.  Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date     17 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

