
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
hu/07011/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 September 2017                      |On 4 October 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MS FRESHA RAJESHBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Ms Patel):  Mr A Swain, Counsel, instructed by Eagles
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey whereby she allowed the appeal of  Ms
    Patel against the Secretary of State's decision refusing  to  grant  Ms
    Patel further leave to remain under Article 8.  For ease of reference I
    shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary of State, who was
    the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to  Ms  Patel,
    who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of India who was born on 12  February  1991.
    She arrived in this country on 20 April 2008 with a student visa  valid
    until 30 June 2009.  Her leave was extended until 13 November 2010  and
    then again until 20 October 2013.  Soon after arriving in this  country
    she met her partner, Mr Sariaya, who had three children, twins now aged
    13 and a son, now aged 9.  The twins are a boy and a girl, and the  boy
    suffers from a disability.

 3. I will refer to Judge Pacey's findings below. Amongst  them  she  found
    that the claimant was the "de  facto  mother"  of  these  children  and
    because of her childcare  responsibilities,  she  did  not  attend  her
    college as she needed to in accordance with  the  leave  she  had  been
    granted.  For this reason, her leave, which as  noted  above  had  been
    further extended until 20 October 2013, was  curtailed  on  3  February
    2012.

 4. The claimant then, on 5 September 2012, applied for leave to remain  as
    the unmarried partner of Mr Sariaya,  and  she  was  granted  leave  to
    remain (on the ten year route) until 17  January  2016.   In  order  to
    satisfy the requirements of this application the claimant submitted  an
    English language test certificate which purported to show that she  had
    passed the necessary test in oral and written  English  required  under
    the Rules.  It is in respect  of  this  test  that  her  problems  have
    subsequently been occasioned.

 5. Prior to the expiry of her leave,  on  14  January  2016  the  claimant
    applied for further leave to remain in the UK as  the  partner  of  the
    sponsor, who has indefinite leave to remain; his children  are  British
    citizens.  This application was refused because the Secretary of  State
    believed that the English language  test  certificate  which  had  been
    submitted within  the  application  made  in  2012  had  been  obtained
    fraudulently, by use of a proxy.

 6. The claimant appealed against this decision and her  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pacey,  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham on 31 March 2017.  As already noted above, in a decision and
    reasons promulgated on 11 April 2017, Judge Pacey allowed the appeal.

 7. The Secretary of State now  appeals  against  Judge  Pacey's  decision,
    leave having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman on  20
    July 2017.

 8. The application had been refused on  suitability  grounds,  as  already
    referred to above, because the Secretary of  State  believed  that  the
    English language oral test had been taken by a proxy, and  not  by  the
    claimant herself.  The  Secretary  of  State  relied  essentially  upon
    generic evidence which is very common indeed in  these  cases  and  has
    been the subject of considerable jurisprudence.  Judge Pacey's decision
    was made following consideration of some of the authorities and some of
    this evidence.  It is not entirely clear from the decision  whether  or
    not she considered that the claimant had established that she  had  not
    used fraud in obtaining the certificate or whether  she  believed  that
    the Secretary of State had not established that she had,  but  whatever
    test she applied she found in  the  claimant's  favour.   She  did  not
    consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  properly  rely   upon
    suitability grounds to refuse the application.

 9. The central issue before Judge Pacey was whether or  not  the  claimant
    had taken the test herself.  Judge Pacey  had  regard  to  one  of  the
    earlier cases in which this issue had been considered by this  Tribunal
    which is SM & Qadir v SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden  of  proof)  [2016]
    UKUT 229, in which a Presidential Tribunal had considered (as  was  the
    state of evidence at that time) that the  generic  evidence  which  was
    being adduced by the Secretary of State in very many of these cases was
    sufficient to satisfy the burden of proof which was  initially  on  the
    Secretary of State to show that fraud had been used.  What was  decided
    in SM & Qadir was that the burden then passed to an  applicant  to  put
    forward an explanation as to why he or she  should  still  be  believed
    when he or she contested that position.  If  he  or  she  did  so,  the
    burden would then shift back to the Secretary of State who  would  have
    the burden of proving her case.

10. In this particular case Judge Pacey stated as follows, with  regard  to
    the effect of SM & Qadir:

         "21. I remind myself of SM & Qadir... in which it was held that the
             Secretary of State was required to  discharge  the  evidential
             burden of proving that a TOEIC certificate had  been  procured
             by dishonesty and the legal burden.

         22.  In this case she has not done so...".

11. Judge Pacey then went on to state that she had accepted the claimant as
    credible and made some other observations with regard to  the  evidence
    adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State as follows:

         "The Home Office Presenting Officer provided a generic printout  of
         result from Portsmouth International College for the relevant  date
         but I note that no address for the college was  given  nor  is  the
         origin of the printout clear.  In relation to this appellant  there
         is a very brief printout showing  her  name  and  correct  date  of
         birth.  However, there is  nothing  detailed  to  explain  why  the
         decision had been reached that the test was invalid (merely, in the
         refusal, a brief reference to a recording which would  not  in  any
         event be relevant to the wring  element).   There  is  no  specific
         report on the recording and no explanation of why  the  result  was
         printed twice."

12. Judge Pacey then went on to consider the children  in  the  context  of
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,  to
    which I will refer below.

13. In his submissions  to  this  Tribunal,  on  behalf  of  the  claimant,
    although he submits that looked at in the round the judge did apply the
    test in SM & Qadir properly, he did  accept  that  it  was  perhaps  an
    "inelegant summary of SM & Qadir"; he also accepted  that  there  could
    perhaps have been a "greater elaboration of the boomerang test" which a
    judge is required to consider, although he did nonetheless submit  that
    the judge had analysed the credibility  of  the  claimant  against  the
    Secretary of State's evidence.

14. In my  judgment,  the  judge  does  not  in  this  decision  appear  to
    understand the strength of the Secretary of State's case.  At  a  later
    stage at paragraph 19 she engages in speculation as to where  the  test
    had been  taken,  and  concludes  that  the  "Portsmouth  International
    College" where the Secretary of State claims the test  was  taken,  was
    almost certainly in Portsmouth, because "unlike, as I say, Cambridge or
    Oxford" it is "in my view highly unlikely that a college would chose  a
    geographical name that did not relate to its actual physical location".
     The claimant in her evidence gave an account of how she had taken  the
    test in Canary Wharf.

15. There is, however, absolutely no reference to the  printout  which  was
    supplied on behalf of the Secretary of State, which  demonstrated  that
    there  had  been  a  number  of  results  submitted   from   Portsmouth
    International College which were found (within the generic evidence) to
    have been fraudulent, and that the number  which  is  on  the  official
    score report, which is 0044201359030031, is in the middle  of  all  the
    other numbers of the reports for other persons purportedly having taken
    the test at that centre.  Also, when she says at paragraph 22 "there is
    nothing detailed to explain why the decision had been reached that  the
    test was invalid (merely, in  the  refusal,  a  brief  reference  to  a
    recording which would not in any  event  be  relevant  to  the  writing
    element" it does not appear  that  she  appreciates  what  the  generic
    evidence establishes, which is that in a very  large  number  of  cases
    indeed, the test was taken by a proxy.  By describing the  evidence  as
    "a brief reference to a recording" the judge  does  not  appear  to  be
    appreciating the strength of this evidence, which in most  cases  would
    establish (and certainly satisfies at the very least the initial burden
    of proof on the Secretary of State for this effect) that the  test  was
    taken by a proxy.  Also, if the test was indeed taken by a  proxy,  the
    statement that this "would not in any event be relevant to the  writing
    element" is incorrect, because the whole process would be  invalidated.
    If a proxy had been used, the Secretary of  State  would  not  need  to
    establish also that the writing test was also taken by the same  proxy,
    but the fact that the oral test had been could certainly not be said to
    be irrelevant for this purpose.

16. The judge also appears not to have  considered  the  relevance  of  the
    evidence supplied by Professor French, which was before her,  and  from
    which it is apparent that the Secretary of State's case in reliance  on
    the generic evidence is considerably stronger than it had  appeared  to
    be at the time the Presidential Tribunal was making its decision in  SM
    & Qadir.  The position now can properly be said to be as follows.   The
    very great likelihood is that the bulk of the  decisions  made  by  the
    Secretary of State were correct, but it cannot be ruled out that  there
    are some, albeit not many, decisions in which a  "false  positive"  was
    shown.

17. Had the judge demonstrated in her  decision  that  she  understood  the
    strength of the Secretary of State's case, it might be that  she  could
    then have considered the claimant's evidence against that case, but her
    starting point as shown from paragraph 21 and 22 was that the Secretary
    of State's case was so weak that, notwithstanding what had  been  found
    in SM & Qadir, that the generic evidence at least satisfied the initial
    burden of proof which the Secretary of State was required  to  satisfy,
    the Secretary of State had not satisfied even this burden.

18. For this reason, the Judge's decision  either  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not established that a proxy had been used  or  alternatively
    that the claimant had established that a proxy had not  been  used,  is
    not sustainable.  This is a material error,  because  it  was  on  this
    basis that the decision was made.  It follows that  the  decision  will
    have to be remade, but for the reasons which follow I am able to remake
    this decision myself, on the basis of the  other  findings  which  were
    made by the judge with regard to Article 8.  Although there will be  no
    finding as to whether or not the Secretary of  State  was  entitled  to
    make the findings she did with regard  to  suitability,  Mr  Swain,  on
    instructions, informed the Tribunal that the  claimant  was  happy  for
    this decision to be remade without any finding being made  with  regard
    to the ETS test.

19. The judge considered the position of the  children,  all  of  whom  are
    British in the context of Section 55 of the  2009  Act,  and  made  the
    following findings:

         "The appellant has been acting as a  de  facto  stepmother  of  her
         partner's 3 children since 2008/9.  They are now  aged  12  (twins)
         [they are now 9, and I have to consider the Article 8  position  as
         of today] and 8 [now 9].  Social services were  involved  with  her
         partner's children and were aware of the appellant's role in  their
         lives.  In my view although social services might be able to assist
         her partner with the care of her children if she returned to  India
         this is mere speculation and given the extremely  tight  budget  on
         which all public services operate  it  is  in  the  highest  degree
         unlikely that they would be able  to  provide  the  level  of  care
         currently provided by the appellant, who acts as a  mother  to  the
         children who call her 'Mum' and for whom clearly she  is  de  facto
         their mother."

20. At paragraph 25 Judge  Pacey  noted  (and  accepted  as  accurate)  the
    "detailed oral evidence as to the care [the claimant] gave her de facto
    stepchildren" concluding that "it would in my view not be in  the  best
    interests for these children to lose their de facto mother if she  were
    obliged to return to India even temporarily to apply for a visa to come
    back to the UK".

21. In my judgment the judge's findings as to the relationship between  the
    children and the claimant are unimpeachable.  On  the  basis  of  these
    findings, I can do no other but find that the claimant "has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with these children.

22. With this in mind, I am obliged when considering whether  or  not  this
    appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds, to have  regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, which was inserted by Section 19 Immigration Act 2014.   This
    was part of the  new  Part  VA  which  sets  out  the  public  interest
    considerations which the Tribunal is required to apply when considering
    an appeal brought under Article 8.   The  relevant  parts  of  Part  VA
    provide as follows:

         "PART VA

         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS:

         117A Application of this part

         (1)  This part applies when a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             ...

        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                  cases

        ...
         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                  the United Kingdom. ...


         117D Interpretation of this Part


         (1)  In this part -


              "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on
             Human Rights;


              "Qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
             and who -


             (a)  is a British citizen...".


23.  The children are all British citizens and  are  accordingly  qualifying
    children and, as  I  have  already  found,  in  light  of  the  judge's
    sustainable findings,  the  claimant  has  "a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with these children.

24.  I therefore have to consider whether or not it would be  reasonable  to
    expect these children to leave the United Kingdom, and if  it  is  not,
    then by virtue of Section 117B(6) the public interest will not  require
    the removal of the claimant, and  in  those  circumstances,  given  the
    strength of her family life in this country with  these  children,  her
    removal cannot be seen to be proportionate.

25.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Kotas  made  two  submissions.
    The first was that Section 117B(6) would only apply where there  was  a
    prospect of the children leaving the UK.  As this would not  happen  in
    this case, this section did not apply.  Mr Kotas accepted that  he  had
    (unsuccessfully) made this submission to another Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    before, and in my submission it is unarguable.  It is not  said  within
    117B(6) that the public interest does not require  a  person's  removal
    where children are likely to  leave  the  UK  but  this  would  not  be
    reasonable; what it provides is that if it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect a child to leave the UK,  then  the  public  interest  does  not
    require that the child who will stay will be deprived of one of his  or
    her parents.

26.   Mr  Kotas's  next  submission  was  that  when  considering  what  was
    "reasonable" a Tribunal had to have regard  to  all  the  facts,  which
    would include the very great public interest in deterring  people  from
    relying on certificates fraudulently obtained.

27.  While it may in certain circumstances be reasonable to expect  a  child
    to accompany both parents to another country (see MA (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705), this is clearly in my judgment not the case  here.   The
    children are all British, are all settled in this country  and  one  of
    the twins has a disability.  The father is settled,  having  indefinite
    leave to remain.  As Mr Kotas has accepted, there  is  no  prospect  of
    these children leaving the United Kingdom, and in my judgment  that  is
    because on the facts of this case it clearly is wholly unreasonable  to
    expect them to do so.

28.  It is perhaps surprising that when this appeal was argued before  Judge
    Pacey, no reference was made to  the  effect  of  Section  117B(6)  and
    certainly, Judge Pacey has not referred to  this  anywhere  within  her
    decision.  However, I am entirely satisfied that even  if  the  English
    language test certificate had been obtained fraudulently (about which I
    make no finding) by virtue  of  Section  117B(6)  there  is  no  public
    interest in removing the claimant.  It follows  that  when  considering
    whether her removal would be proportionate, given the strength  of  her
    family ties in this country, there can only be  one  answer,  which  is
    that it would not.

29.  It follows that when remaking the decision, I must again allow  it,  on
    human rights grounds, Article 8 and I will so find.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey,  as  containing
a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is allowed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Craig                                      Date:  29
    September 2017

