








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07156/2018

                                                             & HU/07159/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 1st April 2019                     |On 09th May 2019                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                   GB & MB

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mair of counsel instruct by TM Fortis Solicitors


For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are mother, GB, and daughter, MB a minor, and  both  are
    citizens of the Ukraine.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. As the proceedings concern and impact upon  the  rights  and
    status of a child I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3.  This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on the 9th  January  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  decisions  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellants leave to remain in the UK based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey. Thus the case appeared  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the  decision.  The
    material part of the leave provides as follows: -

         "2.      The grounds allege that the judge erred in his  assessment
         of insurmountable obstacles, proportionality  and  failed  to  make
         material findings on the 2nd appellant's best interests.

         3. It appeared that the  judge  in  assessing  both  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life with the first appellant's British husband
         continuing  in  the  Ukraine  and  the   proportionality   of   the
         respondent's interference, made material errors of fact  (regarding
         the First Appellant's immigration status and the couple's knowledge
         at the outset of  their  relationship),  failed  to  have  adequate
         regard  to  the  appellants'  circumstances   or   the   prevailing
         circumstances in the Crimea (from where  the  appellants  had  been
         living). It was arguable that the judge's assessment of both  these
         components  of  article  8  were  in  error.  In  addition,  whilst
         acknowledging the primacy of the seconds appellant's best interest,
         it was far from clear what conclusions the judge reached as to what
         those best interests  were  or  how  they  were  weighed  into  the
         subsequent  proportionality  assessment.  This  too  disclosed   an
         arguable error of law."

    Factual background

 5. Whilst the appellants are Ukrainian nationals, they were both  born  in
    Georgia. When MB was  7  months  old,  the  appellants  relocated  from
    Georgia to the Crimea, then part of Ukraine. At that stage contact  was
    lost with the father of MB and there has been  no  contact  since  that
    time.

 6. The appellants lived in the Crimea in Ukraine until 11 March 2014, that
    is prior to its annexation by Russia. During the time that they were in
    the Ukraine, they obtained Ukrainian  citizenship.  The  population  of
    Crimea, it is claimed, is predominantly Russian  speaking,  unlike  the
    rest of the Ukraine, and the appellants speak Russian not Ukrainian.

 7. In October 2013 the appellants came to the United  Kingdom  on  holiday
    for 2 weeks. At the end of the holiday they returned  to  the  Ukraine,
    specifically Crimea, without any problem.

 8. On 11 March 2014 the appellants returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    claimed asylum on arrival. Their claims to asylum were however  refused
    and were certified as clearly unfounded such that there was no right of
    appeal against the decision. The refusal letter was dated  27  February
    2015. The appellants did not leave the  UK  but  remained  in  the  UK.
    Whilst they were in the United Kingdom, Russia annexed the  Crimea  and
    is still in physical and political control of the area.

 9. On the 23rd January 2015 GB met JRB, a British  citizen.  According  to
    the evidence their first meeting was only 1 month  before  the  refusal
    and certification of their asylum claim. Prior to that date GB and  JRB
    had been in contact on  the  Internet.  The  relationship  between  the
    couple developed after January  2015  and  ultimately  they  wished  to
    marry.

10. JRB is a British citizen. He has employment  as  a  telecoms  engineer,
    which he has maintained over a significant number of years. He  appears
    to have his own property. His parents live nearby. His parents  are  to
    an extent dependent upon him for help and support.  He  indicated  that
    the system used in Ukraine for  telecoms  is  different  and  he  would
    require retraining and re-education including language education, if he
    were required to relocate Ukraine.

11. In order to get married GB required her passport. The passport had been
    lodged with the respondent at the time of her making her asylum  claim.
    GB therefore requested her passport from the  Home  Office,  which  was
    provided on 30 December 2016. The couple then booked a  civil  marriage
    ceremony to be conducted at Manchester Town Hall. GB and JRB married on
    23 April 2017. After the  marriage  on  the  19th  May  2017  both  the
    appellants moved to live with JRB at a property that he was occupying.

12. The second appellant had been attending school since coming to  the  UK
    in March 2014 and continued to attend  at  the  same  school.  The  2nd
    appellant has now started studying for A-levels in the United Kingdom.

13. Both the appellants speak English fluently.

14. On 10 August 2017 the appellants applied for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of GB being married to JRB, that is  family
    life both under the immigration rules and on the basis of article 8  of
    the  ECHR.  GB's  application  was  made  on  the  basis  of  a  spouse
    application and MB's application as the dependent child of her  mother.
    The second appellant could not apply as a child of the stepfather  JRB,
    see definition of a parent in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules.

15. Judge Alis noted in paragraph 10 of the decision that:-

         "10      Having considered the decision letters it is apparent that
         the  first  named  appellant  satisfied  all  the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM  except  for  the  fact  that  she  did  not  meet  the
         eligibility immigration status requirements, set out in  paragraphs
         E-LTRP 2.1 to 2.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  because
         she did not have valid leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and
         had been on immigration bail since January 26, 2017."

16. Accordingly the only  factor  militating  against  granting  the  first
    appellant's application under  the  Immigration  Rules  was  the  first
    appellant's immigration status. All of the other  requirements  of  the
    rules were met including  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship,  the
    validity of the marriage, the subsisting nature of  the  marriage,  the
    availability of accommodation, satisfying the financial requirements of
    the rules, the fact that the partner was a British citizen and was also
    present and settled in the United Kingdom, the fact that the  appellant
    could speak English and the fact that  the  parties  intended  to  live
    together permanently.

17. At the time the application was made for leave, the appellants did  not
    have valid  leave  and  certainly  the  first  appellant  had  been  on
    Immigration  Bail  since  the  26th  January  2017.  It  was  only  the
    immigration status of the first  appellant  which  prevented  her  from
    meeting the requirements of the rules.

18. As is evident from paragraph 11 of the decision the 2nd  appellant  was
    to be refused in line with her mother and it  is  suggested  could  not
    otherwise meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. In  a  sense  the
    2nd appellant is a minor and the fact that she has had to remain in the
    United Kingdom should not be held against her.

19. As part of the proceedings before Judge Alis it was conceded  that  the
    appellants and JRB,  the  current  spouse  and  sponsor  of  the  first
    appellant, could not live in the Crimea because the recommendation from
    the Foreign & Commonwealth Office was not to travel to the Crimea since
    the annexation of the area by Russia. The evidence also identified that
    other areas of the Ukraine had been placed under  martial  law  by  the
    Ukrainian government, that is  primarily  the  areas  adjacent  to  the
    Crimea and the east of the country.

20. In considering the appeal Judge Alis also considered  whether,  if  the
    first appellant were returned to Ukraine,  any  application  for  entry
    clearance would be refused and if it were  to  be  refused  whether  it
    would be refused under paragraph 320 (11). Whilst it is clear that  the
    first appellant had overstayed the issue was whether or not there would
    be other aggravating circumstances as required by the rule. Judge  Alis
    considers that in paragraphs 87 to 89. Judge Alis concludes that he was
    not persuaded that there were  aggravating  circumstances  and  in  the
    light of that any application for entry clearance could not be  refused
    successfully under paragraph 320 (11). It is suggested on the  part  of
    the appellant's representative that in considering paragraph  320  (11)
    the judge was entering into speculation as to what was likely to happen
    were the appellants to be returned to the Ukraine and have to  make  an
    application for entry to the United Kingdom.

21. However it is on the basis  outlined  that  the  judge  considered  the
    appeals of the appellants and dismissed them.




    Consideration

22.  I heard submissions from both the appellant's representative and  from
    the representative of the Home Office.

23. At the outset I note the provisions  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. It is accepted that  there  is  a
    duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of a  child  who  is  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  The  welfare  of  the   child   becomes   a   primary
    consideration.

24. In dealing with the issues the judge clearly from paragraph 51  onwards
    was  concentrating   upon   whether   there   were   very   significant
    difficulties, insurmountable  obstacles  or  exceptional  circumstances
    impacting upon the rights of the first appellant and her partner,  JRB.
    In assessing whether there were insurmountable obstacles or exceptional
    circumstances consideration was given to the impact that  the  decision
    would  have  upon  the  first  appellant  and  her   partner   but   no
    consideration as an integral part of that assessment of the impact that
    the decision would have upon the child and whether that in turn  alters
    the approach to be taken to the first appellant's  application.  Indeed
    in coming to a conclusion in paragraph 59  the  judge  is  specifically
    limiting  himself  to  consideration  of  the  position  of  the  first
    appellant and the first appellant's application.

25. It is only thereafter the judge commences to  consider  the  impact  of
    removal upon the child but he does not seek to consider that impact  in
    the context of the rights of the first appellant.

26. I would draw attention to the provisions of GEN.3.2 and GEN.3.3 of  the
    rules which provides:-

         'GEN.3.2 (1) Subject to subparagraph (4), where an application  for
         entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  or  remain  made  under  this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not  otherwise  meet  the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the  decision
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in  subparagraph  (2)
         apply.

         (2) Where subparagraph (1) above applies, the decision  maker  must
         consider on the basis of the information provided by the applicant,
         whether there are  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  render
         refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter or remain a breach  of
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, because  such
         refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
         applicant, the partner, a relevant child or another  family  member
         whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that information would be
         affected by decision to refuse the application.

         (3)  Where  the  exceptional  circumstances  referred  to  in   sub
         paragraph (2) above apply, the  applicant  will  be  granted  entry
         clearance  or  leave  to  enter  or  remain  under  as  appropriate
         paragraph ... DLTRP.1.2.

         ...

         GEN.3.3(1) In considering application  for...  leave  to  ...remain
         where paragraph GEN.3.1 and GEN.3.2  applies,  the  decision  maker
         must take into  account,  as  a  primary  consideration,  the  best
         interests of any relevant child.

         (2) In paragraphs GEN.3.1 and GEN3.2 and this paragraph,  'relevant
         child' means a person who:

             a)  is  under  the  age  of  18  years  at  the  date  of  the
             application; and

             b)  it  is  evident  from  the  information  provided  by  the
             applicant  would  be  affected  by  decision  to  refuse   the
             application'

27. The provision  clearly  contemplates  that  there  may  be  exceptional
    circumstances which would render it unjustifiably harsh to  a  relevant
    child to refuse  leave  to  remain  to  a  parent.  The  2nd  appellant
    certainly appears to  fall  within  the  term  of  relevant  child.  In
    assessing  whether  or  not  there  where   exceptional   circumstances
    resulting  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  it  is  clear   from
    paragraph 51 onwards that the judge was only considering the  appellant
    and  her  partner  and  not  whether  or  not  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances or unjustifiably harsh consequences to the 2nd  appellant
    which impacted on the rights of the first appellant.

28. A conclusion is reached in paragraph 59 but it is only thereafter  that
    the judge goes on to consider interests of the child.

29. Given the provisions of the rules highlighted it was necessary to  take
    into account the position of the child in assessing the rights  of  the
    first appellant. The failure to take such into account in assessing the
    rights of the first appellant is a material error of  law.  Accordingly
    the decision contains a material error of law. That in turn will impact
    upon the rights of the 2nd appellant as her  application  is  dependent
    upon consideration of the first appellant's application.

30. Further it is suggested on the part of the  appellant's  representative
    that in considering paragraph 320 (11)  the  judge  was  entering  into
    speculation as to what was likely to happen were the appellants to make
    an application from the Ukraine to enter the United Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration Rules. It seems to me that the  judge  was  only  making  a
    conclusion that aggravating features would not be  applicable,  whether
    an application by the appellants was refused or not. Whilst it  may  be
    speculation as to what an ECO might do or what  grounds  an  ECO  might
    raise, the judge was entitled on the facts as presented  to  point  out
    that there were no aggravating features justifying  refusing  any  such
    application under paragraph 320 (11). It may  be  considered  that  the
    approach posed is consistent with the case of Chikwamba 2008 UKHL 40.

31. In effect the conclusion by Judge Alis was if the  appellants  returned
    to their home country and made application to enter  such  applications
    had every reasonable prospects of success given the circumstances.  The
    question to be posed therefore is whether or not the appellants  should
    be required to return to  the  Ukraine  and  make  an  application.  In
    argument before me reference was made to the  case  of  Chikwamba  2008
    UKHL 40. I would also draw attention to the case of  Hayat  (Nature  of
    Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 444 and  Agyarko  &  Ikuga  v
    SSHD 2017 UKSC 11.

32. I draw specific attention to paragraph 51 in Agyarko  &  Ikuga  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 where Lord Reed stated:-

         "51.     Whether the applicant is  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  or  is
         entitled to  remain  in  the  UK  only  temporarily,  however,  the
         significance of this consideration depends on what the  outcome  of
         immigration  control  might  otherwise  be.  For  example,  if   an
         applicant would otherwise be automatically deported  as  a  foreign
         criminal, then the weight of the public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal will generally be very considerable. If, on the other hand,
         an applicant -  even  if  residing  in  the  UK  unlawfully  -  was
         otherwise certain to be granted leave to  enter,  at  least  if  an
         application were made from outside the UK, then there might  be  no
         public interest in his or her removal. The point is illustrated  by
         the decision in  Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department."

33. Despite that consideration it is worthy of note that in Agyarko's case,
    an individual that had been in the United Kingdom for 9 years and in  a
    relationship with her partner for a considerable part of that time, the
    court still held that removal in the circumstances  was  justified.  In
    refusing the appeal it was material that the appellant and sponsor were
    not able  to  meet  other  requirements  of  the  rules  including  the
    financial requirements. The same position applies in respect of  Ikuga.
    In respect of both it was clear that they would otherwise not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules on other grounds. The same cannot
    be said in the present circumstances in respect of the first  appellant
    as noted by Judge Alis in paragraph 10 of the decision.

34. The same considerations do not apply in respect of present  appellants.
    It has been accepted  by  the  judge  that  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant the only issue was her immigration status and in  respect  of
    the 2nd appellant her application would it appear succeed  or  fail  in
    line with her mother.

35. In respect of Hayat the headnote makes the point:-

         "The significance of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  is  to  make
         plain that, in appeals  where  the  only  matter  weighing  on  the
         respondent's side of an Article 8 proportionality  balance  is  the
         public policy of requiring an application  to  be  made  under  the
         immigration rules abroad, that legitimate objective will usually be
         outweighed by factors  resting  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
         balance ..."

36. It has to be accepted that since the case of Chikwamba section 117B has
    be enacted, specifically subsection (4)(b) which requires  that  little
    weight should be given to  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
    partner that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully. However  the  same  cannot  be  said  of
    Agyarko, which was clearly decided after the statutory amendment.

37.  It is in that context that  consideration  has  to  be  given  to  the
    circumstances that exist in the Ukraine. It was accepted that JRB would
    not be able to travel to Crimea. But it is suggested that there  is  no
    legal bar to him travelling to other parts of the Ukraine. In  a  sense
    the difficulty is that parts of the Ukraine are subject to martial  law
    and the ability of an individual to travel to  such  areas  had  to  be
    considered carefully. Equally that would impact upon  the  position  of
    the first appellant, 2nd appellant and JRB in being able to  settle  in
    parts of Ukraine.

38. There was before the judge an independent social worker's report  which
    indicated that if the 2nd appellant had to return to the  Ukraine  this
    would put her education back  by  some  3  years.  In  looking  at  the
    provisions cited above, GEN.3.2  and  GEN3.3.,  consideration  of  such
    factors as the 2nd appellant's education as an integral aspect  of  the
    assessment was a necessary part of determining  whether  or  not  there
    were exceptional  circumstances  in  assessing  the  first  appellant's
    appeal. The judge clearly has not taken that into account.

39. Therefore for the reasons set out I find that the decision by the First-
    tier Tribunal contained a material error of law.

40. I invited the representatives to indicate  how  the  matter  should  be
    determined if I did find that the was  a  material  error  of  law.  It
    seemed to be agreed that, if there was an error of  law,  it  would  be
    necessary for the matter to be reheard and fresh findings of fact made.

41. For the reasons set out I find that there is a material  error  of  law
    and direct that the decision of the first-tier Tribunal be set aside. I
    direct that the matter is to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal

    Notice of Decision

42. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.






Signed      Date 2nd May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure







Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings




Signed      Date 2nd May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

