

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07083/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals, Liverpool     |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2018                                    |On 23 May 2018                  |
|                                                   |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 GLADYS DUBE
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Santamera, Counsel, instructed by RMB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought by the  Appellant  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shergill
      dated 29 June  2017,  allowing  the  Applicant's  appeal  against  the
      decision  of  the  Appellant  dated  23  February  2016  refusing  the
      Applicant entry clearance to enter the UK. The Applicant is a national
      Zimbabwe, and had applied  for  entry  clearance  for  a  visit  under
      paragraph 41 of the immigration rules. Her stated purpose for doing so
      was to come to the United  Kingdom  for  the  church  wedding  of  her
      daughter, the Sponsor.

2     The  Appellant  refused  entry  clearance  on  the  grounds  that  the
      Applicant had not shown that she had  sufficient  assets  or  ties  to
      Zimbabwe, and it was not accepted that the Applicant intended to leave
      the United Kingdom after the visit.

3     The Applicant appealed to the First Tier  Tribunal,  and  the  Sponsor
      gave evidence before the Judge. The Judge allowed the appeal on  human
      rights  grounds,   finding   that   the   decision   amounted   to   a
      disproportionate  and  therefore  unlawful   interference   with   the
      Applicant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

4     The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      on grounds, in summary, that family life under Article  8(1)  had  not
      been established as between the Applicant and the  Sponsor.  Reference
      was made to certain authorities, in particular Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 31, referring to the necessity for the existence of more than
      the normal emotional ties between a parent  and  an  adult  child  for
      family life to exist.

5     It was argued that those criteria were not met in  the  present  case.
      The fact that the Sponsor had been prepared to have a registry  office
      wedding in Zimbabwe in addition to her intended church wedding in  the
      United Kingdom undermined the Judge's view that the  proposed  wedding
      in the United Kingdom was a once-in-a-lifetime event.

6     It was further argued that the Judge had erred in actually failing  to
      make a finding as  to  whether  there  was  family  life  between  the
      Applicant and Sponsor.  Further, the Judge had  erred  in  failing  to
      have regard to the case of Adjei (visit visas -  Article  8)  (Rev  1)
      [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC), para 13: "A person who satisfies  the  Tribunal
      that he does meet the requirements of para  41  of  HC  395  does  not
      succeed on that account. He still  has  to  demonstrate  that  refusal
      represents an unlawful infringement of rights protected by  Article  8
      of the ECHR."

7     Further, it was argued that  the  Judge's  proportionality  assessment
      was inadequate.

8     It is to be noted that within the grounds  of  appeal,  the  Appellant
      accepts at paras 8 and 10 that the Judge had found that the  Applicant
      had met the requirements of paragraph 41 of the immigration rules.

9     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Scott Baker on 13 December 2017, on the  basis  that  the  grounds  of
      appeal were arguable.

10    Before me, Mr Bates relied upon the grounds of  appeal.  He  confirmed
      that the Appellant's position, as reflected in the grounds of  appeal,
      was  that  the  Judge  had  accepted  that  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration  rules  were  met.  Indeed,  I  observe  that  the   Judge
      considered in detail the Applicant's evidence, supported by  the  oral
      evidence of the Sponsor, that the Applicant had  significant  ties  to
      Zimbabwe, paragraphs  26  to  32.  There  is  no  challenge  to  those
      findings.

11    Mr Bates repeated the submission that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
      making no  finding  as  to  the  existence  of  family  life.  In  the
      alternative, to the extent that Judge did so  find,  Mr  Bates  argued
      that he was not entitled in law to do so, on the evidence before  him.
      Mr Bates referred to the recent judgements in Entry Clearance Officer,
      Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511, and SSHD v  Onuorah  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 1757 as to the nature of ties which must exist to  support  a
      finding of family life.

12    In response, Ms Santamera defended the  decision  of  the  Judge.  The
      Judge had made a positive finding that family  life  was  engaged,  at
      paragraphs 18 and 20 of the decision. Ms  Santamera  referred  to  the
      Judge's reference  paragraph  22  to  Abbasi  and  another  (visits  -
      bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC), in which the  Tribunal
      had held that Article 8 could be engaged in unusual circumstances;  in
      that case, it was held that the wish of adult grandchildren  to  enter
      the UK for a finite period for the purposes of  mourning  with  family
      members the recent death of a close relative, and visiting  the  grave
      of  the  deceased  was  capable  of  constituting  a  disproportionate
      interference with the rights of those persons under Article 8 ECHR. By
      analogy, the Applicant argued that her Article 8  family  life  rights
      were engaged in order to visit her daughter in the United Kingdom  for
      the specific purposes of attending the daughter's marriage. The  Judge
      had clearly directed himself in law in relation to Adjei at  paragraph
      11.

      Discussion

13    The Judge fully acknowledged that the issue in the appeal was  whether
      the case involved human rights issues that were justiciable before the
      First-tier Tribunal [12]. It is also clear that the Judge was  of  the
      view that at least in the normal course of their lives, the  Applicant
      and Sponsor did not have a family life together - see [14].

14    However,  the  Judge  noted  the  particular  purpose  for  which  the
      application for entry clearance had been made; to visit  her  daughter
      at the time of her church wedding in the UK. The Judge held as follows
      regarding that purpose:

           '16 ... I am satisfied the purpose  for  which  the  visitor  is
           proposed has a unique quality to it in terms of it being a once-
           in-a-lifetime event marking a key passage in the sponsor's life.
           It is axiomatic that it would also mark a key milestone  in  the
           appellant's life. ...

           17 My  assessment  of  all  this  evidence  indicates  that  the
           particular event  of  the  sponsor  getting  married  is  a  key
           milestone event in her life and naturally she wants her  parents
           to attend. I also accept that she wishes to get married  in  the
           United Kingdom which is where she has been living for  the  last
           16 years; and were her friends  and  other  family  members  are
           based.


           18 I am satisfied in those circumstances  for  the  purposes  of
           this milestone  event  that  there  are  more  than  the  normal
           emotional ties that one would expect between  parent  and  adult
           children. The enjoyment of the family life is not  something  in
           those circumstances that can be enjoyed long-distance  for  that
           particular milestone event or apart from each other.'

15    The Judge noted that a registry wedding  had  in  fact  already  taken
      place in  Zimbabwe,  as  entry  clearance  had  been  refused  to  the
      Applicant. However the Judge was of the view that the  Sponsor's  wish
      to marry in a church wedding in the United Kingdom was  understandable
      [18].

16    The Judge concluded on this issue:

           "19 Having concluded that for the purposes of the wedding  there
           is more than the normal emotional ties one would expect  to  see
           between adults, it has a quality which on  the  face  of  it  is
           interfered with by the respondent's decision not to grant  entry
           clearance; and as such can be considered by me.

           20 I am satisfied that the interference is of sufficient gravity
           to engage article 8 because being  a  once-in-a-lifetime  event,
           cannot be repeated. I am satisfied that in milestone event  such
           as a wedding is a key aspect of the bonds and ties  which  holds
           families together across different religions and cultures around
           the world.  Once the event has passed it cannot be repeated  and
           the inability of key family members to partake in that  has  the
           potential to interfere with the exercise of family  life  rights
           in a sufficiently grave manner. That is despite the  context  in
           which mother and daughter have  lived  apart  for  the  last  16
           years. I draw support from this proposition of a unique facet of
           family life from Abbasi [2015] UKUT 00463 (see para  11).  I  am
           therefore satisfied that the first and second  Razgar  principle
           is met."

17    The crux of the Appellant entry clearance officer's case is  that  the
      Judge was simply not entitled to find  that  family  life  existed  as
      between the Applicant and Sponsor.

18    I note that within the case of Kopoi,  the Court  of  Appeal  held  at
      [20] that the evidence before the First tier and  Upper  Tribunal  had
      been insufficient to establish that family life existed  between  that
      applicant and her cousin and cousin's family  in  the  UK,   observing
      that that applicant was not even a member of her  sponsor's  immediate
      family, did not have any element of dependency on the sponsor, nor was
      she the beneficiary of any  established  pattern  of  support  by  the
      sponsor or the sponsor's family members. The Court  distinguished  the
      circumstances of that applicant from the facts in the case of Boyle  v
      UK (1994) 19 EHRR 179, where significantly stronger family  life  ties
      existed. I note that in the present case, the  Applicant  and  Sponsor
      are immediate members to one another (mother and daughter)  and  there
      is prior pattern of visiting one another; see paras [6] and [14].

19    Further, in Onuorah, where an applicant for entry clearance sought  to
      visit her brother settled in the UK, few details are given as  to  the
      extent of the ties between the applicant  and  the  sponsor,  but  the
      Court made its decision on the apparent  basis  that  the  facts  were
      similar to those in Kopoi, which the Court refered to as authority for
      the proposition that family life did not embrace a situation 'such  as
      the present' (para [30]).

20    However, the proposed  visits  in  Kopoi  and  Onuorah  were  for  the
      desired purpose of maintaining family life, between  persons  who  did
      not have the necessary elements of dependency  to  meet  the  Kugathas
      criteria.

21    However, Mr Bates has not succeeded in persuading me that the  Judge's
      approach, to treat the particular purpose of the  proposed  visit,  as
      being  one which engaged family life as  defined  under  Article  8(1)
      ECHR, disclosed an error of law.   I  believe  it  uncontroversial  to
      suggest that a relationship between a parent  and  their  adult  child
      might over time, and due to changes of circumstances, move in and  out
      of the boundaries of family life as defined by Article  8  ECHR.  They
      may move nearer to, or further away from one another; they may  become
      more, or less dependent on one another, depending on their  respective
      circumstances, including their health and their care needs, such  that
      there may be periods where they have more than  the  normal  emotional
      ties to one another than would be expected between  parent  and  adult
      child, and at other times, not. The boundaries of family life  between
      adults, as recognised in Kugathas, are not permanently fixed  one  way
      or another.

22    I do not find any error in in Judge finding on the one hand,  at  [14-
      15] that in general, the Applicant and  Sponsor  would  not  have  the
      required dependency on one another such that they  may  be  deemed  to
      have a family life with one another, but finding, on the  other  hand,
      that for the  purposes  of   the  'milestone  event'  of  the  Sponsor
      marrying in church  in  the  UK,  there  were  more  than  the  normal
      emotional ties that one  would  expect  between  a  parent  and  adult
      children [18-20].

23    In Abbasi, a panel chaired by the former President, the Tribunal  held
      that the refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking to  enter  the
      United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose  of  mourning  with
      family members the recent death of a close relative and  visiting  the
      grave of the deceased is capable of  constituting  a  disproportionate
      interference with the rights of the persons concerned under Article  8
      ECHR (see headnote). Further, having referred at [3]-[9] to  a  series
      of  authorities  from  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  which
      McCloskey J considered illustrated that  matters  relating  to  death,
      burial and mourning had been held to fall within the ambit of  Article
      8, the Tribunal held at [11]:

            "As the decided  cases  of  the  ECtHR  make  clear,  the  FtT's
           decision that the Appellants' appeals did not  fall  within  the
           ambit of Article 8 ECHR is unsustainable. The Judge's error  was
           driven by an impermissibly  narrow  approach  to  the  scope  of
           Article 8 protection and  a  concentration  on  the  Appellants'
           family life in Pakistan, to the exclusion of both  their  family
           ties in the United Kingdom and  the  central  purpose  of  their
           proposed visit. The essence  of  the  error  was  a  failure  to
           recognise that the particular aspect of private and family  life
           invoked by the Appellants was capable of  being  encompassed  by
           Article 8 ECHR. The protection,  or  benefit,  which  they  were
           asserting had the potential of  being  protected  by  Article  8
           ECHR."

24    That decision was considered by the Court of Appeal in Onuorah.  Singh
      LJ held:

           "44. As Mr Biggs points out, the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and
           Asylum  Chamber)  considered  and  applied   the   decision   in
           Sabanchiyeva in Abbasi v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  of  Karachi
           [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC): see para.  [9]  (McCloskey  J,  the  then
           President of that Chamber). As McCloskey J pointed out in  para.
           [9], the European Court of Human Rights  in  Sabanchiyeva  found
           that there had been a violation of Article 8 "without making any
           distinction  between  the   private   life   and   family   life
           dimensions." That is indeed a feature of some of the case law to
           which this Court has been referred.

           45. No doubt there are some cases  in  which  it  is  immaterial
           precisely which of those two concepts is invoked, because it  is
           clear that there has been an interference with at least  one  of
           the rights set out in Article 8(1). However, in my view, in  the
           present context it is important to be clear about which  gateway
           into Article 8 a person is able to go through before one reaches
           later questions such as whether there has been  an  interference
           with that right by a public  authority  or  a  lack  of  respect
           pursuant to a positive obligation which can sometimes be imposed
           on the state in order to give effect to the rights in Article 8.

           46. Mr Biggs also relies on the decision of  the  UT  in  Abbasi
           itself in support of his submission in the present case. I  note
           that the decision of this Court in Kugathas was not referred  to
           in that case. In  my  view,  this  is  unsurprising,  since  the
           factual matrix of the case was very different from  the  present
           one. It concerned "matters relating to death,  burial,  mourning
           and associated rites": see para. [6] of the judgment. It is  for
           this reason that the UT referred, at para. [7], to the  decision
           of the European Court of Human Rights in Sargsyan  v  Azerbaijan
           (2011) ECHR 2337. That is a decision  to  which  I  will  return
           under the rubric of the  right  to  respect  for  private  life.
           Although I have no  reason  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  the
           decision of the UT in Abbasi on its facts, I  consider  that  it
           has no bearing on the present context, which is governed by  the
           principle in Kugathas."


25    Gloster LJ and Sales LJ, agreeing with Singh LJ,  specifically  stated
      that they preferred to reserve their opinion as to the correctness  or
      otherwise of the decision of the UT in Abbasi.  (paras [63]-[64].

26    There being no error in McCloskey J's decision in  Abbasi,  therefore,
      in its own context, could it be  used  as  authority  to  support  the
      Judge's conclusion in the present case?

27    I find that it can. In Kopoi and Onuorah, there  was  no  purpose  for
      the proposed visits  by  the  Applicants  with  the  'unique  quality'
      present in the instant appeal; that being for the Applicant to  attend
      the 'key milestone' event in the Applicant's and Sponsor's life  which
      the Sponsor's intended church wedding  in  the  UK  represented.   The
      Appellant's argument that the purpose was not as unique as  the  Judge
      suggested, because a registry office wedding had already  taken  place
      in Zimbabwe,  does not disclose any error of approach by the Judge  in
      my view, and represents  a mere disagreement with the Judge's  finding
      as  to  the  significance  of  the  proposed   visits;   it   was   an
      understandable, and reasonable desire  shared  by  the  Applicant  and
      Sponsor that the Applicant attend the church wedding in the UK,  where
      all the Sponsor's other family and  friends  resided.  The  desire  to
      marry in church, in a  religious  ceremony,  may  often  have  greater
      importance to the parties to a marriage, and to family members, than a
      civil marriage alone.

28    I find that there was no error of law in the Judge's finding that  the
      Article 8 family life of the Applicant and Sponsor was engaged in  the
      appeal.

29    The suggestion that there was no actual finding that Article 8(1)  was
      engaged is not made out; it is clear  from  the  first  two  lines  of
      paragraphs [18] and [19] respectively that he did so find.

30    Further, where the Appellant accepts within  the  grounds  of  appeal,
      and in the oral submission of Mr Bates, that the Judge held  that  the
      requirements of the immigration rules were satisfied (and there  being
      no challenge before this Tribunal that such a finding was not open  to
      the Judge), I find that there is no merit in the Appellant's remaining
      challenge that the proportionally balancing exercise  was  inadequate.
      Adequate reasons were given at [35]-[40] for that conclusion. Further,
      where the rules are met, it is difficult to see what  public  interest
      considerations there would be in continuing to  refuse  the  Applicant
      admission to the UK for the stated purpose of a visit. Mr  Bates  does
      not argue, for example, that the Applicant has 'acted in  a  way  that
      undermines  the   system   of   immigration   control'   (a   relevant
      consideration identified in Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry  clearance)
      [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) .

31    I find no material error of law in the decision.

32    I have noted that the findings of fact  made  by  the  Judge  in  this
      appeal were  that  the  rules  were  satisfied.  The  Appellant  Entry
      Clearance Officer accepts that, and has  not  quibbled  with  it.  The
      suggestion in Adjei at [11] that the findings made  by  the  Judge  in
      that case were to be given little weight by any ECO was an observation
      made on the particular facts  of  that  case;  where  the  applicant's
      grounds of appeal to the First tier Tribunal did not allege  that  the
      rules were met, and there was no Presenting Officer appearing for  the
      ECO at the First tier; the Judge's findings of fact had been  made  on
      the case of one party only, the  ECO  having  had  no  notice  of  the
      challenge being pursued.  Insofar as the headnote in Adjei appears  to
      suggest that any and all findings made by a Judge as to  the  positive
      satisfaction of para 41 of the rules will carry  little  weight,  this
      fails to  accurately  reflect  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      actually given within the body of the  decision  at  [10]  -[11].  The
      Court of Appeal has observed that a headnote may not always accurately
      reflect the reasoning  actually  contained  within  the  body  of  the
      decision; PO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      [2011] EWCA Civ 132 paras [37] and [56].

33    I see no reason why the Judge's findings that the  Applicant  met  the
      requirements  of  the  immigration  rules,   unchallenged   in   these
      proceedings, ought not be accepted  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      considering this decision.

      Decision

34    The making of the decision did not involved the making or an error  of
      law.

35    I do not set aside the Judge's decision.

36    The Appellant Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.



Signed:
Date: 21.5.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





