
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/07400/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2019                     | On 13 March 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Edwin Masunda
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr. C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:   Mr. P. Haywood, Counsel instructed by Cahill De
                    Fonseka Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 29 January 2019, I set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.  As in that decision, I  refer
    to Mr. Masunda as the Appellant, and to the Secretary of State  as  the
    Respondent, reflecting their positions as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


The hearing


 2. I heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  from  his  wife,  the
    Sponsor,  Mrs.  Kirsty  Masunda.   Both   representatives   made   oral
    submissions.  I reserved my decision.


 3. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle  (92
    pages), the Appellant's bundle (158 pages), and the  skeleton  argument
    provided by Mr. Haywood.  I was provided with copies of  the  cases  of
    Mhlanga [2012] EWHC 1587 (Admin), JM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA  Civ  1669,
    and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

Burden of proof

 4. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show that, at the date  of
    the hearing, the Respondent's decision  is  a  breach  of  his  rights,
    and/or those of the Sponsor, to a family and private life under Article
    8 ECHR.  The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.

Findings and conclusions


 5. I make two observations at the outset.  First, an additional issue  was
    raised by the Appellant in the Upper Tribunal, which he had not  raised
    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  regarding  his  ability  to  return  to
    Zimbabwe.  It was not argued before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to return to Zimbabwe due to the policy  of
    the Zimbabwean government in respect of return of their nationals, with
    reference to the cases of Mhlanga and JM (Zimbabwe).


 6. Secondly, Mr. Avery made no reference to, or placed  any  reliance  on,
    the Appellant's criminal record.  This was not an issue in the  reasons
    for refusal letter, as the convictions occurred after the decision.   I
    find that it is significant that the Respondent is placing no weight on
    this element.


 7. I found the Appellant and Sponsor to be honest and credible  witnesses.
    They were not cross-examined, but they answered all  questions  put  to
    them by  Mr.  Haywood,  and  were  not  evasive.   Their  evidence  was
    consistent,  and  consistent  with  the   documentary   evidence.    In
    particular, the Appellant has been open about his criminal  conviction.
    I find that I can rely on the evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor.


Immigration rules


 8. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application as a partner  as  he
    did not  meet  the  eligibility  status  requirements  or  the  English
    language requirements.  The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b)  as  there  was  no
    evidence that there were any insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Zimbabwe.


 9. It  was  not  submitted  that  the  Appellant  could  meet  either  the
    eligibility status requirement, or the  English  language  requirement.
    In order to meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b),  the  Appellant
    must show that he has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor, and that there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    with the Sponsor continuing outside the United Kingdom.


10. Paragraph EX.2 states:


    "For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    means the very significant difficulties which would  be  faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."


11. In respect of paragraph EX.1(b), it was submitted  by  Mr.  Avery  that
    there had been no change since the date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  The Judge  had  found  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    there had been no change to this position.  However, as I have set  out
    above, no reliance had been placed  on  the  cases  of  Mhlanga  or  JM
    (Zimbabwe) at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, and therefore the
    Judge did not take this issue into  account  when  considering  whether
    there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
    Zimbabwe.


12. I have carefully considered these cases.  At [11] of JM  (Zimbabwe)  it
    states:

    "It has been the settled policy of the Zimbabwean government since 2002
    that it will not grant ETDs  to  its  nationals  who  do  not  wish  to
    return."


    The case went on to consider  whether  the  Respondent  could  lawfully
    require an individual to tell Zimbabwean officials that he was  willing
    to return voluntarily when he was not, and  held  that  the  Respondent
    could not do so.


13. The case of Mhlanga states at [19]:

    "At para. 8 of the witness statement [filed on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State] it is said that the Secretary of State is not presently in  a
    position to remove persons to Zimbabwe who do not have a valid passport
    without their consent. This is because the Zimbabwean authorities  will
    not agree to issue emergency  travel  documents  to  persons  returning
    involuntarily."

14. In relation to the Appellant's reliance on JM  (Zimababwe),  Mr.  Avery
    submitted that he was not sure that it was relevant to the test set out
    within EX.1(b) which was concerned with the  integration  into  society
    once in the country.  First, EX.1(b) is not so limited, and  further  I
    find that an appellant's inability  to  enter  his  country  of  origin
    cannot be considered other than an obstacle to family  life  continuing
    there.  Mr. Avery did not submit that the situation was  any  different
    now to that outlined in Mhlanga.

15. The Appellant gave evidence that he did not wish to return to Zimbabwe.
     He said that he had nowhere to stay, had been away for  a  long  time,
    and would not know what to do on his return.  He said that his life was
    here consisting of the Sponsor and her extended family, as well as  his
    own extended family members.  I find that the Appellant lives with  his
    older sister and her two children.

16. It was submitted by Mr. Haywood that the issue of voluntary returns  to
    Zimbabwe had not gone away.  The Appellant's passport had expired,  and
    he would therefore have to be taken to the Zimbabwean Embassy in  order
    to obtain an emergency travel document ("ETD").  He would then have  to
    make a declaration that he was willing to return to Zimbabwe, which  is
    he not.  The Respondent would have  to  compel  him  to  sign  a  false
    declaration so as to be able to effect his removal.  He submitted that,
    following JM (Zimbabwe), the Respondent had no statutory  power  to  do
    this.

17. Mr. Haywood submitted,  which  I  find  must  be  the  case,  that  the
    Respondent had been aware of this policy throughout the period of  this
    application and appeal.  This was clear from the cases of  Mhlanga  and
    JM (Zimbabwe).  He submitted that the problem was the attitude  of  the
    Zimbabwean authorities, not the Appellant.   For  most  places,  if  an
    individual did not want to return, this did not cause  a  problem.   An
    ETD would be issued all  the  same,  irrespective  of  an  individual's
    wishes.  This was not the case with Zimbabwe, and the Respondent  could
    not expect, or force, the Appellant to lie  to  the  authorities.    He
    submitted that this was a significant point which went to the issue  of
    whether the Appellant could conduct married  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

18. I find that this is a significant issue which goes directly to  whether
    or not the Appellant  can  conduct  married  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  As I set out above, Mr. Avery did not challenge the situation
    as set out in Mhlanga and JM (Zimbabwe), and while I  accept  that  the
    skeleton argument was not served until the morning of the  hearing,  he
    did not seek an adjournment.  I find that it is  significant  that  the
    Respondent  did  not  challenge  this  position,  nor  apply   for   an
    adjournment.

19. It is not surprising that the Appellant does  not  want  to  return  to
    Zimbabwe, and in this respect  he  is  no  different  from  many  other
    appellants who do not wish to return to their home countries.  In  most
    cases, appellants' wishes are irrelevant, but this is not the case with
    those from Zimbabwe, and this is something  which  the  Respondent  has
    been aware of for many years.  In JM (Zimbabwe) it states that this has
    been the policy since 2002.  I find that there is no way in  which  the
    Respondent can compel the Appellant to lie and state to the  Zimbabwean
    authorities that he is willing to return.

20. I therefore find that the Appellant has shown that the  policy  of  the
    Zimbabwean authorities is an insurmountable  obstacle  to  family  life
    continuing in Zimbabwe.  He has shown that he meets the requirements of
    paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

Article 8

21. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 in  accordance
    with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The Respondent  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant met the relationship requirements of the immigration
    rules.  I find that the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have  a  family  life
    sufficient to engage the operation of  Article  8.   I  find  that  the
    decision would interfere with this family life.


22. It was found in the First-tier Tribunal that the Sponsor could maintain
    contact with her family members through  visits  and  modern  means  of
    communication.  No separate finding was made as to whether the  Sponsor
    had family  life  with  her  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    particularly her  mother  or  stepmother.   It  was  submitted  in  the
    skeleton argument that the Sponsor said that her  family  circumstances
    made it difficult for her to relocate outside the United  Kingdom,  but
    it was not submitted that she had  a  family  life  with  any  of  them
    sufficient to engage the operation of Article 8.

23. In her witness statement the Sponsor said that her mother required  her
    care, and that it would be in her mother's best interests if she  could
    stay in the United Kingdom to look  after  her  "when  necessary".   In
    relation to her stepmother, she referred to her illness,  but  did  not
    indicate that she was required to provide any care.  At the hearing she
    said that her mother was worse now, and was now only working  part-time
    as she could not keep up with the workload.  I find that  there  is  no
    evidence to show that the Sponsor has a relationship  with  either  her
    mother or stepmother, or indeed any other family member, sufficient  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.  There is insufficient  evidence  of
    dependency.

24. I find that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since December
    1999, a period of some 19 years.  I find  that  he  has  established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom during that time.  I find  that  the
    decision would interfere in his private life.

25. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.

26. In assessing the public interest, I have taken into account all  of  my
    findings above in relation to the immigration rules.  I have also taken
    into account section 19 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  Section 117B(1)  provides  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.   I  have  found  above
    that the Appellant meets the requirements of the immigration  rules  in
    relation to his family life.  I therefore find that there  will  be  no
    compromise to the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  by
    allowing his appeal.

27. Although the application was refused  with  reference  to  the  English
    language requirements, I find that the Appellant speaks fluent  English
    (section 117B(2)).  He could not sit an English language  test  as  the
    Respondent had retained his passport.

28. The application  was  not  refused  with  reference  to  the  financial
    requirements.  The Sponsor is still employed by the  same  company  and
    earns in excess of the amount required to sponsor  a  spouse.   I  find
    that the Appellant and Sponsor  are  financially  independent  (section
    117B(3)).  Further, I find that when the Appellant was given permission
    to work by the Respondent, he obtained employment as a support  worker,
    working with adults with dementia, and then young adults with  learning
    difficulties.  He worked from 2014 until January  2018,  earning  about
    �17,600.  He gave evidence that he would like to continue to work  with
    young adults with learning difficulties.

29. Little weight is to be given to  a  relationship  established  when  an
    individual is in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  (section  117B(4)).
    While I find that the relationship was established when  the  Appellant
    did not have leave, I have carefully considered the circumstances.  The
    Judge in the First-tier Tribunal found that when the Appellant met  and
    married  his  wife,  he  had  an  application  outstanding   with   the
    Respondent.  She found that it was the Respondent's delay that gave him
    the time and opportunity to meet and marry the Sponsor.

30. It is set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter  that  the  Appellant
    received an asylum decision in 2010.  He made  further  representations
    in May 2012, which were rejected in November 2017.  The Appellant  gave
    evidence that he had reported to the Respondent from 2010 to 2017.   At
    the start he was required to report every two weeks.  This  then  moved
    to monthly reporting, and then six-monthly reporting.  He gave evidence
    that he fully complied, and never missed a day.  He said  that  he  was
    still reporting on a monthly basis.  He gave evidence that he had  been
    given permission to work by the Respondent  in  2014.   He  had  worked
    until January 2018.

31. The Appellant met the Sponsor in 2011.  He was asked what his  thinking
    had been, given that he had entered into a relationship when he had  no
    leave.  He said that he had fallen in love.  Things had progressed and,
    when he was given permission to work in 2014,  he  moved  in  with  the
    Sponsor.  He gave evidence that he had had to apply to  the  Respondent
    when they decided to get married.  The Respondent had not  investigated
    whether the  relationship  was  genuine,  but  had  "assisted"  him  by
    releasing his passport to the registry office.

32. I find that there was a delay of over five years  in  the  Respondent's
    consideration of the Appellant's further representations, from May 2012
    to November 2017.  The Respondent has not provided any explanation  for
    this delay.  I find that the Appellant's relationship progressed during
    this period of delay, during which time, presumably as a consequence of
    the delay, the Appellant was given permission to work.  I find that the
    Appellant was in a position of limbo.  The Respondent was not making  a
    decision on his application, and neither was he making any  attempt  to
    remove the Appellant.  I accept the evidence of the Appellant  that  he
    reported for the duration of this period.  He did  not  go  underground
    and could have been located by the Respondent for  the  entire  period.
    The Respondent gave him permission to work, and  permission  to  marry.
    He did not investigate  the  marriage,  but  allowed  the  marriage  to
    proceed.

33. In relation to delay, I was referred to Agyarko, which states at [52]:

    "It is also necessary to bear in mind that the cogency  of  the  public
    interest in the removal of a person living  in  the  UK  unlawfully  is
    liable to diminish - or,  looking  at  the  matter  from  the  opposite
    perspective, the weight to be given to precarious family life is liable
    to increase - if there is a protracted  delay  in  the  enforcement  of
    immigration control."

34.  I  find  that  the  delay  of  the  Respondent  in  dealing  with  the
    representations made in 2012 reduces the weight  to  be  given  to  the
    public interest in maintaining effective immigration control, given the
    conduct of the Appellant, who reported for this entire period.  I  find
    that the weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control is also lessened by  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent was well aware  that  the  relationship  was  becoming  more
    permanent, as he was aware of the Appellant's  intention  to  marry  in
    2016.

35. Section 117B(5) is not relevant to family life.  Section 117B(6) is not
    relevant.

36. I have considered the Appellant's criminal convictions.  The  Committal
    Record Sheet indicates that the Appellant was sentenced to  six  months
    for dangerous driving, with sentences of one month running concurrently
    for assaulting a constable and criminal damage.  These all  arose  from
    one incident.  The agreed basis of plea was that the Appellant had  not
    intended to injure the officer (page 127).  The Appellant said in  oral
    evidence that he was sorry.  It was out of character, he  had  put  his
    hands up and had admitted what  he  had  done.   He  had  accepted  the
    outcome.  He had plead guilty, so the matter had not gone to trial.

37. I find that these are the only convictions in a period of 19 years.  As
    stated above, no reference was made to these by Mr. Avery.   He did not
    cross-examine the Appellant and no  reliance  was  placed  on  them  in
    submissions.  I find that no issue has been taken by the Respondent  in
    relation to these offences, which is significant.  It was not submitted
    that the suitability requirements under Appendix FM were not met in the
    light of these convictions.  I find  that  they  do  not  outweigh  the
    weight to be given to his family life.


38. In relation to the immigration rules, the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    five year route as a partner as he has not taken  an  English  language
    test.  However, he speaks fluent English.  Secondly, he does  not  meet
    the status requirements, but he cannot return to Zimbabwe  to  make  an
    application from there.  I have  found  above  that  his  inability  to
    return to Zimbabwe as a result of the Zimbabwean authorities' policy on
    returns  of  their  nationals  means  that  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in Zimbabwe, and that he meets  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1(b).   I  find  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities that he and the Sponsor can only enjoy family life in the
    United Kingdom.


39. Taking all of the above into account, I find that  the  rights  of  the
    Appellant and Sponsor outweigh the weight to be  given  to  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  effective   immigration   control.    Giving
    particular weight to the fact that the Appellant meets the requirements
    of  the  immigration  rules,  and  to  the  situation  created  by  the
    Zimbabwean authorities in relation to return of their nationals, I find
    that the balance comes down in favour of the Appellant.   I  find  that
    the decision is not proportionate.   I  find  that  the  Appellant  has
    shown, on the balance of probabilities, that the decision is  a  breach
    of his rights, and those of the Sponsor, to a family life under Article
    8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision


The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights  grounds.   The  Appellant
meets the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 9 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  In the  circumstances,  although  the
Respondent was aware of the  issues  regarding  returns  to  Zimbabwe,  this
issue was not raised until now.  In the circumstances, I make no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 9 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
