
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber Appeal Numbers: HU/07277/2019
                                                               HU/09477/2019
                                                               HU/09735/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              [S N] and others
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, instructed by Paramount Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant are citizens of India. The first  and  second  appellants
    are the parents of the third appellant. The appellants appealed against
    a decision  of  the  respondent  dated  2  April  2019  refusing  their
    application  for  settlement  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.  The
    appellant's appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 August 2019, dismissed the  appeals.  The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on  27  January  2020,  both
    parties' representatives agreed that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside. The appellants claim that  they  did  not
    receive notice of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
    clear that the appellants had sought an oral hearing of  their  appeals
    and that the appeals were only dealt with on the papers  by  the  judge
    because no attendance before the Tribunal  on  5  June  2019  had  been
    recorded. I make no  comment  whatever  regarding  the  merits  of  the
    judge's decision and it is clear that he made no error  in  determining
    the appeal on the papers  on  the  basis  of  the  information  he  had
    received. However, the appellants were entitled to be notified and have
    an opportunity to attend an oral hearing of  their  appeals;  for  some
    administrative reason or postal error, that opportunity has been denied
    to them.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 29  August  2019
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 27 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





