
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07112/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                  |
|On 26 November 2020                          |On 13 January 2021           |
|                                             |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                Dil Maya rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 31 October 1988.  Her
    father, who died in 2002, served in the Ghurkhas between December 1960
    and November 1969 (eight years and 348 days).

 2. The appellant's mother settled in the UK in February 2019.

 3. The appellant's application to settle in the UK, made on 31 October
    2018, was refused on 19 February 2019.  She appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal, where her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Housego ("the judge").  In a decision promulgated on 8 January
    2020 the judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing
    against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge accepted that the appellant and her mother enjoy a family
    life that engages Article 8(1) ECHR (paragraph 56) but found that
    refusing entry clearance to the appellant would be proportionate under
    Article 8(2), for the following reasons:

      a) The judge found that it is more likely than not that the
         appellant's late father would have stayed in Nepal and not come to
         the UK even if he had been permitted to move to the UK.  The judge
         reached this conclusion because there was not "any firm evidential
         basis" on the question of whether the appellant's father would have
         moved to the UK (paragraph 49); it would not have occurred to the
         appellant's father that moving to the UK was a possibility
         (paragraph 53); he was steeped in Nepalese culture and tradition
         and had ancestral lands (paragraph 54); and there was no evidence
         he ever expressed regret before his death about not moving to the
         UK (paragraph 54).

      b) The judge found that a very long period of time has passed since
         the appellant's father served in the Ghurkhas.  The judge stated at
         paragraph 57.1:

             "At some point the length of time that has passed must weaken
             the weight to  be given to the historical injustice argument
             in favour of a child of a former Ghurkha soldier."

      c) The judge found that the appellant served only a short period of
         time in the Ghurkhas (paragraph 57.2).

      d) The judge found that the appellant is not "in want" in Nepal and
         her mother has the option to live with her (paragraph 57.3).

      e) The judge also found that the appellant will be a burden on the
         taxpayer as she lacks skills and does not speak English (paragraph
         57.4).

Grounds of Appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal focus on the judge's finding that the appellant
    had not established that her father would have settled in the UK when
    he retired from the army in 1969 had he had the opportunity to do so.
    It is argued that the judge erred by:

      a) rejecting (or ignoring) the evidence of the appellant's mother on
         this issue when all her other evidence was accepted and her
         evidence on this point was not challenged;

      b) applying the wrong standard of proof; and

      c) not providing adequate reasons.

 6. It is also argued that the judge erred by taking into consideration
    that "it would not have occurred" to the appellant's father that he
    could move to the UK.  The grounds submit that this indicates the judge
    failed to appreciate the restitutionary nature of remedying the
    historic injustice to Ghurkhas.

 7. The grounds submit that the judge erred by finding that the length of
    time that elapsed between the appellant's father retiring from the
    Ghurkhas and the appellant applying for entry clearance reduces the
    weight to be attached to the historic injustice.

 8. It is also submitted that it was erroneous to characterise the
    appellant's father's service as being short when he served for almost
    nine years.

Submissions

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Moriarty on behalf of the appellant and Mrs
    Aboni on behalf of the respondent.

10. Mr Moriarty submitted that this appeal turns on a simple and important
    point, which is that the judge ignored the unchallenged evidence of the
    appellant's mother that her husband would have settled in the UK had he
    been permitted to do so. He added that if the judge doubted the
    evidence of the appellant's mother on this point it should have been
    put to her so that she could address any concerns.

11. He also argued that the judge fell into error by finding that the
    appellant's circumstances were such that he did not have a wish to
    leave Nepal when the evidence of the appellant and her mother was that
    the family lived in poverty.

12. Mrs Aboni argued that the judge directed himself appropriately and
    reached a conclusion that was open to him.  She argued that it was not
    erroneous for the judge to find that there was not a firm evidential
    basis for determining whether the appellant's father would have settled
    in the UK as there was indeed an absence of firm evidence on this
    issue.

Error of Law

13. The judge's reasoning for finding that the appellant's father would not
    have settled in the UK had he been permitted to do so contains several
    flaws, including:




      a) First, the consistent evidence of the appellant's mother (both in
         her written statement and orally at the hearing, as acknowledged in
         paragraph 40 of the decision) was that her husband would have
         settled in the UK had he been given the opportunity. The judge
         failed to explain why this evidence was rejected even though the
         rest of her evidence was accepted and no adverse credibility
         findings were made. The judge's reasoning on this point is
         erroneous in law because it is not possible to discern from the
         decision why the judge believed the appellant's mother in all other
         aspects of her evidence but not on this discreet point.




      b) Second, the judge appears to have treated as material to the
         question of whether the appellant's father would have settled in
         the UK that when he retired from the army in 1969 no one thought
         about settling in the UK. This is legally erroneous because it is
         plainly immaterial to the question of whether the appellant's
         father would have settled in the UK had he been afforded the
         opportunity to do so that he did not consider settling in the UK at
         a time when such an opportunity was not available. Indeed, the
         absence of consideration of the possibility of settling in the UK
         was an inevitable (and direct) consequence of the historic
         injustice he faced.


      c) Third, the judge failed to take into consideration the evidence of
         the appellant's mother that the family lived in poverty, without an
         army pension, and experienced difficult circumstances in Nepal. The
         reference in paragraph 54 of the decision to the family having
         "ancestral lands" paints an entirely different picture to that of
         the appellant's wife, who stated in her statement:

             "He was discharged without any Pension.  He had no option but
             to remain in Nepal.  We were very poor and lived in the most
             difficult circumstances in Nepal.  My husband could not find
             any work.  We remained as farmers as that was the last
             option....

             We had [a] small piece of land where we grew crops to feed us
             and our children.  It was never enough and we had to help
             other farmers in return for food.  Sometimes [we] were paid
             cash for loading jobs.  Living generally was tough.  We still
             do not have gas or electricity.  Water has to be fetched from
             far away.  It takes 30 minutes to one hour, depending on the
             season, to fetch water from the streams.  We have to make
             several journeys in a day.  We also  use firewood for cooking
             and heating.   The wood is collected once or twice in a week.
             It takes a whole day to collect needed wood.  There are no
             roads where we live.  The nearest paved road is up to 2 hours
             walk."

14. For these reasons, I find that the reasons given by the judge for
    concluding that, irrespective of the historic injustice faced by former
    Gurkhas, the appellant's father would not have settled in the UK, are
    not sustainable. The error is material for the reason summarised
    succinctly in paragraph 42 of R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8,
    where it is stated:

         "If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic injustice, he
         would have settled in the UK at a time when his dependent (now)
         adult child would have been able to accompany him as a dependent
         child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that
         it is proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family
         now."

15. The judge also fell into error by reducing the "weight to be given to
    the historical injustice" because the appellant's father had served
    only "a short period of time" in the army. This is misconceived because
    a period of almost nine years, which is the time the appellant's father
    served in the army, is not a short period of time. In fact, it is over
    double the length of time required under the respondent's policy.




16. A further error arises from the judge reducing the weight to the
    historic injustice because the injustice occurred so long ago. There is
    nothing in the respondent's policy or in the case law on Ghurkhas to
    indicate that the historic injustice is reduced, or carries less
    weight, if the injustice occurred a long time ago. The length of time
    that has elapsed since the appellant's father retired is immaterial to
    the question of whether refusing entry to the appellant is
    proportionate and therefore it was erroneous for the judge to take this
    into consideration.


Remade decision

17. Both parties agreed that I should proceed to remake the appeal.




18. Aside from the question of whether, but for the historic injustice, the
    appellant's father would have settled in the UK, the factual matrix is
    not in dispute and it was common ground that the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be preserved.




19. The following findings of fact are not contentious:


      a) The appellant's father, who died in 2002, served as a Gurkha for
         over eight years.




      b) The appellant's mother and the appellant have a close relationship:
         they lived together until the appellant's mother came to the UK,
         they are in frequent contact, and the appellant relies on her
         mother for financial support.


      c) The appellant's mother settled in the UK in 2019.


      d) The appellant lacks skills, qualifications or knowledge of English
         that would facilitate finding employment in the UK.


      e) Neither the appellant nor her mother have an adverse criminal or
         immigration history.


20. The one area of contention is whether the appellant's father would, but
    for the historic injustice, have settled in the UK. The consistent
    evidence of the appellant's mother was that her husband would have
    settled in the UK with his family had he been afforded the opportunity
    to do so. The credibility of her evidence has not been challenged and
    no reason was advanced by Mrs Aboni as to why she should not be
    believed. Moreover, the appellant's father did not receive an army
    pension and lived in poverty. He therefore had a strong economic
    incentive to relocate to the UK. For these reasons, I am satisfied that
    it is more likely than not that the appellant's father would, had he
    been given the opportunity, have settled in the UK after he retired
    from the army.




21. There are two questions to be determined. The first question is whether
    article 8(1) ECHR is engaged. If it is not engaged, the appellant
    cannot succeed. If it is engaged, then the second question must be
    considered, which is whether refusing entry is disproportionate under
    article 8(2).


22. The first question must be answered in the affirmative because the
    unchallenged finding of the First-tier Tribunal was that article 8(1)
    is engaged. This is, in any event, plainly correct given the close
    relationship between the appellant and her mother, who have lived
    together for the entirety of the appellant's life (until her mother
    moved to the UK) and have a relationship characterised by a significant
    degree of mutual support.


23. The Court of Appeal has made clear that, in a case such as this, where
    there is no criminality or poor immigration history, the
    proportionality assessment under article 8(2) - which is the second of
    the two questions to be addressed - cannot fall other than in favour of
    the appellant. Elias J in AP (India) v The Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 89 explained:
         In R (on the application of Gurung) v Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8, the Court of Appeal  was  faced
         with a similar,  if  not  quite  so  culpable,  historic  injustice
         perpetrated on those who had been veterans of  the  Gurkha  brigade
         and had served in the British army. The Master of the  Rolls,  Lord
         Dyson, referred to Sedley LJ's comments in paragraph 15 of Patel to
         the effect that the historic injustice may perhaps be decisive, but
         he  emphasised  the  word   "perhaps".   Consistently   with   that
         observation, Lord Dyson added (para.38) that any historic injustice
         was only one of the factors to  be  weighed  against  the  need  to
         maintain a firm and fair immigration policy. However, later in  his
         judgment he emphasised the  considerable  weight  which  should  be
         afforded to that factor where it is applicable (para.42):
                 ".. If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic
                 injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a time when
                 his dependant (now adult) child would have been able to
                 accompany him as a dependant child under the age of 18,
                 that is a strong reason for holding that it is
                 proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family
                 now."
            He noted that this principle would apply whether the historic
            injustice was to the Gurkhas or the British citizens from East
            Africa.
         More recently the Upper Tribunal in R (Ghising) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2013] UKUT 00567 has interpreted
         these decisions as saying that where the only justification for
         refusing entry is in order to maintain firm immigration policy, the
         historic injustice should always outweigh that consideration.
         Accordingly, entry should be granted as a matter of course in such
         cases. It is only if there is some other factor weighing in favour
         of refusal, such as the commission of criminal offences or a bad
         immigration record, that it will not be decisive.
         Ms McGahey very properly informed us that on 5 January this year
         the Immigration Directorate issued instructions which have accepted
         the analysis in Ghising for Gurkha cases; and the Secretary of
         State further accepts that no different rule can be applied to BOC
         cases. Accordingly, Ms McGahey accepts that if the appellant had
         been able to demonstrate that but for the historic injustice, his
         father would have settled in the UK earlier, with the consequence
         that the appellant would have sought entry as a minor rather than
         as an adult, his appeal ought to have succeeded. Her case is that
         he failed to establish the causal connection which was critical to
         this part of his application.

24. Reaffirming the assessment in AP, the President of the Upper Tribunal
    stated in Patel (historic injustice; NIAA  Part 5A) [2020] UKUT
    00351(IAC):

         The effects of historic injustice on the immigration position of
         the individual are likely to be profound, even determinative of
         success, provided that there is nothing materially adverse in their
         immigration history.

25. Applying these authorities to the facts of this case, it is plain that
    although I must weigh against the appellant, in the article 8
    proportionality assessment, that the maintenance of effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest and that it is in the
    public interest that immigrants to the UK speak English and are
    financially independent (see Sections 117B(1) - (3) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002), because of the historic injustice
    experienced by her father, the weight attached to these public interest
    considerations is greatly reduced to the extent that they are
    outweighed by the family life of the appellant and her mother.


Notice of Decision

The decision the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law
and is set aside.

I re-make the decision and allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

D Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
                                                         Date 5 January 2021

