
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07795/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2021                              |On 23 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                NAZNEEN QAZI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B. Malik, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10 July 1955 whose  two
      sons live in the UK.

   2. On 14 December 2018 she applied for entry clearance to the UK as an
      Adult Dependent Relative and under Article 8 ECHR. The application was
      refused. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
      heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Taylor ("the judge"). In a
      decision promulgated on 9 January 2020, the judge dismissed the
      appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

   The medical letters from Pakistan

   3. The appellant submitted letters from her family doctor, Dr Fareed,
      clinical psychologist, Dr Khan, and her psychiatrist, Dr Taj.

   4. The letter from Dr Fareed states that the appellant is in "very bad
      shape physically and mentally" and that:

           "I have contacted her psychiatrist Dr Rizwan Taj and we have
           spoken [at] length about [the appellant's] well-being and we
           both agree the only chance of her health improving is through
           being reunited with her sons in the UK.


           Throughout my career as a doctor I have never seen or even heard
           of a patient suffering with such high levels of OCD, anxiety and
           depression. [The appellant] is fully dependent for her every day
           to day tasks and she desperately needs to be close to children
           who can be around her, care for her day to day needs and provide
           her with the medical attention she deserves. At [the
           appellant's] age she has no other option but to be close to her
           only two sons in the UK for a chance to improve her health. It
           is proven mental health patients can show improvement when they
           are close to family, in a comfortable caring environment."


   5. A letter from Dr Khan states that the appellant has severe OCD and
      that she is at risk due to declining physical and mental health. It is
      stated that the appellant is unable to receive "due care" as her
      father is old and unwell and her brother is unable to cope with her
      mental status. Mr Khan also states:

           "She needs to be looked after well from her basic needs,
           medication and regular therapeutic sessions. Therefore, it is
           strongly recommended that [the appellant] should be reunited
           with her sons as soon as possible for protecting both her
           physical and mental health.


           Evidence from worldwide clinical researchers prove that
           isolation makes one clinically depressed and vulnerable to
           various mental and physical illnesses. Being with her children
           will help in improving her emotional state as each passing day
           her physical and mental health conditions are worsening"


   6. In another letter, Dr Khan states:


           "The level of care that she requires is extensive  and  this  is
           not available to her here as her father is old and unwell  while
           her family of brother is unable to cope with the  state.  Client
           is living unaccompanied as  carers  available  are  not  skilled
           enough to understand and deal with clients issues while  she  is
           unable to look  after  herself.  Also  no  such  facilities  are
           available  both  in  government  or  private  sectors  for   the
           management of patients like her.


           Being with sons would help  improve  her  mental  and  emotional
           state which will result in better physical condition. Her  state
           is likely to deteriorate further if this does not happen"


   7. Dr Khan gave the following prognosis:

           "Favourable only if get appropriate care, supported  by  family,
           medication and regular psychotherapeutic sessions"

   8. The letter from Dr Taj states that the appellant has  a  diagnosis  of
      obsessive compulsive disorder with symptoms of anxiety and  depression
      and that:


           "She needs to be close to people she trusts as carers  available
           in Pakistan are not qualified and have no experience of  dealing
           with such problems".


   Decision of First-tier Tribunal


   9. The judge considered whether the appellant met the conditions of
      section EC-DR (entry clearance as an adult dependent relative) of
      Appendix FM.

  10. The judge accepted that the appellant requires long-term personal care
      to perform everyday tasks and therefore that E-ECDR.2.4 was met.
      However, the judge rejected the appellant's claim that she is unable,
      even with the practical and financial help of her sons, to obtain the
      required level of care in Pakistan because it is not available and
      there is no person who can reasonably provide it (the requirement
      under E-ECDR.2.5).

  11. The judge gave the following reasons for finding that the appellant
      had not established that she was unable to obtain the required level
      of care in Pakistan:

        a. She did not submit background information or national statistics
           as to the availability of care for the mentally ill in  Pakistan
           and did not address the background  information  quoted  in  the
           respondent's refusal letter about care being available.

        b. The report by  Dr  Fareed  did  not  offer  an  opinion  on  the
           availability of care in Pakistan; and the reports of Dr Taj  and
           Dr Khan dealt only briefly with  the  availability  of  care  in
           Pakistan.

        c. Dr Fareed, Dr Taj and  Dr  Khan  expressed  the  view  that  the
           appellant's sons are best placed to care for her,  but  did  not
           explain how this conclusion was reached.  The  judge  noted,  in
           this context, that the appellant's  sons  had  not  visited  the
           appellant in Pakistan  for  "some  considerable  time"  and  the
           appellant's doctors did not have any evidence as to the  ability
           of the appellant's sons to care for her in the UK.

  12. At paragraph 21 the judge stated that Dr Taj provided no background as
      to what enquiries he had made as to the availability of mental  health
      nurses or carers in different parts of Pakistan and that:

           "Dr  Taj's  department  must  have  support  staff  as  well  as
           psychiatrists, and given that  his  hospital  has  a  psychiatry
           department, it is not a  plausible  proposition  to  state  that
           there were no carers in the whole country who  could  assist  in
           the care of a person with severe mental health issues".


  13. Also in paragraph 21, the judge stated that:

           "Dr Khan's report did not provide  any  background  as  to  what
           enquiries and analysis had been carried  out  to  conclude  that
           there were no facilities available to look after the  appellant.
           Dr Khan's notepaper states that she works in  several  areas  of
           mental health services in Pakistan, and given that mental health
           services are available I would expect to see  some  support  for
           the proposition that there  was  no  available  care  throughout
           Pakistan, rather than a mere assertion."

Relevant Provisions of the Immigration Rules
  14. Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM states:
           "The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are the
           sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must
           be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
           sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country
           where they are living, because -
           a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
              who can reasonably provide it; or
           (b) it is not affordable."
  15. Paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE provides:
           "Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with
           the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to
           obtain the required level of care in the country where they are
           living should be from:
           (a) a central or local health authority;
           (b) a local authority; or
           (c) a doctor or other health professional."




   Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

  16. Mr Malik, relying his skeleton argument, advanced four arguments.

  17. First, he argued that the judge erred in respect of his assessment  of
      the medical evidence showing the importance to the appellant's health,
      recovery and care needs of residing in close proximity to her sons. He
      argued that the medical evidence on  this  issue  was  not  adequately
      considered. In particular, he submitted that the judge failed to  take
      into consideration the unanimity between the three  doctors  that  the
      appellant needs to be  with  her  sons  and  that  there  is  no  real
      alternative to this. Mr Malik argued that  if  the  appellant's  needs
      cannot be met other than by being near her sons then it  follows  that
      her needs cannot be met in Pakistan as her sons are not there. He also
      submitted that the evidence of the doctors, considered together, could
      not rationally be dismissed as deserving only little weight. A further
      point made by Mr Malik was that the judge failed  to  explain  why  he
      accepted the medical evidence on the appellant's diagnosis but not  on
      treatment/prognosis.

  18. Second, Mr Malik argued that the judge fell  into  error  by  reducing
      weight given to the opinions of Dr Taj and Dr Khan  because  they  did
      not provide details of research into care generally in  Pakistan  when
      the point the doctors were making was that the  appellant  needs  care
      provided by her family  and  there  is  an  absence  psychiatric  care
      provision at which the appellant could receive  treatment  that  would
      address the gap left by the absence of her family members.

  19. Third, he argued that the judge erred by inferring from Dr  Taj's  and
      Dr Khan's professional role that suitable care would be  available  in
      Pakistan. He submitted that the fact that there are psychologists  and
      psychiatrists who can treat the appellant in Pakistan  does  not  mean
      that there is "live in care" and "home care "for  people  with  mental
      health problems.

  20. Fourth, Mr Malik argued that the judge  erred  by  placing  weight  on
      background information quoted in the refusal letter that had not  been
      addressed by the appellant  when  in  the  refusal  letter  no  actual
      evidence was cited and the respondent merely  stated  that  there  was
      "open source information" available.

  21. Mr Melvin argued that the judge  dealt  adequately  with  the  medical
      evidence and that the grounds of appeal  amount  to  no  more  than  a
      disagreement with the weight given by the judge to that  evidence.  He
      submitted  that  the  conclusions  drawn  were   not   irrational   or
      inadequately reasons and therefore there was no basis to set aside the
      decision.

  22. He also submitted that the medical letters did not offer an opinion on
      treatment/care in Pakistan and there was no  evidence  that  the  only
      option for the appellant was to be with her family in the UK.

   Analysis

  23. The focus of the grounds of appeal, as well as Mr Malik's submissions,
      was the approach taken by the  judge  to  the  letters  of  the  three
      professionals in Pakistan who have treated the appellant: Dr  Taj,  Dr
      Khan and Dr Fareed. For the following reasons, I  cannot  discern  any
      error in respect of the judge's approach to this evidence.

  24.  First,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  took   the   evidence   into
      consideration. The judge plainly took  into  account  that  it  was  a
      consensus between the three professionals that  the  appellant  should
      live with her sons in the UK as at paragraph 9 the judge  stated  "all
      the professionals recommended that the appellant  should  be  reunited
      with her two sons in the UK" and at  paragraph  20  the  judge  stated
      again that "all three medical reports advise that the appellant should
      be in the care of sons..."The judge also took into account  that  both
      Dr Taj and Dr Khan expressed the  view  that  adequate  care  was  not
      available in Pakistan. This is plain from paragraph 21 where the judge
      stated: "the reports of Dr Taj and Dr Khan deal with the  question  of
      care..."

  25. Second, it is clear that the judge gave reasons to explain why she did
      not accept the opinions of the  professionals  on  these  issues.  The
      reasons are set out, in detail, in paragraphs 20 and 21. In respect of
      the need to be with her sons in the UK, the judge stated in  paragraph
      20 that the letters from professionals did not explain  how  the  view
      was reached that her sons were best placed to look after her, or  take
      account of how long it had been since they had last visited  her.  The
      judge stated that the reports do  not  contain  "evidence  as  to  any
      research or  analysis  which  had  taken  place  in  support  of  this
      opinion". With  respect  to  the  absence  of  care  in  Pakistan,  in
      paragraph 21 the judge gave several reasons for rejecting the evidence
      of Dr Taj and Dr Khan. Amongst  other  things,  the  judge  noted  the
      absence of "background as to what enquiries [Dr Taj] made  as  to  the
      availability of mental health nurses or carers in different  parts  of
      the country" and that Dr Khan "did not provide any  background  as  to
      what enquiries and analysis had been  carried  out  to  conclude  that
      there were no facilities available to look after the appellant".

  26. Third, it was not irrational to infer from the  fact  that  Dr  Khan's
      letterhead states that she works at "a specialised  treatment  centre"
      for mental health conditions and that Dr Taj  works  in  a  psychiatry
      department that appropriate care is available. These findings need  to
      be placed in context, which is that the burden of proof  lies  on  the
      appellant to show that she satisfies the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5
      and the only evidence to show care would not  be  available  were  the
      letters from the professionals which did not address the  availability
      of  care  (whether  at  the  appellant's  home  or  in  a  specialised
      home/centre) in any detail.

  27. Fourth, it was not irrational for  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
      evidence before him was not sufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of
      showing that the appellant's care needs could not be met in  Pakistan,
      even if that care would be inferior to that which could be provided by
      her sons in the UK. Another  judge  might  have  reached  a  different
      conclusion from the evidence but it was not irrational for  the  judge
      to reach the conclusion he did.

  28. Mr  Malik's  argument  that  the  judge  erred  by  giving  weight  to
      information not disclosed  by  the  respondent  (referred  to  in  the
      refusal letter as "open source information") was  not  raised  in  the
      grounds of appeal and an application to amend the grounds was not made
      prior to the hearing. For that reason,  I  declined  to  consider  the
      point.

Notice of decision

  29. The grounds of appeal do not identify an arguable error of law and the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 17 March 2021               |

