
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/07571/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Determination Promulgated      |
|On 26 January 2018                        |  On 5 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Hitesh Malhotra
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood, Counsel, instructed by Lamptons
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  D
    Lloyd promulgated on 15  May  2017.   The  appeal  is  brought  by  the
    Secretary of State but for convenience  I  shall  refer  to  Mr  Hitesh
    Malhotra as the appellant for the purposes  of  this  determination  as
    that was his status in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a national of India  born  on  5  September  1988  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 October 2010 with  entry  clearance
    as a student.  That expired on 30 November 2013.  The appellant made an
    application for leave to remain which was granted until 16 October 2015
    but was subsequently curtailed prior to that date.

3.   The proceedings concern a further Tier 4 application which was  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 8 January 2015.  There was then a  further
    application made on 8 December 2015, referring to the appellant's wife,
    Kiranjit Kaur Kundal.  There was an evidential dispute as to whether or
    not the appellant and the sponsor were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. At paragraph 18 of the determination, the judge  came  to
    the conclusion that they were. There is no appeal from this finding.

4.   The  judge  then  proceeded  to  consider  whether  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing  the  appellant  from  returning  to   India,   noting   his
    immigration history and that, as is conceded today by Mr Maqsood on his
    behalf, throughout the currency of his relationship  with  the  sponsor
    the appellant's immigration status was precarious.

5.   The judge then found as follows:


         "27.  My  task  is  to  weigh  all  these  matters  up.   With  the
             Immigration Rules satisfied there is  a  much  reduced  public
             interest in refusal.  I can see  little  or  no  advantage  or
             public interest in the appellant  having  to  return  to  make
             entry clearance application, that being the respondent's  most
             weighty argument.


         28.  Having considered all  of  this  together,  I  find  that  the
             decision made by the  respondent  was  not  proportionate  and
             accordingly I allow the appeal on human rights grounds."


6.   The Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  raised  two  matters.  In
    granting permission to appeal, Judge Pullig took the  view  that  there
    was little in the first ground, namely the judge referring to a reduced
    public interest on the basis. This was an infelicitous  form  of  words
    rather than an error of law.

7.   On the second ground, however, permission was granted,  namely  failure
    to give proper  consideration  to  balancing  the  public  interest  in
    respect of a temporary separation and the impact of that on family life
    were the appellant to return to  India  and  make  an  out  of  country
    application.

8.   On this discrete issue there  is  considerable  judicial  comment,  not
    least the case of R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State
    for  the  Home  Department)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary
    separation - proportionality) [2015] UKUT 00189, which addresses how  a
    tribunal  should  properly  balance  the  various  state  and  personal
    interests which come into play when proportionality is being assessed.
9.   The judge did not refer  expressly  to  Chen  and  the  proportionality
    analysis (such as it is) is very briefly expressed.  It became plain to
    me from an early stage of oral argument that there was  a  self-evident
    error of law on the face of this determination and that a reader  could
    not be satisfied that the legal principles were properly  applied.   It
    seemed to me inevitable that this decision must  be  set  aside  and  I
    indicated as much.

10.  Both Mr Staunton, acting for the Secretary of State,  and  Mr  Maqsood,
    acting on behalf of the appellant, were  content  that  I  remake  this
    decision and they each made submissions in this regard.
11.  There being no cross-appeal, I proceed on the basis (i) that  there  is
    in  existence  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between   the
    appellant and the sponsor; (ii) that the financial evidence is such  as
    to  demonstrate  beyond  argument  that  the  sponsor  is   more   than
    sufficiently well placed to satisfy the minimum  prescribed  under  the
    Immigration  Rules;  (iii)  that  there  would  be  no   insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant returning to India and making an application
    out of country; and (iv) that all other things being equal, any out  of
    country application would succeed.

12.  Mr Maqsood took me to the head note of  the  decision  in  Chen,  which
    reads as follows:

         "Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether
         it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to  return  to
         his home country to make an entry clearance application  to  rejoin
         family members in the U.K.  There may be cases in which  there  are
         no insurmountable obstacles to family life  being  enjoyed  outside
         the United Kingdom but where  temporary  separation  to  enable  an
         individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
         disproportionate.  In all cases, it will be for the  individual  to
         place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
         separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
          It will not be enough to rely solely upon the case law  concerning
         Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL
         40.


13.  In reaching his conclusion  that  there  would  not  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant returning to India there  are  a  number  of
    factual findings made by the judge which self-evidently play  into  the
    proportionality  assessment.   One  of  these,  which  is   a   weighty
    consideration, is the judge's acceptance that the appellant had  become
    estranged from his family due to  his  inter-faith  marriage  with  the
    sponsor.  One is of the Sikh religion and the other a  Hindu.  Although
    the judge took the view that this would not  of  itself  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle, it is still  a  factor  which  sounds  in  the
    proportionality assessment.

14.  I give full  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  proper
    immigration control.  Throughout his relationship with the sponsor  the
    appellant's immigration status has been precarious but I also  bear  in
    mind that the application under human rights grounds was made  as  long
    ago as 2015. The lengthy period which these proceedings have  taken  to
    reach a conclusion is in no way down to the fault of the appellant.

15.  It would be disproportionate in circumstances where  the  appellant  is
    well-settled with a sponsor whose financial resources are sufficient to
    pay for his day-to-day living expenses to compel him to return to India
    where there will be difficulties, (albeit not insurmountable obstacles)
    arising from his interfaith marriage in circumstances where there would
    be  something  approaching  an  inevitability  to  an  out  of  country
    application being granted.

16.  Applying the principles of Chikwamba, as expanded  in  Chen,  leads  to
    the proportionality balance coming down in the appellant's favour.  The
    appeal is therefore allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15  May  2017is
      set aside by reason of the error of law identified herein;
   2) The decision is remade allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     23 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
