
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07397/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 15th May 2019  On 21st May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                             MR Md. SHAHINOR ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Evolent Law.
For the respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Both representatives are in agreement that there is a material error
      displayed in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer and
      suggested that I set the decision aside and remit the matter for a de
      novo hearing in the First-tier tribunal. Ms S Igengar confirmed that
      the original application for an adjournment of today's hearing is not
      being pursued.

   2. The appeal concerned the entry clearance officer's decision to refuse
      the appellant's application of 29 November 2017. He had applied for
      entry clearance under appendix FM for the purposes of settlement with
      his wife. They married in an Islamic ceremony on 8 February 2015 and
      then in accordance with UK law on 21 November 2016.It was accepted on
      appeal that the financial requirements were met. The decision was
      reviewed by the entry clearance manager on 20 November 2018 and was
      maintained.

   3. His application was refused under paragraph 320(11) on the basis of
      suitability. In support of this the respondent relied upon his
      immigration history. He came to the United Kingdom under the then work
      permit scheme in 2004. He subsequently made a claim for protection
      indicating he was fearful of return to his home country, Bangladesh,
      because he had been sentenced to 4 years imprisonment. He was to
      attend at the Bangladesh High Commission to obtain documentation but
      did not attend. Finally, he was required to report but absconded on 27
      August 2014. It is recorded that he voluntarily left on 10 September
      2017.

   4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it
      was arguable the judge materially erred in that there was an absence
      of proof of the assertions made by the respondent.

   5. Ms Jones said she had consulted the presenting officer's note from the
      First-tier Tribunal who indicated some concerns about the proofs. The
      reference to a period of imprisonment was made as part of an asylum
      claim. She also noted there was no evidence produced of any
      requirement to report. Ms Iengar added that there was no evidence
      provided from the Bangladesh High Commission to show the appointment
      letter had been sent or of a failure to attend. Furthermore, there was
      no documentation to confirm he had absconded. Overall, she said the
      bundle on behalf of the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal was very
      short and the refusal decision was absent.

Consideration

   6. At paragraph 8 of the decision the judge referred to the basic burden
      and standard of proof. At paragraphs 19 and 21 there is reference to
      the respondent needing to show a breach of rule 320(11). Consequently,
      the judge did demonstrate an awareness that the initial burden upon
      the respondent to establish the appellant engaged in deception or that
      there were aggravating circumstances. The requirement to do so is set
      out in the decision cited at paragraph 21 of the decision and at
      paragraph 10 of JC (Part 9 HC395 - burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT
      00027, which the appellant's representative has helpfully provided.

   7. The judge made findings of fact to the effect that the appellant
      overstayed; work illegally; failed to attend for interview at the High
      Commission and absconded. At paragraph 23 the judge recorded the
      appellant claims not to have been notified of an appointment at the
      Bangladesh High Commission. There is no reference to the evidential
      basis for the respondent's assertion and the presenting officer today
      indicated in fact little evidence was presented.

   8. In the interests of justice and bearing in mind the views of both
      representatives the decision is unsafe and is set aside. The matter is
      remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Brewer materially errs in law and
is set aside. The appeal is to be relisted for a de novo hearing in the
First-tier Tribunal

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.



Directions

   1. Relist for a de novo hearing at Taylor house excluding First-tier
      Tribunal judge Brewer.
   2. It was indicated there is no need for an interpreter.
   3.  It was indicated there may be around 3 witnesses attending. A hearing
      time of around 2 hours can be anticipated.
   4. The appellant's representative should advise the respondent in writing
      what facts are in dispute. The respondent is to consider the necessary
      proofs and provide copies to the appellant. In particular, in the
      absence of any agreement, the respondent should address the following:
        a) The evidence to establish the assertion that the appellant
           worked illegally in the United Kingdom
        b) Evidence that the appellant failed to report as required
        c) Evidence that the appellant was notified of and failed to attend
           an appointment at the Bangladeshi high commission.
        d) Evidence that the appellant absconded.
   5. If possible the respondent should seek to provide a form IS.96 in
      relation to the claimed failure to report. A copy of his asylum
      interview of July 2014 should be provided. The refusal letter should
      be provided. The party should also endeavour to see if there is
      evidence to confirm the fact he left the United Kingdom voluntarily.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

