
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07333/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd March 2020                             |On 23rd March 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                Kirandeep [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Chaggar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of India (born 24th October 1989) appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Parkes) dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision of 27th
    March 2019 refusing her leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8 family/private life grounds.

 2. On 26th July 2018 the Appellant made a human rights claim for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her relationship with  her
    partner and his three children, the eldest of whom is 12 years  of  age
    and the youngest 5 years.  Her partner is an Indian  national  who  has
    settled status in the UK; the children are all British citizens.

 3. The Respondent refused the application because the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the eligibility requirements of the  Immigration  Rules;  she  had
    remained unlawfully in the UK since 2014 without leave.  The Respondent
    considered that paragraph EX1 of the Rules did not  apply  because  the
    Appellant had not provided evidence to show any  exceptional  level  of
    dependency of the children upon her.  Furthermore EX1(b) of  the  Rules
    did  not  apply  because  it  was  not   accepted   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  her  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.

 4. In addition the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  She had only resided in
    the UK for eight years  and  ten  months  prior  to  the  date  of  the
    application for leave to remain.   The  Respondent  considered  whether
    there were any exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's  case,  but
    decided that the evidence submitted was insufficient to show  that  the
    Respondent's decision would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
    for the  Appellant,  her  partner  or  her  partner's  children.   This
    decision was arrived at by taking into account the  best  interests  of
    the children as a primary consideration.  The  Respondent  refused  the
    application.

 5. The Appellant appealed  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on  4th  September  2019  the  FtT
    dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

 6. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds seeking permission set  out  three  strands,  as
    follows:

      i) the FtT's consideration of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  under  the
         Rules is flawed;

     ii) there was a failure to adopt the correct approach in having  regard
         to the best interests  of  the  children,  and  in  the  Article  8
         assessment as a whole; and

    iii) there was a failure to give anxious scrutiny to the case which when
         read as  a  whole  displays  missing  passages  [13]  and  confused
         findings contained in the "Decision and Reasons" [18 - 19].

 7. Permission was granted by FtTJ Gumsley in the following terms:

         "3.  ... I am satisfied that it is arguable that Judge  Parkes  did
             materially err in law:

             (i)  in the  approach  taken,  and  weight  attached,  to  the
                  Appellant's immigration status when considering the proper
                  application of the Immigration Rules;

             (ii) in that the judge has not given anxious scrutiny  to  the
                  case, having regard to apparently missing  passages  [13],
                  and  confused  findings  [18][19]  in  the  Decision   and
                  Reasons; and

             (iii)    has failed to have regard to  relevant  evidence  and
                  adopted a flawed approach when considering the question of
                  the best interests of a child in the assessment of Article
                  8 as a whole.

         4.   In the circumstances, permission to appeal  is  granted.   The
             Appellant may argue all the grounds pleaded by counsel."

 8. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the FtT contains such material error that it must be set aside and  the
    decision remade.  A Rule 24  response  was  served  by  the  Respondent
    defending the decision.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. Before me the Appellant was represented by Miss Chaggar of Counsel  and
    the Respondent by Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.   I
    heard  submissions   from   both   representatives.    Miss   Chaggar's
    submissions relied in the main on the grounds seeking  permission.   In
    addition she emphasised the following points:

     . the FtTJ had placed too much emphasis on the fact that the Appellant
       was an overstayer.  This was only one factor in any consideration of
       whether there are insurmountable obstacles to a return to India

     . the Appellant's family  life  is  continuing  between  her  and  her
       partner and her partner's three British children.  For  that  family
       life to continue in India was virtually impossible.  To  expect  the
       Appellant's partner to wind up his business and  relocate  to  India
       was unrealistic

     . there was a flawed approach to the question of the best interests of
       the three British children.  The Appellant provides their day-to-day
       care for a great part of the time and she is effectively their  main
       carer because she steps into her partner's shoes when he is at work.



10. Miss Chaggar then drew my attention to [18] of the decision  which  she
    said made no sense at all.  This, she said, indicated the lack of  care
    with which the judge had approached the evidence.  Her final point  was
    a reiteration of the fact that maintenance and accommodation was not an
    issue in the Appellant's case.  Her partner had ample funds to maintain
    and accommodate her.

11. Mrs Aboni on behalf of the Respondent relied  on  a  Rule  24  response
    which had been served.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately.  The judge was  correct  in  that  the  starting
    point in this appeal was the Appellant's immigration status.   She  had
    remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   Unlawful  status  was
    properly relevant when considering the  Immigration  Rules.   Added  to
    this the Appellant does not  have  a  parental  relationship  with  her
    partner's three children such as to bring her  within  the  Rules.  The
    judge had made a  finding  that  he  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence regarding the impression she  was  trying  to  give  that  the
    children's mother was not interested in them. The judge factored  those
    matters into his decision as he was entitled to do.     The  result  is
    that the Appellant's presence in the UK is not essential to the  extent
    that the children are dependent upon her because both father and mother
    are present in the UK.

12. So far as [18] is concerned, Mrs Aboni accepted that there was  a  lack
    of proofreading. That was an error but not a material one because it is
    clear from a reading of the decision as a whole why the  appeal  fails.
    It was open to the judge to find  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant and her partner  returning  to  India.   The
    decision was sustainable and contained no material error.

13. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

14. It appears to me that the central issue in this  appeal  turns  on  the
    judge's approach to the application of EX1  and  by  extension  Section
    117B(6) [12].  The judge found that Section 117B(6) does not  apply  as
    the Appellant does not have a parental relationship with her  partner's
    children [17].  The Appellant argues that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the evidence showing the  extent  of  the  care
    that she provides for the three  children.   He  therefore  misdirected
    himself in his finding at [12] that  the  Appellant  does  not  have  a
    parental relationship with them.  I am bound to say that I  find  merit
    in this claim.

15. Both the Appellant and her  partner  gave  evidence  to  the  FtT.  The
    evidence of the Appellant outlined the extent of the care she  provided
    to her partner's children. It was a detailed account.  Whilst I  accept
    that the judge has made a  finding,  namely  that  he  disbelieved  the
    Appellant's evidence that the  children's  biological  mother  was  not
    interested in them, nevertheless he has  failed  to  analyse  and  make
    findings on  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  care  provided  by  the
    Appellant.

16. I accept that the FtTJ has noted that he was handed up a copy of R  (on
    the application of RK) v SSHD (s.117B(6); "parental relationship")  IJR
    [2016} UKUT 31 (IAC).  It is difficult to see however that  the  useful
    guidance given therein has been fully applied to this case.

17. RK was a case concerning a grandmother who relied on  the  relationship
    with her grandchildren in order to remain in the  UK  in  circumstances
    where the children were living with her but also with both parents.   I
    find that what is said in [42 - 43] of RK is particularly  relevant  to
    this appeal.

           "[42]  Whether a person is in a 'parental relationship'  with  a
           child must, necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances.
            Those circumstances will include what role they  actually  play
           in caring for and making decisions in  relation  to  the  child.
           That is likely to be a most  significant  factor.   However,  it
           will also include whether that relationship  arises  because  of
           their legal obligations as a parent or in lieu of a parent under
           a court order or other legal obligation.  I accept  that  it  is
           not   necessary   for   an   individual   to   have    'parental
           responsibility'  in  law  for  there  to   exist   a   'parental
           relationship', although whether or not that is  the  case  is  a
           relevant factor.  What is important is that the  individual  can
           establish that they have taken  on  the  role  that  a  'parent'
           usually plays.


           [43]   I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that,  in  effect,
           an individual must 'step into the shoes of a parent' in order to
           establish a 'parental relationship'.  If  the  role  they  play,
           whether as a relative or friend of the family, is  as  a  caring
           relative or friend but not so as to take on the role of a parent
           then it cannot be said that they have a 'parental  relationship'
           with the child.  It is perhaps obvious to  state  that  'carers'
           are not per se 'parents'.  A child may have carers  who  do  not
           step into the shoes of their parents but look  after  the  child
           for specific periods of time (for example whilst the parents are
           at work) or even longer term (for example where the parents  are
           travelling abroad for a holiday or family visit).  Those  carers
           may be professionally employed; they may be relatives;  or  they
           may be friends.  In all those cases, it  may  properly  be  said
           that there is an element of dependency between the child and his
           or her carers.  However, that alone would not, in  my  judgment,
           give rise to a 'parental relationship'".


18. In short this extract confirms the highly fact-sensitive nature of  the
    inquiry that  needs  to  be  made  to  determine  whether  a  "parental
    relationship" exists.  The judge's findings are  insufficient  to  show
    that the he has had regard to all the evidence before him.

19. This is sufficient to show a material error requiring the  decision  to
    be re-made. In view of this finding it is not necessary to address  the
    other grounds put before me. The decision will have to be set aside  in
    its entirety and a fresh fact-finding analysis undertaken. It is  right
    that this decision is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on
4th September 2019 is allowed  for  material  error.  The  decision  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted for rehearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
(not Judge Parkes) with no findings preserved for that Tribunal  to  re-make
the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     19 March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

