
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07347/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                             |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                xianglong he
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Nawaz of ACS Visas
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of China.  He applied for  entry  clearance
    as a child dependant to join his father, a settled person in the United
    Kingdom.  The application was refused on 1 June 2017, and  the  refusal
    was under paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f).   The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge  dismissed
    the appeal.  After a hearing on 8 February 2019 I found errors  of  law
    in the judge's decision and directed that the appeal be reheard  before
    the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The decision-maker considered first the issue of  sole  responsibility.
    The appellant's father came to the United Kingdom  in  2000,  the  year
    after the appellant  was  born.   The  decision-maker  noted  that  the
    appellant's mother had been his primary carer for  over  sixteen  years
    and that he had provided nothing to show  that  his  father  had  legal
    custody of him.

3.   The appellant's father had returned to China three times since 2010  in
    order to visit him.  There was  no  evidence  of  this  nor  was  there
    evidence of financial support being provided.  There  was  no  evidence
    that  the  appellant's  father  took  important  decisions  about   his
    upbringing for example  where  he  lived,  the  choice  of  school  and
    religious practice.

4.   As regards  the  issue  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations making his  exclusion  undesirable,  the  decision-maker
    noted that the appellant's evidence was that his mother  suffered  from
    medical problems and was  unable  to  provide  the  care  provided  and
    neglected his care needs.  He provided a doctor's letter  stating  that
    his mother suffered from migraines three to four times a week.  He  had
    also said that his adult sister was in China and lived  with  them  but
    would leave home to make her own life and was  therefore  unwilling  to
    provide care where needed.  The decision-maker was satisfied  that  the
    appellant's living arrangements in China could  continue  and  was  not
    satisfied that they could not continue and therefore  found  that  that
    element of the Rules was also not made out.  Nor  had  any  exceptional
    circumstances been identified which might  warrant  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appeal was therefore dismissed.

5.    In  his  submissions  Mr  Nawaz   argued   that,   as   regards   sole
    responsibility, the appellant's father had  been  back  to  China  five
    times since he obtained  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 and he had been providing substantial financial support
    and evidence had been provided.  In addition his  father's  partner  in
    the United Kingdom welcomed the prospect of him coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  requirements  of  the  Rules   on   accommodation   and
    maintenance were met.  As regards important  decisions  concerning  the
    appellant, his father was of course thousands of  miles  away  but  had
    made his wishes known and there had been decisions made by  the  mother
    not necessarily in the best interests of the child or the father.

6.   As regards serious or compelling circumstances, the issue here was  the
    mother's illness.  At the time of the  application  she  was  suffering
    from migraines and there was a  doctor's  report  saying  she  was  not
    capable of looking after the appellant and he was more of a provider of
    care than the receiver.  His sister had now moved out and  he  was  the
    only one at home with his mother and was essentially her carer.

7.   Her care had deteriorated.  The  medical  evidence  referred  to  liver
    disease and her being tested for carcinogens and Aids and liver disease
    and it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  her  to  provide  the  care
    necessary.  It was in the appellant's best interests  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Reliance was placed on what had been said in  Hardward
    (00/TH/01522, 12 July 2000), where it was suggested that one of the key
    factors was the willingness and ability of the overseas adult  to  care
    for the child.  That criterion was met.   Mr  Nawaz  also  referred  to
    Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) where it was said that the focus should be
    on the child's  best  interests  and  Article  8(1).   The  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights was also important,  noting  the  child's  right  to
    maintain on a regular basis direct contact  with  both  parents  unless
    this was contrary to his best interests.  It was in the best  interests
    of the appellant to be reunited with his  father.   His  mother's  ill-
    health needed to be considered.  It was unclear how  long  she  had  to
    live.  There had been different  views  as  to  the  career  he  should
    follow.  He had not made the grade for his chosen course and  the  home
    situation could not have  helped.   Likewise  he  had  had  behavioural
    problems at school and that was largely  because  his  mother  was  not
    there to provide the care.

8.   In his submissions Mr Tufan noted that the appellant was just short  of
    his 18th birthday at the date of application.  It was  clear  from  the
    evidence that at that date the appellant's mother  was  suffering  from
    recurring migraines and that was all.  It was a  common  problem.   The
    test was a high one as set out at paragraph 34 in  Mundeba.   The  case
    came nowhere near the threshold.  He was nearly 20 now.  It was unclear
    whether his sister was living at home at the date of the application so
    she could assist with care.

9.   By way of reply Mr Nawaz referred  to  paragraph  25  of  his  skeleton
    argument where it was said that the sister had not been living at  home
    since March 2017.  The burden had fallen on the appellant when  he  was
    under 18.  He had been left alone to look after his mother.   Migraines
    were serious and she was out of action for days at a time.  He was left
    on his own.  There was  evidence  now  her  suffering  from  additional
    illnesses.  The high threshold was crossed.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  This is, of course, an Article 8 appeal, but it is of  clear  relevance
    to the proportionality evaluation to establish whether or not the claim
    can succeed under the relevant Immigration Rules.

12.  Paragraph 297(1)(e) contains the following requirement:

         "(e) one parent is present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  or
             being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
             sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or


         (f)  one parent or a relative is present and settled in the  United
             Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement
             and  there  are  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  child's
             care."

13.  As regards the issue of sole  responsibility,  it  is  clear  from  the
    appellant's father's witness statement that he was not in a position to
    provide for his family in China with any monies  since  he  was  barely
    surviving himself.  This was up to 2010 and subsequently  he  has  been
    able to save money and send remittances to the children  and  has  made
    five trips to China including the first one on October 2010 and  up  to
    February 2018.  He had always asked his ex-partner  to  make  sure  the
    children went to good schools and had  the  opportunity  to  go  on  to
    university but she did not always listen to him  and  he  believed  his
    children's education suffered as a result.  He had  maintained  contact
    with the family primarily for the sake of the children by telephone and
    later via the internet.  In his last  trip  he  noted  that  his  son's
    relationship with his mother had broken down and that he blamed her for
    not permitting him to go on to higher education and there was  constant
    tension between them.  He had previously been expelled from school  for
    bad behaviour.  His education had been neglected by the mother  and  he
    had gone for vocational training with which he was never happy.

14.  I do not consider this evidence is such as to satisfy the test of  sole
    responsibility under  paragraph  297(i)(e).   Clearly  the  appellant's
    father has had some involvement in his life during the many years  when
    they have been separated, but he has not been in a position to do  much
    more really than give  advice  and  keep  in  touch  and  provide  some
    financial support since  2010.   This  falls  some  way  short  of  the
    requirement  of  sole  responsibility  as  set  out  in  the  Rule  and
    accordingly the claim could not succeed in relation to that  particular
    criterion of the Rules.

15.  As regards  the  issue  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations, I note what was said in Mundeba at paragraph 34 that:

         "Serious" read with "compelling" together indicates that family  or
         other considerations render the exclusion of  the  child  from  the
         United Kingdom undesirable.  The analysis is one of degree in kind.
          Such an interpretation sets a high threshold that  excludes  cases
         where, without more, it  is  simply  the  wish  of  parties  to  be
         together however natural that ambition may be."

16.  There is also reference to paragraph 48 of TD  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  to
    the test being an onerous one.

17.  There is medical evidence from  the  Changle  City  Hospital  dated  27
    January 2017 referring to the  appellant's  mother  suffering  frequent
    attacks of migraine in the recent  two  years  and  that  the  episodes
    happen on a weekly basis and last for three to four  days  within  each
    episode.  Among other things she is advised not to look after  children
    on her own and that she must have a carer  during  attacks.   Otherwise
    there was a diagnosis of liver disease in a document from February 2018
    and tests for carcinogens and Hepatitis B  and  Hepatitis  B  HBV  test
    again in 2018.  It would  appear  clear  that  Huizhu  the  appellant's
    mother, has liver problems as well as  the  migraines  from  which  she
    suffers.  But there is no medical report as to the impact  of  this  on
    her life, and the only reference to that is in the inpatient  discharge
    report of 27 January 2017 concerning her migraines.

18.  It is not irrelevant I think to note that the appellant was  nearly  18
    at the time of the application, albeit Mr Nawaz is surely right to make
    the point that the Rules are the Rules  and  he  was  a  child  at  the
    relevant time.  But the need for care that would arise in the  case  of
    someone who is nearly 18 is clearly different  from  that  which  would
    apply  in  the  case  of  a  small  child  and  that  is  relevant   to
    consideration of the application of sub-paragraph (f) to the  facts  of
    this case.  In essence, the medical evidence  is  that  Huizhu  suffers
    from liver disease and migraines.  In her witness statement of  25  May
    2018 she refers to being in  very  poor  health  and  having  very  bad
    medical conditions and that she often goes to hospital and is currently
    taking medication and under treatment and she  cannot  look  after  the
    appellant and instead he often has to look after her.

19.  This evidence is vague and unspecific.  The test as noted above is  one
    that sets a high threshold.  The fact that the appellant's  mother  has
    the problems she has and that he has to look after  her  frequently  is
    not in my view such as to give rise to a satisfaction of this provision
    of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly the appellant does  not  satisfy
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20.  This has clear  implications  for  the  Article  8  claim.   Compelling
    circumstances must be shown in order for an Article 8 claim to  succeed
    where the claim cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.   When  one
    looks at the consideration as under section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, I  note  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest that people seeking to enter the United Kingdom  are  able  to
    speak English and there is no evidence in that  regard.   Also  in  the
    public interest such  persons  are  financially  independent,  and  the
    evidence of the sponsor is that he is  able  to  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Rules.

21.  The proportionality evaluation has to take  into  account  on  the  one
    hand the effect on the private and family life of the particular person
    and on the other hand the public interest.  The effect  of  an  adverse
    decision is to maintain the separation of the appellant and his father.
     But separation has existed for nearly  all  of  the  appellant's  life
    barring the five visits to China  the  sponsor  had  made  since  2010.
    There is no strong public interest operating in the appellant's  favour
    bearing in mind that he has  not  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As regards his best interests, he was born in China
    and has been brought up there and lived with his mother throughout  his
    life.  His father has played a  minimal  role  in  his  life  only.   I
    consider that his best interests lie in remaining with  his  mother  in
    China.

22.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that the  Article  8  claim
    of the appellant cannot succeed and accordingly his appeal falls to  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 08 May 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 08 May 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

