
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07877/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2020                           |On 9 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                EMILE BOISSY
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sanders
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. By a decision promulgated on 4 March 2019, I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         1.   The appellant is a male citizen of Gambia which was born on  9
         July 1947. He first entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002.  By  a
         decision dated 30 June 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
         appellant's human rights application. The  appellant  appealed  the
         First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 6  December
         2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should  be
         set aside. The appellant in this case is in  very  ill  health.  He
         requires  regular  kidney  dialysis,  the  availability  of   which
         treatment in Gambia is uncertain. The judge wrongly determined that
         he need consider only the reasonableness of the decision to  remove
         the appellant in the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds. He failed to
         apply the test of 'very significant obstacles' as provided  for  in
         paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended) (see  AS  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         1284). I agree with Ms Sanders, who appeared for the  appellant  at
         the initial Upper Tribunal hearing, that this  error  vitiated  the
         judge's subsequent analysis.

         3.   It is unfortunate that this appeal is taken some  considerable
         time to reach the Upper Tribunal.  Since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing, the  Court  of  Appeal  has  given  its  judgement  in  AM
         (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64 which, in turn, is now subject to  an
         appeal to the Supreme Court. It is possible that judgement  of  the
         Supreme Court will be available by the time I remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing. I am also  concerned  that  up-to-date
         evidence concerning the availability of dialysis and other relevant
         treatment in Gambia should be before the  Upper  Tribunal  when  it
         comes to remake the decision. I therefore direct that there  should
         be a case management review (CMR) before  me  at  Bradford  on  the
         first available date after 1 March 2019. The parties may rely  upon
         fresh evidence provided copies of such evidence  are  sent  to  the
         other party and to the Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days prior to
         the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         4.   The decision of the first-tier  tribunal  is  set  aside.  The
         Upper Tribunal  shall  remake  the  decision  following  a  resumed
         hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed  (before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Lane). I direct that there shall be a case management  review
         before me at Bradford on the first available  date  after  1  March
         2019 (20 minutes allowed).

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 25 February 2020, I informed  the
    representatives and  the  appellant  that  I  intended  to  remake  the
    decision and to allow the appeal on human rights grounds. I record also
    that Mr Diwnycz who appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  did  not
    advance by way of submissions any reasons to suggest  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.

 3. Ms  Sanders,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the
    appellant's current circumstances and those pertaining in  the  country
    of removal, the Gambia, fall  squarely  within  the  definition  of  an
    Article 3 ECHR health case as articulated by the Court of Appeal in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64 at [38]:

         So  far  as  the  ECtHR  and  the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It  extends  to  cases  where
         "substantial grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a
         real risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases where
         the applicant faces a real risk  of  rapidly  experiencing  intense
         suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the  receiving  state
         because  of  their  illness  and  the  non-availability  there   of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same  reason.  In  other  words,  the  boundary  of  Article  3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state.

 4. I am aware that the Supreme Court  has  heard  an  appeal  against  the
    judgment in AM and that the outcome of that appeal is awaited. However,
    given the very serious medical  condition  of  the  appellant  in  this
    appeal, I do not consider that there is any reason further to  delay  a
    determination of the appeal.

 5. The appellant's medical condition is now very serious. He is  suffering
    stage V chronic kidney disease. He cannot urinate at all. In  order  to
    survive, he requires haemodialysis three times every week. Each session
    lasts for four hours. The most recent  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    treating doctor which is dated 27 August 2019 unambiguously states that
    the appellant would die within several days and almost certainly within
    one week if he does not receive each and every dialysis treatment which
    he requires. That requirement is entirely at odds with the availability
    of the necessary treatment in the Gambia. A  haemodialysis  centre  has
    been  set  up  there  largely  through  the  work  of  the   foundation
    established by a Ms Flasrud who has provided evidence  in  the  appeal.
    That evidence shows that there are only 14 beds for dialysis  to  serve
    the entire population of the Gambia. Ms Flasrud states that the  centre
    is aware that at least seven patients have died awaiting treatment  for
    kidney failure/disease. I find as a fact  that,  within  a  very  short
    period after arrival in the Gambia, there would be a  very  significant
    likelihood  that,  given  the  nature  of  facilities   for   treatment
    available, this appellant would miss one or more  dialysis  treatments.
    Indeed, I find it very likely that he would miss treatments within days
    of arriving in the country. The effect of missing any treatment will be
    that the appellant would die. I find that  these  facts  fall  squarely
    within the 'very modest' extension of the rule  in  N  (2005)  UKHL  31
    which Lord Sales articulates in AM. Accordingly, I find  it  is  appeal
    should be allowed on Article 3 human rights grounds. In addition and by
    reference to the same findings of fact, it is clear that the  appellant
    would face very significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  the
    society of  Gambia.  In  consequence,  he  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 of HC 395 (as amended).




    Notice of Decision

    The Upper Tribunal has remade  the  decision.  The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 30 June  2017  was
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 and 8 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

















































