
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07585/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester by Skype for Business     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2021                           |On 2 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                PUSHPA GHALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant., a female citizen of Nepal who was born on 2 April 1962,
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 21 March 2019 refusing her entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated
    on 24 February 2020, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  appeal  turned  on  whether  the  appellant  had  proved  to  the
    appropriate standard of  proof  that  her  husband,  a  former  Ghurkha
    soldier, was dead. The First-tier Tribunal found that she had failed to
    prove this as a fact and dismissed her appeal. At  the  Upper  Tribunal
    initial hearing on 11 February 2021, Mr McVeety, who appeared  for  the
    respondent, told me that the respondent considered that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law by finding that the evidence adduced  by  the
    appellant had been insufficient to prove that  her  husband  was  dead.
    The judge's analysis was flawed in law for the reasons advanced in  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal and as summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Gill who granted permission to appeal.  He  submitted  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal should set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake the decision allowing the appeal.

 3. In the circumstances, I set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    and remake the decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is allowed.


Signed                              Date 11 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane









