
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07356/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 4 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            MR RIZWAN ALI JANJUA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Maher & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of the decision under appeal following an error of
    law ruling made by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  on  24  April  2017,
    whereby she set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The background to this case is that the  appellant  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan, who entered the United Kingdom on 1 April 2007 in  possession
    of a student visa which was valid until 31 October 2008.  On 10 October
    2008 he applied for leave to remain as a Highly Skilled  Migrant.   His
    application was refused on 15 January 2009, as he had attempted to  use
    false documents as part of his  application.   The  appellant  appealed
    against the refusal decision, and his appeal was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 20 March 2009.  The appellant sought judicial  review,
    but permission was refused by the High Court on 15 April 2009  and  his
    appeal rights were exhausted as of 3 July 2009.

 3. On 4 April 2012, the appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the grounds that he had a British wife, Nazia Bibi,  and  a  British
    child by her.

 4. On 15 October 2012 the then  Secretary  of  State  made  the  following
    decision on the appellant's application:

       The Secretary of State is not satisfied  that  your  application  is
       being  sought  for  a  purpose  covered  by  the  Immigration  Laws,
       therefore your application has been refused under paragraph 322(1).

       Your application has also been considered  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules, however it is not believed that your circumstances are  of  a
       compellingly compassionate nature for a grant of indefinite leave to
       remain to be made.

       As a result of the changes to the Immigration Rules which came  into
       effect on 9 July 2012, any family life  claims  will  now  be  given
       consideration under Appendix FM.  Consideration to  your  claim  has
       therefore been given under the exceptions at paragraph EX.1(a).   It
       has  been  accepted  that  you  have  a   genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship with your child who is a British citizen under the  age
       of 18.  It is also considered  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It is for this reason
       that the position has been taken  to  grant  you  limited  leave  to
       remain for a period of 30 months, thus entering a 10-year  route  to
       settlement.

 5. On 10 April 2015, the appellant applied for further leave to remain  on
    the same basis as before.  On 21 September 2015, the Secretary of State
    gave her reasons for refusing the application.  She began by rehearsing
    the appellant's immigration history, but did not make reference to  the
    appellant's past  dishonesty.   The  application  was  refused  on  two
    grounds.  Firstly, it was refused under S-LTR.1.7 as without reasonable
    excuse he had failed to comply with a request  to  provide  information
    with regard to his current application.  Secondly, as a consequence  of
    his failure to provide the requested information, she was not satisfied
    that he remained in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  Nazia
    Bibi.

 6. She noted that in support of his application he  had  raised  the  fact
    that he had two British national children, one of whom was aged 3 years
    and 2 months, and  the  other  was  aged  2  months,  at  the  date  of
    application.  However, he had provided no evidence to support his claim
    that he had a genuine parental relationship with  these  two  children.
    Furthermore, they would be able to continue to have family life in  the
    UK as dependants of their mother.  He had not provided any evidence  to
    suggest that there was anything preventing  Nazir  Bibi  from  assuming
    full parental responsibility and care of his  children,  should  he  be
    removed from the UK.

 7. The appellant's  appeal  came  before  Judge  Barrowclough  sitting  at
    Columbus House, Newport on 8 September 2016.  Both parties were legally
    represented, and the Judge received oral evidence  from  the  appellant
    and Mrs Nazir Bibi.  In his subsequent  decision,  he  found  that  the
    respondent had been right to refuse the application for  non-compliance
    with the suitability requirements set out in  S-LTR.1.7.   However,  he
    found that the suitability requirements were now met, and that  it  was
    now  shown  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with Mrs Bibi,  and  also  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with the two children.

 8. The Judge considered whether the appellant  could  bring  himself  with
    EX.1(b).  He bore in mind that Mrs Bibi was a British citizen, now aged
    34, and had come to the country at age 7.  No evidence had been adduced
    concerning the possible difficulties involved  in  living  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  He found that both the appellant and Mrs Bibi had been
    born and raised in Pakistan, both were of Pakistani ethnicity, and both
    spoke Urdu as their first language.  He concluded that there  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles to their family life  continuing  outside  the
    UK, and the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  for
    the grant of leave to remain under the Partner route.

 9. With regard to EX.1(a), the Judge found that the appellant did not meet
    the relationship requirements set out in E-LTRPT.2.3, and so  he  could
    not take the benefit of EX.1(a) so as to qualify for  leave  to  remain
    under the Parent route. (EX.1 provides an exception to the  immigration
    status requirement set out in E-LTRP.3.2, but not an exception  to  the
    relationship requirements set out in E-LTRPT.2.3).

10. The Judge held that it was ultimately a question of choice for Mrs Bibi
    and her two young children.  She had personal  and  cultural  links  in
    Pakistan to which she  had  returned  for  visits.   It  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect Mrs Bibi to accompany her husband  to  Pakistan,
    together with their two young children, particularly since it was  well
    established that the children's best interests were to be brought up by
    both their parents where possible.

11. The Judge turned to consider the appellant's Article  8  claim  outside
    the Rules.  He could speak English, if not fluently; and it seemed that
    he was employed by Tesco and he had  some  savings,  although  it  also
    appeared that he could not meet the financial requirements of  Appendix
    FM.  The only possible potentially compelling reason why an  Article  8
    assessment was required was if Mrs Bibi decided to  remain  in  the  UK
    with the couple's small children. If  so,  the  family  unit  would  be
    broken up, and unless the appellant  was  subsequently  able  to  apply
    successfully for leave, his children would be brought up without  their
    father's presence - and he would be deprived of their  company  and  of
    helping and seeing them grow up in his role  as  their  father.   Thus,
    returning the appellant to Pakistan might penalise his children as well
    as himself.  So, on balance, he accepted  that  there  were  compelling
    reasons why and Article 8 assessment was required.

12. The Judge went on  to  conduct  a  proportionality  assessment,  having
    regard to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  At the time that Mrs Bibi embarked on the relationship with  the
    appellant, and also when she married him,  the  appellant  was  in  the
    country illegally, whether or not Mrs Bibi was aware of that fact.  The
    appellant had attempted to obtain leave to stay in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of documentary evidence which the Tribunal found not to be
    genuine or reliable, and this counted against him.  They were not  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration  into  Pakistan,
    as he had lived most of his life  there.   Finally,  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly arduous for Mrs  Bibi  and  the  couple's  small
    children to choose to return to Pakistan with the  appellant.   So,  he
    concluded  that  removing  the  appellant  to  Pakistan  would  not  be
    disproportionate  when  set  against  the  public   interest   in   the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls.

13. Following an error of law hearing at Field  House  on  20  April  2017,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara gave  her  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by a material error of
    law, such that  it  should  be  set  aside  and  remade.   For  present
    purposes, it is convenient to quote paragraph [15] of her decision:

       Turning to the grounds, it is the case that the Judge addressed  the
       legitimate expectation point at [13], however he did not proceed  to
       weigh the previous grant of leave to remain outside the Rules,  made
       in  full  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  unimpressive  immigration
       history, in the balance in assessing the Article 8 claim outside the
       Rules.  It is  especially  important,  given  the  Judge's  positive
       findings  as  to  the  existence  of  a   genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship between the appellant, his partner  and  the  children.
       There was, therefore, no adverse change in the appellant's situation
       since the grant of leave in September  2012  and  the  date  of  the
       hearing in September 2016, other than that his  private  and  family
       life is more entrenched and a further child has come along.  This is
       a matter which was deserving of some consideration  in  a  balancing
       exercise, whereas there was none.

14. In paragraph [16] of her decision,  Judge  Kamara  concluded  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment of the  proportionality  of  the
    appellant's removal was flawed.  As there was no error in  relation  to
    the Judge's findings in respect of the Rules  or  in  his  findings  of
    fact, these were to be preserved.   Judge  Kamara  made  the  following
    directions:

    1. The appellant  and  respondent  are  to  prepare  detailed  skeleton
       arguments which address all relevant matters as well  as  the  basis
       upon which leave to remain outside the  Rules  was  granted  to  the
       appellant.

    2. The said skeleton arguments must be served on the Upper Tribunal  no
       later than 10 working days prior to the resumed hearing date.

The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me, to remake the decision, Mr  Tufan  handed  up
    some written submissions dated 15 June 2017  which  his  colleague,  Mr
    Singh, had prepared in compliance with Judge Kamara's directions.   The
    thrust of the submissions was that,  even  giving  due  weight  to  the
    previous grant of leave in October  2012,  the  interference  with  the
    appellant's private and family life was not disproportionate  when  set
    against the public interest, which in this case involved  an  appellant
    with a very poor immigration history.

16. Mr Ahmed appeared  before  me  without  a  skeleton  argument,  and  he
    apologised for the fact that no skeleton argument had  been  served  in
    compliance with Judge Kamara's directions.  He had not appeared at  the
    hearing before Judge Kamara, and he indicated that  he  had  only  been
    recently instructed to appear at the hearing before me.   He  submitted
    that the present case was 'on all fours' with the case of SF  &  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014 act) Albania 27 UKUT 00120 (IAC),  a  decision  of
    Vice-President Ockelton and Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara, promulgated on
    16 February 2017.  Accordingly, he submitted, there could be  only  one
    outcome, which was that the appellant's appeal should be allowed.

17. Although Mr Ahmed had not brought along a copy  of  this  decision,  Mr
    Tufan was aware of it and he addressed me briefly on its  implications.
    He did not formally concede the point taken by Mr Ahmed,  but  he  also
    did not seek to distinguish SF.

Discussion and Findings

18. The favourable immigration decision of October 2012 is puzzling, as the
    appellant's  highly  adverse  immigration  history  at  that   juncture
    provided a very good reason as to why it would have been reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's then only child (who was still a baby) to  leave
    the UK with the appellant and Mrs Bibi, notwithstanding his status as a
    British citizen.

19. The direction made by Judge Kamara gave the respondent the  opportunity
    to provide some further insight into the rationale for the decision  of
    October 2012.  But  this  opportunity  has  not  been  grasped  by  the
    respondent, and as a result the respondent is unable to explain why the
    appellant should be treated less favourably now than he was in  October
    2012.  It is not an adequate answer that the appellant has "a very poor
    immigration history", as submitted by  Mr  Singh,  as  this  very  poor
    immigration history was presumably taken into account by the respondent
    when making the decision in October 2012  to  grant  the  appellant  30
    months' leave to remain,  rather  than  compelling  him  to  return  to
    Pakistan.

20. The effect of the decision to grant leave in October 2012 was  to  wipe
    the slate clean, so far as the appellant's past  immigration  offending
    was concerned.  Since October 2012 the appellant has  been  present  in
    the United Kingdom lawfully.

21. In SF, Mr Wilding drew the attention  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the
    Immigration Directorate Instruction on "Family life  as  a  partner  or
    parent and private life,  10-year  routes"  (August  2015  edition)  at
    paragraph  11.2.3.   The  Tribunal  characterised  this  paragraph   as
    containing important guidance on the topic of "Would it be unreasonable
    to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK?"

22. The guidance provides, inter alia, as follows:

       Save in cases involving criminality,  the  decision-maker  must  not
       take a decision in relation to the parent  or  primary  carer  of  a
       British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be  to
       force that British citizen to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
       that child.  This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
       Zambrano ...

       Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
       primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must
       always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent  or
       primary carer.

       In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave  to  the
       parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
       child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship.

       It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave  where  the
       conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to  considerations
       of such weight as to justify separation, if a child could  otherwise
       stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the  UK  or
       in the EU.

23. The Tribunal in SF held:

    10. It is clear that the appellants do not  have  available  to  them  a
        ground of appeal on the basis that the decision is not in accordance
        with the Law, such as before the amendments made to the 2002 Act  by
        the 2014 Act they might have had.  Nevertheless  it  appears  to  us
        that the terms of the  Guidance  are  an  important  source  of  the
        Secretary of State's view of what is to be regarded as reasonable in
        the circumstances, and it  is  important  in  our  judgment  of  the
        Tribunal of both levels to make  decisions  which  are,  as  far  as
        possible, consistent with decisions  made  in  other  areas  of  the
        process of Immigration control.

    11. The Secretary of State makes a decision in a person's favour on  the
        basis of guidance of this sort, there can of course  be  no  appeal,
        and the result would be that the decision falls below the  radar  of
        consideration by a Tribunal.  It is only possible for  Tribunals  to
        make decisions on matters such as reasonableness  consistently  with
        those that have been made in favour of individuals by the  Secretary
        of State, if the Tribunal applies similar or identical processes  to
        those employed by the Secretary of State.

    12. On  occasion,  perhaps  where  it  has  more  information  than  the
        Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if the case  is
        exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason for departing from  such
        guidance.  Where there is clear guidance which covers a  case  where
        an assessment has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  Guidance  clearly
        demonstrates what the outcome of the assessment would have been made
        by the Secretary of  State,  it  would,  we  think,  be  the  normal
        practice of a Tribunal to take such Guidance  into  account  and  to
        apply it in assessing the same consideration in  a  case  that  came
        before it.

24. In the decision under appeal,  the  Respondent  did  not  rely  on  the
    appellant's "very poor immigration history" prior to October 2012 as  a
    reason for refusing him Article 8 relief. In any event, since the slate
    has been wiped clean, the appellant cannot  now  be  treated  as  being
    guilty of conduct which would, under the Guidance, justify separation.

25. However, although Mr Tufan did not seek to distinguish SF, the facts of
    that case were very different from the facts of this case and I am  not
    persuaded that the policy guidance in paragraph 11.2.3 has  a  material
    bearing on a case such as this, where the Respondent has made it  clear
    in the decision under appeal that the British national children are not
    expected to follow their father to  the  country  of  return;  but  are
    expected to stay with their mother in the UK. If they were to  go  with
    their parents to Pakistan, it would be because their parents had freely
    chosen this course, not because they or their parents were expected  to
    leave  the  UK.  This  critical  distinction   between   "choice   "and
    "expectation"  was  also  rightly  recognised  and  applied  by   Judge
    Barrowclough, and his decision does not run counter to the guidance.

26. The crucial factor in this case is not  the  existence  of  the  policy
    guidance, which I find does not avail the appellant. It is  the  simple
    fact that the respondent has previously accepted that it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the oldest British national child to leave the UK,
    and hence that the appellant should also not be required to  leave  the
    UK.  If  it  was  unreasonable  in  October  2012,  it  is  even   more
    unreasonable now, when the oldest child has reached the age of six, and
    is in full-time education.  So, having  particular  regard  to  section
    117B(6) of the 2002  Act,  I  find  that  on  the  highly  unusual  and
    exceptional facts of this case - namely, the concession in 2012 that it
    was unreasonable for the Appellant's first-born child to leave the  UK,
    and that the Appellant should be granted leave to remain as  a  result,
    irrespective of his highly adverse immigration history or of any  other
    relevant  public  interest  consideration  apparently  -  the  decision
    appealed against is disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

The appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse to grant  him  further
leave to remain is allowed on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 28 August 2017


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal, I have given consideration as to  whether  to
make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid  or  is  payable,
and I have decided to make no fee  award  as  the  application  was  rightly
refused under the Rules, and the appellant needed to bring forward  evidence
by way of appeal in order to succeed in his appeal.


Signed                              Date 28 August 2017


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

