
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07829/2018 +5

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 24 May 2019                       |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   Mrs O o
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and
                                 Miss O O O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and
                                  MR O K O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and
                                 Miss t O O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Fourth Appellant
                                     and
                                 MR M T A O
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             Fifth Appellant
                                     and
                                 MR D O A O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             Sixth Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who appealed a  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Appellant has five dependants all of whom are minors and dependent upon
    her appeal.

 2. Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-ties Tribunal  O'Garro  who,
    in a decision promulgated on 11 March 2019, dismissed it. The Appellant
    sought permission to appeal. It was granted by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal SPJ Buchanan on 17 April 2019. His  reasons  for  so  granting
    were: -

         "1.  The appellants seek permission to appeal, (in time), against a
         Decision of a FTTJ (Judge Cas  O'Garro)  who,  in  a  Decision  and
         Reasons promulgated on 11 March  2019,  dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal.

         2.   The Grounds of Appeal [GOAsJ contend that  the  FTTJ  arguably
         erred because: 6 "It is submitted that the FTT failed to follow the
         guidance given by the  superior  courts.  The  FTT's  finding  that
         removal of the two elder children appellant to Nigeria  at  a  time
         when he is just about to sit crucial exams as reasonably  blatantly
         disregards the guidance set down by the Court of Appeal  and  Upper
         Tribunal. This is very significant factors which carry considerable
         weight because it is recognised that in such circumstances  removal
         would have deleterious consequences upon both appellants."

         3.   At (42) the FTTJ addresses issues of  proportionality  in  the
         context of an article 8 ECHR claim. At (45) he concludes: "I accept
         the appellant's two eldest children who are expected to  take  life
         changing exams next spring is at a crucial stage in their education
         but I am sure the respondent can delay any removal  of  the  family
         unit until the two eldest children have completed their exams.  The
         children can continue their education in Nigeria."

         4.   Whereas the materiality of any error might be diluted  by  the
         effluxion of time since the date of hearing, it  is  arguable  that
         the conclusion at (45) can only fairly be construed as  determining
         that as at  date  of  appeal  on  23  October  2018,  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove two  of  the  appellants.  This  is  the
         argument contended in paragraphs 2-6 of the application.

         5.   For these reasons, I conclude that it is arguable by reference
         to the application that there may have been error  of  law  in  the
         Decision as identified in the application. I  grant  permission  to
         appeal."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Prior to the hearing I noted that Paul John & Co Solicitors had written
    to the Tribunal on 30 April 2019 indicating that their client "will  be
    going to court by herself".  At  the  outset  of  today's  hearing  the
    Appellant confirmed that she  was  representing  herself.  I  therefore
    fully explained the procedure to her. I provided her  with  a  pen  and
    paper and asked her to tell me at any time if there was  anything  that
    she did not understand where upon I would seek to explain further.  She
    told me that she was ready to proceed. She  wished  to  rely  upon  the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal.

 5. Mr Walker  urged  me  to  accept  that  there  was  no  material  error
    whatsoever within Judge O'Garro's decision. At  paragraph  40  she  had
    recorded that it was reasonable to expect the Appellant's  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom along with the Appellant. She had done so with
    reference to the recent authority of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD 2018  UKSC  53
    and other  relevant  authority.  The  Judge  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the children. None are British citizens and at the time of
    the decision none had been in the United Kingdom for seven  years.  The
    Judge appreciated that the two  eldest  children  were  about  to  take
    examinations and referred the Respondent to this in  her  decision  and
    her expectation that removal of the family unit would  not  take  place
    until such examinations had taken place.

 6. The Appellant sought to reargue the case that was before Judge O'Garro.
    She emphasised that she cannot return to her country of origin. She has
    nobody there to fall back upon.  Her  mother  is  aged  and  unable  to
    support the Appellant and her children. There is nothing that  she  can
    do there. Indeed, she fears not being able to look after them.  If  she
    is returned it will be "tough and hard". There was nothing further  she
    wished to add in relation to the submissions made by Mr Walker.

 7. There is within this decision no material error of law. Given  the  age
    of the children at the time of the decision and the fact that they  are
    not British citizen children it was left to the Judge to  consider  all
    the factors that she did  when  carrying  out  the  required  balancing
    exercise. She has taken all the competing  factors  into  account.  She
    recognised, and catered for, the fact that two  of  the  children  were
    about to sit examinations. She has come to a decision that was open  to
    be made on the totality of the evidence. The Appellant  was  unable  to
    show any exceptional circumstances that would lead to any unjustifiably
    harsh consequences if returned.

 8. Accordingly, there is no material error within the Judge's decision.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
