
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07633/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Manfred Ayuk-Etang
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee of Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid,
solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Manfred Ayuk-Etang (the  Applicant)  is  a  citizen  of
    Cameroon whose date of birth is given as 25 December 1987.  In  January
    2012 he entered with leave as a visitor which expired on 28 June  2012.
    In July 2017 the Applicant registered his marriage with  Ruth  Margaret
    Cant, a British citizen by birth on 6 January 1977.  They  met  at  the
    church where she is employed as a Children's Minister  and  with  which
    she has been associated since November 2012.

 2. The Applicant did not seek to regularise his immigration  status  until
    his application of 19 January 2018 for leave to  remain  based  on  his
    private and family life with his wife.

The SSHD's Original Decision

 3. On 12 March 2018 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused the Applicant further
    leave. He did not meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules because he was  an  over-stayer.  There  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles as referred to in Section EX.1(b) of  Appendix
    FM to the continuation of his private and family life in Cameroon, even
    if any difficulties which his wife might experience on relocation there
    were taken into account.

 4. The Applicant did not meet any of the  time  critical  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his re-integration into Cameroon where he  had
    lived for some twenty-four years and received  a  university  education
    before coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.   There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant the grant of leave  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. On 26 March 2018 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The  grounds  are  generic  referring  to  the  Applicant's
    private and family life in the United Kingdom and asserting that he  no
    longer has any connection with Cameroon where on  return  he  would  be
    destitute. The grounds  also  assert  that  the  SSHD  failed  to  give
    adequate consideration to various aspects of his application.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 01 August 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Freer allowed the appeal.

 7. On 6 September 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford  granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the grounds it was arguable the Judge  had
    erred by:

       . misdirecting himself

       . failing to give adequate reasons to support  finding  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to remove the Applicant

       .  finding  that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
         Applicant returning to Cameroon and his wife joining him (para.  51
         of his decision) and also finding  that  the  SSHD's  decision  was
         disproportionate (paras.61-66).

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Appellant together with his wife and  his  parents-in-law  attended
    the hearing. I explained the purpose and procedure to be  followed  and
    the Applicant confirmed his address but otherwise neither  he  nor  his
    wife took any active part in the proceedings.

Submissions for the SSHD

 9. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that at paras. 53ff of his  decision  the
    Judge  had  found  that  Applicant  had  not  shown  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and had not adequately or at  all
    explained what made his return with or without his  wife  unjustifiably
    harsh.  The  only  exceptional  circumstances  which  the   Judge   had
    identified were in para. 64 in which he had referred to the wife's work
    in and for the church and noted that other than the fact  of  her  work
    there was little documentary evidence in support.

10. The Applicant had developed his private and family life only at a  time
    when he had been an over-stayer and  consequently  his  status  in  the
    United Kingdom had throughout been precarious. The  Judge  had  made  a
    finding para.37 that the Applicant and his  wife  had  not  been  in  a
    durable relationship for a period of at least  2  years  prior  to  the
    application leading to the SSHD's decision.

11. The Judge at para.51 had made a clear and unqualified finding that  the
    relationship between the Applicant and his wife had been "rather brief"
    and it would not "encounter demonstrably insurmountable  obstacles"  in
    Cameroon. He had not explained why the public interest  in  maintaining
    proper immigration control was displaced or  outweighed.  The  decision
    was not safe and should be set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

12. Mr Lee submitted there was no  inconsistency  between  a  finding  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the return of  the  Applicant
    and a finding that it was not appropriate to insist he return, if  only
    to make an application for entry clearance as a spouse.

13. Throughout the operative parts of  the  decision  the  Judge  had  made
    findings both for and against the Applicant. He had considered all  the
    relevant factors. He had found the income threshold of Appendix FM  had
    been met; that the Applicant and his wife had a strong  and  subsisting
    relationship; that his wife  and  her  work  were  of  benefit  to  the
    community and that it would be unduly harsh to  remove  the  Applicant:
    see paras. 61-66 of the decision.

14. At para.51 of the sole judgment in R (Agyarko) v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11
    Lord Reed found:-

         "... whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal ..."

    There was a spectrum of situations.  There  was  little  or  no  public
    interest in requiring the Applicant  to  return  to  Cameroon  for  the
    purpose of obtaining entry clearance. The Applicant should  be  allowed
    to stay in the United Kingdom and given leave not because there were no
    insurmountable obstacles to his return to Cameroon but because  of  the
    reasoning in R (Agyarko).

15. The two parts of the Judge's decision were not incompatible  with  each
    other and the SSHD's appeal should be dismissed.

Response for the SSHD

16. Ms Willocks-Briscoe said the Judge had not given  adequate  reasons  to
    support  his  finding  the  appeal  should  be  allowed   outside   the
    Immigration Rules. Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  is  not  a
    dispensation for the  circumvention  of  the  Rules.  She  referred  to
    paras.36 and 39 of the judgment in R (Hiahong Chen) v SSHD  IJR  [2015]
    UKUT 00189 (IAC):-

         "(it was suggested) that there  must  be  a  "sensible  reason"  to
         require an individual to make an application  for  entry  clearance
         abroad. I reject the submission. I do not accept that, in using the
         phrase "sensible reason", Elias LJ was setting  out  the  test  for
         applying the guidance in Chikwamba, nor that he reversed the burden
         of proof. The burden remains upon the applicant to place before the
         Secretary of State all material that  he  or  she  relies  upon  to
         suggest that removal pursuant to the refusal of leave would  breach
         Article 8 ...

         ... If it is shown by an individual ...  that  an  application  for
         entry clearance from abroad would be granted and that  there  would
         be significant interference with family life by temporary  removal,
         the weight to be accorded to the formal  requirement  of  obtaining
         entry clearance is reduced... In cases involving children...it will
         be easier to show that the  balance  on  proportionality  falls  in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was "precarious". ... It all depends on the facts."

    The burden was on the Applicant, the Judge had found his  return  would
    be merely inconvenient, not that it would cross the threshold of  being
    unreasonable. He had not adequately dealt with the issue of the  public
    interest in the light of his findings that relationship at the date  of
    application did not meet the minimum threshold of 2 years' duration and
    that the Applicant was an over-stayer  throughout  and  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to his return to Cameroon.

17. The Judge's findings did  not  show  that  the  Applicant  crossed  the
    significant threshold necessary to engage the State's obligations under
    Article 8 and had not identified the evidence to support his  reasoning
    that the decision did amount to so substantial an  interference  as  to
    engage Article 8.



Findings and consideration

18. I enquired if there was any evidence to show the Applicant's  wife  had
    complied with the obligations under para. 3.38 of her tenancy agreement
    in the Applicant's bundle  at  p.198.  Mr  Lee  took  instructions  and
    advised me that it was not in the bundle or otherwise before the  Upper
    Tribunal.

19. Mr Lee's submission that there is no inconsistency between finding that
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to return and finding that it was
    disproportionate to insist the Applicant return to seek entry clearance
    had some attraction.

20. The difficulty with the Judge's decision is  that  the  Judge  has  not
    sought to address clearly the apparent inconsistency so that  the  SSHD
    as the losing party is able to understand why he reached the conclusion
    he did. The decision does not adequately identify  the  nature  of  the
    public interest. The balancing exercise at para.63 of the  decision  is
    questionable because it does not  take  into  account  both  the  clear
    finding at para.51 that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    relationship of the Applicant and his wife  if  the  Applicant  has  to
    return to seek entry clearance and the extent to  which  the  Applicant
    fails to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  Appendix
    FM. Further, the Judge did  not  consider  the  position  if  the  wife
    relocated to Cameroon.

21. Ms Willocks-Briscoe urged me to re-make the decision at the hearing. Mr
    Lee argued for the appeal being remitted  for  hearing  afresh  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  in  part  because  of  the  deficiencies  in  the
    documentary evidence which the Judge had himself identified at  para.52
    of his decision.

22. I  find  that  the  part  of  the  decision  setting  out  findings  of
    credibility  and  fact  at  paras.  25-51  of  the  decision   is   not
    satisfactory. There appears to be a mixing of  recording  evidence  and
    making findings of fact. This was demonstrated at the hearing before me
    when the parties discussed the apparent  differences  between  paras.33
    and 37 relating the date the Applicant and  his  wife  entered  into  a
    durable relationship. I also note that while  the  Judge  has  set  out
    correctly the burden  of  proof,  he  has  not  mentioned  at  all  the
    requisite standard of proof.

23. In this light, I consider it appropriate  for  the  judge  hearing  the
    remitted appeal to be able to make relevant findings of fact which  may
    be  based  on  additional  documentary  and  oral  evidence.  In  these
    circumstances I have  decided,  relying  on  the  powers  conferred  by
    s.12(2)  Tribunals,  Court  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and   Practice
    Statement 7.2(b) issued by the Senior President, to  remit  the  appeal
    for hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of  fact
    preserved.

Anonymity

24. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted for a hearing afresh in First-
    tier Tribunal.
    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  26.
x. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
