

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/07269/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Edinburgh                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 January 2020                       |On 4 February 2020              |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          ARINZE IKECHUKWU NWOKOLO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 7 February 1979.  On  27
    June 2017 his application for leave to remain in the UK was refused due
    to discrepancies between his declarations of income to  the  respondent
    (UKBVI) and to HMRC.

 2. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 14 February 2018.

 3. The appellant petitioned the Court for reduction of the UT's refusal of
    permission to appeal.  On 28 November 2019 the Vice President of the UT
    granted permission in light of the Court's interlocutor and the opinion
    of Lord Arthurson.

 4. The FtT found that the alleged discrepancies, on which the case turned,
    were not explained by income falling over two tax years, and  concluded
    at [24] that the appellant  misled  the  respondent  by  inflating  his
    earnings.

 5. With his grounds of appeal to the UT the appellant produced a  forensic
    accountancy report, which had not been before the FtT.

 6. The Court at [16] expressed considerable sympathy for the  position  in
    which the FtT had found itself.  Nevertheless, it  thought  that  as  a
    specialist tribunal it should have been able to grasp  the  distinction
    between a business accountancy year and the  tax  year;  a  point  with
    which the UT in refusing permission had failed to  grapple,  even  with
    the report before it.

 7. Mt Govan argued that the FtT made no error on  the  case  as  it  stood
    before it.  He said that the tribunal was  specialised  in  immigration
    and asylum law, not in accountancy.  However, it is  plain  that  there
    was error, even on the basis of what the Court described  as  "the  raw
    financial material".

 8. The decision of the FtT therefore fell to be set aside.

 9. Mr Govan did not make any submission to counter the forensic report.

10. It was common ground that but for the finding of deceit,  which  cannot
    now be supported on the evidence, the appellant's application for leave
    to remain would have been granted, and in this area of the rules,  that
    makes out a case on human rights grounds.

11. The appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      30 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




