
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07981/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 May 2019                               |On 20 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  sajid ali
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of the decision in the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 7 July 2017,  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim. That claim was made following the Respondent's prior decision to
    make a deportation order on 6 July 2017 pursuant to  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.  This action had arisen as  a  result  of  the
    Appellant's conviction on 9 January 2017 for causing death by dangerous
    driving contrary to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988  in  respect
    of an incident on 12 December 2014 in which the Appellant's  friend,  a
    passenger  in  his  car,  was  killed.   A  sentence  of   27   months'
    imprisonment  was  imposed,  together  with  a  significant  period  of
    disqualification from driving.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 13 November 2018, the First-tier  Tribunal
    had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal
    of his human rights claim. In a decision promulgated on 18  March  2019
    and annexed to this remake decision, a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    comprising Mrs Justice  Lang  and  myself  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law. The  panel's  summary  conclusion
    for this outcome is set out in para. 22 of its decision:

         "As we announced to the parties at the hearing,  we  conclude  that
         the judge materially erred in law by failing to take into  account,
         as a relevant factor, the fact that the Appellant represented a low
         risk of reoffending when undertaking the broad Article 8  balancing
         exercise once she  had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not
         satisfy the provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules."

 3. The panel directed that the remaking of the decision in this case would
    be undertaken by myself, sitting alone. A Transfer Order to that effect
    has been obtained and is on file.



The scope of the remaking decision in this appeal

 4. The scope of the remaking decision in this appeal is relatively narrow.



 5. At para. 36 and 37 of the error of law decision, the panel stated:

         "36.     ... we have concluded that this matter  should  indeed  be
         retained in the Upper Tribunal.   This  is  not  a  case  involving
         procedural unfairness and it is clear to us that  there  would  not
         need to be extensive  findings  of  fact  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Indeed, the judge has set out a good many findings, none  of  which
         need be disturbed.  In addition, the judge's conclusions as to  the
         various provisions of the Rules have not been challenged.

         37.      The issue for the Upper Tribunal at  the  resumed  hearing
         will be whether the public interest in deportation is outweighed by
         "very compelling circumstances over and above" those  described  in
         paragraphs 399(a), 399(b) and 399A of the Rules, on  the  basis  of
         the First-tier Tribunal's preserved findings of  fact,  and  taking
         into account all relevant factors, including the accepted low  risk
         of reoffending. These factors also fall to be considered within the
         wider balancing exercise under Article 8 ECHR."

 6. Thus, the findings set out in para. 20  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision stand for the purposes of the remaking decision. In  addition,
    the conclusion that the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of para.
    399(a), 399(b), and 399A of the Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules),  also
    stand.

 7. The core issue is, in essence, whether the Appellant can show  that  he
    has, by virtue of "very compelling circumstances over  and  above"  the
    exceptions set out in para. 399-399A  of  the  Rules  and  sub-sections
    117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as
    amended ("NIAA 2002"), an Article 8 claim strong enough to outweigh the
    very powerful public  interest  in  deporting  him.  This  involves  an
    evaluation of all relevant factors,  for  and  against  the  Appellant,
    having due regard to the mandatory considerations in  Part  5  of  NIAA
    2002, the Rules, and any other  matters  bearing  on  the  question  of
    whether the Respondent's refusal of the human rights claim represents a
    fair balance between the rights of the individual on the one  hand  and
    the public interest on the other.



The evidence before me

 8. In remaking the decision in this appeal I have taken  full  account  of
    the evidence contained in: the Respondent's appeal bundle, under  cover
    of letter dated 20  December  2017  ("RB");  the  Appellant's  original
    appeal bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, indexed and paginated  1-
    147 ("AB"); and a newly admitted letter from the Appellant's  Probation
    Officer, Ms [JB], dated 30 April 2019.

 9. At the outset of the hearing Mr Halim confirmed that he was not seeking
    to call oral evidence from the Appellant. This was in keeping with  the
    observations made by the panel at paras. 36-37  of  the  error  of  law
    decision and direction 3  of  those  issued  to  the  parties  in  that
    decision.



The parties' submissions

For the Appellant

10. Mr Halim relied first and foremost on his skeleton argument. He rightly
    acknowledged the great weight  attributable  to  the  public  interest.
    Notwithstanding this, a combination of  factors  including,  primarily,
    the  very  low  risk  of  reoffending  and  risk  to  the  public,  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim was very strong. The  evidence  of  remorse
    and rehabilitation was clear and there  were  mitigating  circumstances
    surrounding the offence itself. It appropriate in this  case  to  place
    significant weight on  the  rehabilitation  factor.  The  relevance  of
    deterrence was accepted.



For the Respondent

11. Mr Bramble apologised for the absence of a skeleton argument  from  the
    Respondent: he explained that the Senior Presenting Officer who had had
    charge of the case had recently left.

12. It was submitted that the  Appellant's  offence  was  serious  and  the
    public interest very strong. In light of the relevant  authorities  and
    the facts in this appeal, the Appellant could not succeed.



Legal self-directions

13. In answering the core question in this appeal  I  have  considered  the
    guidance set out in authorities including, but not limited  to:  Hesham
    Ali [2016] UKSC 60; NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  662;  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    1012;  MS  (s.117C(6):  "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines
    [2019] UKUT  122  (IAC);  and  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:
    seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC).

14. In the context of this appeal, the essential principles to  be  applied
    are as follows:

          a) The public interest is very strong indeed;


          b) The test is "extremely demanding";


          c) Matters covered by the exceptions in  paras.  399(a)-399A  and
             section 117C(4) and (5) NIAA 2002 can also be relevant to  the
             assessment of the "very compelling circumstances" test;


          d) The public interest retains the facets of deterrence, the risk
             of reoffending, and the public's concern  over  the  issue  of
             foreign nationals offending in the United Kingdom;


          e) The particulars of the individual's offending are relevant;


          f) The policy of the Respondent, as expressed in  the  Rules,  is
             deserving of "considerable weight";


          g) The relevance of rehabilitation is to  be  treated  with  real
             caution,  although  it  can,  in  appropriate  cases,  play  a
             significant role;


          h) Cases are fact-sensitive.


15. The overall approach was summarised in Hesham Ali thus:

         "The critical issue for the tribunal  will  generally  be  whether,
         giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the offender in the case before it,  the  Article  8
         claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  only  a
         claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as it was  put
         in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."



Analysis and conclusions

The facts

16. There is no material dispute as to the factual  matrix  in  which  this
    case falls to be decided.

17. The particular circumstances surrounding  the  offence  for  which  the
    Appellant was convicted are set out in: the Sentencing Remarks  of  HHJ
    Bright, QC, at Annex H of the Respondent's bundle (a complete  copy  is
    on file); the Pre-Sentence Report at 72-76 AB; the OASys report at  77-
    81 AB; and certain matters are covered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    preserved findings. On the basis of these sources I make the  following
    findings:

          i. The Appellant was distracted  by  his  mobile  telephone  when
             undertaking the manoeuvre leading to the  collision,  although
             he was not actually using it at the time;

         ii.  The  victim,  the  Appellant's  friend,  was  not  wearing  a
             seatbelt;

        iii. The other vehicle (a recovery truck) was travelling in  excess
             of the relevant speed limit at the time of the collision.

18. As to matters following the commission of the offence itself, again the
    facts are uncontroversial:

          i. The Appellant pleaded  guilty  to  careless  driving  but  was
             convicted by a jury on the count of causing death by dangerous
             driving;

         ii. From the outset, the Appellant expressed genuine  remorse  for
             his actions;

        iii. He has suffered from nightmares as a result of what occurred;

         iv. The sentencing judge accepted that the offence was a "one off"
             and there was little chance of further offending;

          v. The Appellant represents a very low risk of reoffending;

         vi. The same categorisation  applies  to  the  issue  of  risk  of
             serious harm to the public (this has been  reduced  since  the
             OASys report was produced;

        vii. He has complied with  all  requirements  of  his  licence  and
             supervision by the Probation Service;

       viii. The supervision has been effective.

19. In relation to other relevant matters, and based  on  the  unchallenged
    evidence and preserved findings, I find as follows. The  Appellant  has
    no previous or subsequent convictions against his name.  He  spent  the
    first four years of his residence in the United  Kingdom  with  limited
    leave and had indefinite leave to  remain  from  4  December  2012.  He
    currently has no partner and  no  children  in  this  country.  He  has
    various family members residing in  Pakistan  and  there  is  a  vacant
    property there owned by his father. The Appellant has  numerous  family
    members and friends in the United Kingdom and  they  provide  him  with
    financial support. He did not work whilst in Pakistan but has  done  so
    in this country. He has established two businesses  here,  although  it
    appears that he is no longer engaged in them.  There  are  no  material
    health conditions.

20. In light of the findings  of  fact,  I  now  adopt  a  "balance  sheet"
    approach to the assessment of whether the  Appellant  has  disclosed  a
    sufficiently strong Article 8 claim to succeed in his appeal.



Factors counting in the Appellant's favour

21. The primary factor relied on by Mr Halim in this case is the  very  low
    risk of reoffending and serious risk to the public.  He  has  described
    this as representing an "unusual  and  distinguishing"  feature  (para.
    13.2 of the skeleton argument).

22. I certainly agree that it is a matter of real  significance,  although,
    for reasons set out later, I take issue with  the  elevated  importance
    attributed to it by Mr Halim. It is clear  that,  save  for  the  index
    offence, the Appellant  is  a  man  of  excellent  character.  Multiple
    sources  have  consistently  assessed  him  as  representing  what  can
    properly be categorised as a very low risk  of  reoffending.  This  has
    involved a recognition by him of not  only  what  he  did  but  also  a
    genuine commitment to avoiding any recurrence of related misconduct.

23. The risk of reoffending (incorporating the risk of serious harm to  the
    public) is a well-settled facet of the overall public interest, and for
    good reason: the greater the risk to the public of a  foreign  national
    criminal  reoffending,  the  stronger  the  case  for   deporting   the
    individual in question.

24. I will deal with the issue of rehabilitation as a free-standing  point,
    below. Suffice it to say here that in  my  view  rehabilitation  counts
    neither in his favour nor against him.

25. As to the particulars of the offence, I take account of the  fact  that
    the victim was a friend of the Appellant and that he was not wearing  a
    seatbelt. I also bear in mind that the  other  vehicle  was  going  too
    fast.  These  mitigating  circumstances  are,  to  an  extent,  in  the
    Appellant's  favour  and  they  were  appropriately  reflected  in  the
    sentence imposed.

26. The Appellant has a good immigration history,  having  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully throughout the last eleven years  or  so.  This
    carries with it some weight, particularly as regards the  period  spent
    with settled status.

27. The Appellant has been an economically self-sufficient  and  productive
    individual whilst in this country. Although financial  independence  is
    effectively a neutral factor, the Appellant's business endeavours  have
    contributed to the economy of the  United  Kingdom  and  I  place  some
    weight on this factor.

28. There are clear familial and social ties here. Having said,  there  has
    been no evidence of  any  particularly  significant  relationships  and
    certainly  nothing  to  indicate  dependency  beyond  being   supported
    financially.



Factors counting in the Respondent's favour

29. The public interest in deporting foreign criminals, as expressed by the
    Respondent in para. 398 of the Rules and by Parliament in section 32(4)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  section  117C(1)  NIAA  2002,  is  very
    powerful indeed. It effectively  "pre-loads"  the  scales  against  the
    Appellant.

30.  Without  in  any  way  "double-counting"  factors,  as  part   of   my
    consideration of  the  overall  public  interest,  I  am  placing  very
    significant weight on the issues of deterrence and the public's concern
    over the deportation of foreign national offenders.

31. At para. 8 of his skeleton argument, Mr Halim states that  the  "public
    interest  in  deportation  is  commensurate  to  the  risk  of   future
    offending..."  and  suggests  (if  I  have  interpreted   the   passage
    correctly) that a low risk would  therefore  reduce  that  interest  or
    necessarily represent a very significant factor weighing against it.

32. I  disagree  with  this  proposition  for  three  reasons.  First,  the
    overarching public interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  is,  by
    virtue of the expression of Parliament in particular, a fixity, in  the
    sense that once an individual falls  with  the  category  (due  to  the
    length of a sentence) it is in the  public  interest  to  deport  them.
    Second, factors favourable to an  appellant  will  never  "reduce"  the
    strength of the public interest; they can only ever go to  outweigh  it
    in a particular case. Third, the risk of reoffending is only one of the
    facets of the public interest and not necessarily the most important of
    these in cases involving serious offences. It is very difficult to  see
    how a low risk of reoffending would, in  and  of  itself,  represent  a
    sufficiently strong factor as to outweigh that interest.

33. I turn to the particulars  of  the  Appellant's  offence.  It  was,  as
    correctly stated by the First-tier Tribunal, a serious  matter.  In  so
    saying, I have taken into account that the sentence imposed was, having
    regard to all the circumstances, towards the bottom end of the relevant
    guideline bracket. Against this, there was an  aggravating  feature  in
    that the Appellant had been distracted by his mobile telephone.

34. In addition, I re-emphasise a point made in para. 21 of  the  error  of
    law decision. Aside from  the  primary  victim  of  the  incident  (the
    Appellant's friend), it must be recognised that the driver of the other
    vehicle and the victim's family would inevitably  have  suffered  as  a
    result of the Appellant's actions. This consequence  essentially  flows
    from the nature of the offence itself.

35. The fact that the Appellant has been unable to meet the requirements of
    the exceptions contained  in  the  Rules  section  117C  NIAA  2002  is
    relevant. There are no ties in the United Kingdom which  can  represent
    significant factors in his favour and nothing material in  the  way  of
    him re-establishing himself in Pakistan. I place considerable weight on
    the inability to meet the exceptions.

36. Turning finally to immigration-based  matters.  It  is  true  that  the
    Appellant has been in this country lawfully throughout. However,  until
    the grant of indefinite leave to remain in December  2012,  his  status
    was precarious and, in the circumstances of this case, I must take that
    into account when attributing weight to the totality of the Appellant's
    private life.



Rehabilitation: a "neutral" factor

37. The significance of rehabilitation has been addressed recently  in  RA.
    At para. 33 the Upper Tribunal stated:

         "33.     As a more general point, the fact that an  individual  has
         not committed further  offences,  since  release  from  prison,  is
         highly unlikely to have a material bearing, given that everyone  is
         expected  not  to  commit  crime.  Rehabilitation  will   therefore
         normally do no more than show that the individual has  returned  to
         the place where society expects him  (and  everyone  else)  to  be.
         There is, in other words, no material weight which ordinarily falls
         to be  given  to  rehabilitation  in  the  proportionality  balance
         (see SE  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56). Nevertheless,
         as so often in the field of human rights, one cannot  categorically
         say  that  rehabilitation  will never be  capable  of  playing  a
         significant role (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from
         the norm would, however, need to be fully reasoned."

38. In my view, no  material  weight  can  be  attached  to  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation in this case. This is essentially for  the  reason  that
    the Appellant was not a person who needed rehabilitating in  the  first
    place. His offence was a "one-off" and there was no history in  respect
    of which he had to show he had genuinely moved on  from,  as  it  were.
    Thus, in reality no rehabilitation (in the true sense of the word)  has
    taken place, but I conclude that this not count against  the  Appellant
    but rather is of neutral value in the balancing exercise.

39. Even if some weight in the Appellant's favour were attributable to this
    factor, in the circumstances of this case it  would  certainly  not  be
    "significant".



Evaluative judgment on the competing factors

40. I have carefully weighed up all factors counting for  and  against  the
    Appellant. In respect of the matters resting on his side of the balance
    sheet, I have conducted the evaluation on a cumulative basis.

41. I conclude that he has,  by  a  not  insignificant  margin,  failed  to
    demonstrate that there are "very  compelling  circumstances  above  and
    beyond" those set out in the exceptions  contained  in  the  Rules  and
    section 117C NIAA 2002, or at all.

42. Although Mr Halim has certainly said everything that could be  said  in
    the Appellant's cause, and has done so with skill and  professionalism,
    the cornerstone of his case - the very low risk of reoffending - simply
    does not, whether seen  in  isolation  or  in  combination  with  other
    matters, attain the requisite significance  to  outweigh  the  numerous
    strong factors on the Respondent's aside of the balance sheet.

43. No other specific aspects of the case disclose anything  of  sufficient
    importance.

44. In my view, the Respondent's refusal of the  Appellant's  human  rights
    claim strikes an eminently fair balance between, on the  one  hand  the
    rights of the latter, and on the other the public interest relied on by
    the former.

45. The Appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.



Anonymity

46. I make no anonymity order in this case. One has not been sought, nor is
    it appropriate for me to issue one in any event.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and that decision has been set aside.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal


Signed      [pic]            Date: 17 May 2019
H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07981/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2019                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MRS JUSTICE LANG
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  sajid ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler (the judge), promulgated on 13 November  2018,  by
    which she dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  6
    July 2017, refusing his human rights claim.

 2. That claim was made following  the  Respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order on 6 July 2017 pursuant to Section 32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders  Act  2007.   This  action  had  arisen  as  a  result  of  the
    Appellant's conviction on 9 January 2017 for causing death by dangerous
    driving contrary to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988  in  respect
    of an incident on 12 December 2014 in which the Appellant's  friend,  a
    passenger  in  his  car,  was  killed.   A  sentence  of   27   months'
    imprisonment  was  imposed,  together  with  a  significant  period  of
    disqualification from driving.



The relevant legal framework

 3. The core legal framework applicable to the  Appellant's  appeal  before
    the judge was as follows.

 4. Paragraphs 398 - 399A of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") state:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)      the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
         the public good and in the public interest because they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)      the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
         the public good and in the public interest because they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c)      the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
         the public good and in the public interest because, in the view  of
         the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm  or
         they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
         the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in  the
         UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii)      the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for  at
             least the 7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
             immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)      the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or  settled  in
         the UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
             the country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)      the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
         of his life; and

         (b)      he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
         integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
         deported."

 5. Sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") set  out  in  primary  legislation  the  public  interest
    considerations which a court or tribunal must take into account  in  an
    appeal based upon Article 8. The provisions of relevance to the  appeal
    before us state:

         117A Application of this Part


         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.


         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and


             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.


         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)      Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.


         (6)      ...


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.


         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.


         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.


         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,


             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and


             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.


         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.


         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.


         117D Interpretation of this Part


         (1)      In this Part-


         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;


         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-


             (a) is a British citizen, or


             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;


         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


             (a) is a British citizen, or


             (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


         (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a) who is not a British citizen,


             (b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and


             (c) who-


                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months


The judge's decision

 6. At [20] the judge sets out numerous findings of  fact.   Significantly,
    for the purposes of the appeal before us, these included an  acceptance
    that the Appellant presented a low risk of reoffending.

 7. Under the subheading of "Conclusions", the judge  proceeds  to  express
    the view that the Appellant's conviction was a serious one.   She  goes
    on to state that because the Appellant did not  have  a  partner  or  a
    child in this country, neither paragraph 399(a) or 399(b) of the  Rules
    applied.  In  respect  of  paragraph  399A,  the  judge  quite  rightly
    concluded that the  Appellant  had  not  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully for most of his life and therefore, on this basis alone, could
    not meet all of the requirements of that particular provision.

 8. In light of these  conclusions  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    question of whether the Appellant could show that  his  case  disclosed
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A".  She directed herself to the factors set  out
    in sections 117B  and  117C  NIAA  2002  and  emphasised  the  need  to
    attribute great weight to the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals.

 9. [28] of the judge's decision reads as follows:

         "The test is not what is best for him but  what  is  best  for  the
         public interest.  Section (sic) 398 tells me  that  it  is  in  the
         public interest to deport a person who  has  been  convicted  of  a
         sentence of over 12 months."

10. In the following paragraph the judge goes on to say:

         "I recognise the Appellant's remorse, the effect that the events of
         the accident have had on him, and also that he is assessed  at  low
         risk of  re-offending,  but  that  is  relevant  when  a  potential
         deportee has a partner or children in the UK.  I do  not  find  the
         circumstances  of  this  Appellant  amount  to   'very   compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
         399A'."

11. Reference is then made in the next two paragraphs to the factors  which
    do not concern us in this appeal.

12. At [32] the judge purports to consider wider aspects of the  Article  8
    claim. These include the following:

          i. the nature of the offence;

         ii.  the  aim  of  preventing  crime  and  deterring  others  from
             committing crimes;

        iii. the public interest in deporting foreign criminals;

    The conclusion drawn is  the  strong  public  interest  outweighed  the
    Appellant's private life rights.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

13. The succinct grounds of appeal make two points: first, that the "binary
    proposition" apparently stated in [28] of the  decision  represented  a
    misdirection in law; second, that the judge failed to have  any  regard
    to the risk of reoffending, specifically when considering wider Article
    8 factors.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 10 December 2018.




The hearing before us

15. Mr Halim relied on the grounds of appeal.  He emphasised what was  said
    to be the error committed in [28] of the judge's decision.

16. In terms of the reoffending issue, he submitted that  this  must  be  a
    relevant factor in any case in which an individual was seeking to  rely
    on circumstances above and beyond those contained in the two exceptions
    provided for in the Rules and NIAA 2002.  The judge's failure  to  take
    this issue into account and weigh it  in  the  balance  was,  Mr  Halim
    submitted, an error.  He submitted that the error was material  as  the
    reoffending issue had represented what he described as  the  "mainstay"
    of the Appellant's case before the judge.

17. For his part, Mr Wilding suggested  that  [28]  was,  at  its  highest,
    simply a case of what he notably described as "judicial misspeak".   In
    reality, the judge had approached her task appropriately.

18. In respect of [29] Mr Wilding submitted that  in  light  of  the  legal
    landscape as it was at the time of the hearing (that being  before  the
    Supreme Court handed down its judgment in KO and Others [2018] UKSC  53
    ("KO (Nigeria)"), the judge had been right to say  that  the  issue  of
    reoffending would only have been relevant to a  family  life  case;  in
    other  words  one  in  which  the  Appellant  had  been  relying  on  a
    relationship with a partner and/or a qualifying child.

19. In respect of paragraph 399A of the Rules, the issue of reoffending did
    not enter the picture as the focus of that provision was on barriers to
    an individual's  reintegration  into  his  home  country.   Mr  Wilding
    suggested that on a proper reading of [29], [32], and  the  finding  of
    facts set out at [20(xi)], it could properly be said that the judge had
    taken the reoffending issue into account  when  considering  the  wider
    Article 8 issue.

20. Mr Wilding then submitted that even if the judge  had  failed  to  take
    this matter into account and had therefore  erred,  there  was  nothing
    material in this.   If  one  placed  the  reoffending  issue  into  the
    balance, weighing, as it would have done, in the Appellant's favour, it
    could not have made any difference to the outcome of the appeal.

21. In reply, Mr Halim submitted that the relevant  factor  of  reoffending
    was simply not considered at all and that Mr Wilding was asking  us  to
    read too much into the  judge's  assessment.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge's error was indeed material.  It was not a  question  of  whether
    the Appellant would have succeeded if  the  relevant  factor  had  been
    taken  into  account,  but  simply  whether  this  could  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome.  He also emphasised the particular nature of
    the evidence underpinning the reoffending issue.  The offence had  been
    a "one-off", the evidence in the OASys  report  and  Probation  Service
    letter was highly favourable to the Appellant, and it was a  fact  that
    the victim of the offence had been the Appellant's friend (we think  it
    appropriate to add that other victims of  the  offence,  albeit  to  an
    obviously lesser extent, included the family of the  deceased  and  the
    driver of the truck which hit the Appellant's car).




Decision on error of law

22. As we announced to the parties at the hearing,  we  conclude  that  the
    judge materially erred in law by failing to take  into  account,  as  a
    relevant factor, the fact that the Appellant represented a low risk  of
    reoffending when undertaking the broad  Article  8  balancing  exercise
    once she had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules.

23. Before turning to our reasons for  reaching  this  conclusion,  we  can
    briefly dispose of the first ground of challenge. We reject Mr  Halim's
    contention that [28] represents any error  in  approach.  Reading  this
    passage sensibly and in light  of  the  decision  as  a  whole,  it  is
    apparent to us  that  the  judge  was  in  reality  simply  making  two
    uncontroversial points. First, that the scales were, by virtue  of  the
    powerful public  interest,  weighed  against  the  Appellant  from  the
    outset. Second, that whatever the Appellant may have wanted  to  happen
    as a matter of  preference  (in  particular  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom rather than having  to  return  to  Pakistan),  the  Article  8
    exercise involves deciding whether he  was  entitled  to  remain  as  a
    result of a very strong claim.

24. Turning to the reoffending issue, the first thing to note is  that  the
    judge had made a clear finding of fact that the Appellant represented a
    low risk.

25. On a sensible reading of [29], we conclude that the  judge  was  saying
    that  the  issue  of  reoffending  was  relevant  to  the  family  life
    provisions of the Rules (namely paragraphs 399(a) and 399(b))  but  was
    not relevant to the private life provision, that being paragraph  399A.
    In terms of the legal landscape as it was at  the  time  she  made  her
    decision, the judge was correct.  Following KO and Others we  now  know
    of course that wider public interest considerations do not  feature  in
    the assessment of unduly harshness.

26. However, that is in a sense by-the-by.   What  is  clear  is  that  the
    judge, having found that the Appellant could not satisfy  the  relevant
    provisions of the Rules, then needed to consider whether he was able to
    show "very compelling circumstances over and above, the matters set out
    in those provisions".  In so doing, she was bound to take into  account
    all relevant factors. We know from NA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 that  these  factors  could
    potentially have included matters related to the particular  provisions
    of the Rules, but  were  not  restricted  thus.   By  its  nature,  the
    proportionality exercise outside the context of the Rules is  wider  in
    its scope.

27. We conclude that the issue of reoffending was a relevant  factor  which
    fell to be weighed in the balance. It is, after all, an important,  but
    not of course the  only,  facet  of  the  overall  public  interest  in
    deportation cases (see, for example, OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA  Civ  694,
    at [15] and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012, at [11(6)]). It  simply
    cannot be said that this factor is irrelevant.

28. Our view on this is  reinforced  by  consideration  of  an  alternative
    scenario. If the judge  had  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  without
    factoring in the risk of reoffending and despite the hypothetical  fact
    that he represented a high risk, the Respondent would have had a strong
    case to assert that an error of law had been committed.

29. In light of the above and bearing in mind that we must view the judge's
    decision holistically and in a sensible manner, we turn to see  if  the
    reoffending factor has been evaluated adequately, or indeed at all.

30. In our view, there is nothing within [29] or [32] to indicate  that  it
    has been.  We are not prepared to infer from the fact  that  the  judge
    had made a finding on the evidence at  [20(xi)]  that  this  issue  had
    indeed  been  implicitly  considered.  Reoffending  is  a  sufficiently
    important matter to warrant specific consideration and  in  this  case.
    There has been none and this is an error of law.

31. We have thought carefully about whether the judge's error is  material.
    We acknowledge that reoffending is  only  one  element  of  the  public
    interest and we also  of  course  recognise  the  very  high  threshold
    represented by the "very compelling circumstances over and above" test.
     However, and perhaps by a relatively narrow margin, we agree  with  Mr
    Halim's submission that the judge's omission is material.

32. The Appellant need not show that had the reoffending issue  been  taken
    into account his appeal would have succeeded, only that it could  have.
    We also bear in mind and  attach  some  significance  to  the  specific
    nature of the evidence underpinning the reoffending issue in this case.
     It is quite clear that the offence was indeed a "one-off", that  there
    was favourable assessments by  the  Probation  Service,  and  that  the
    Appellant had displayed genuine remorse for what had happened.  All  of
    this would arguably add an  additional  dimension  to  the  reoffending
    factor.

33. In light of the above, we conclude that the judge has materially  erred
    in law and we set her decision aside.




Disposal

34. Having set the judge's decision aside we expressed to the  parties  our
    preliminary view that this matter  should  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the decision be remade at a resumed hearing.

35. Having taken instructions, Mr Halim sought to  argue  that  the  matter
    should instead be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that
    this would give the Appellant back an additional "layer" of appeal,  so
    to speak.

36. However, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice  Statement  we
    have concluded that this matter should indeed be retained in the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This is not a case involving procedural unfairness and it is
    clear to us that there would not need to be extensive findings of  fact
    by the Upper Tribunal.  Indeed, the judge  has  set  out  a  good  many
    findings, none of which need be disturbed.  In  addition,  the  judge's
    conclusions as to the various provisions of the  Rules  have  not  been
    challenged.

37. The issue for the  Upper  Tribunal  at  the  resumed  hearing  will  be
    whether the public interest in  deportation  is  outweighed  by  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above" those described in  paragraphs
    399(a), 399(b) and 399A of the Rules, on the basis  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's preserved findings of fact,  and  taking  into  account  all
    relevant factors, including the accepted low risk of reoffending. These
    factors also fall to be considered within the wider balancing  exercise
    under Article 8 ECHR.

38. In furtherance of this course of action, we  issue  directions  to  the
    parties, below.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and we set it aside.

We adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the parties

      1. The resumed hearing shall be listed before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Norton-Taylor alone.

      2. Both parties are to provide skeleton arguments:

         2.1:    the Appellant's skeleton argument shall be filed  with  the
             Upper Tribunal and served on the Respondent no later  than  21
             days before the resumed hearing;

         2.2:    the Respondent's skeleton argument shall be filed with  the
             Upper Tribunal and served on the Appellant no  later  than  14
             days before that hearing.

      3. As matters stand, there is no need for further  oral  evidence.  If
         the Appellant's representatives are of the view that such  evidence
         is essential, they must explain in writing why this is the case and
         do so within 21 days of this Decision being promulgated;



Signed      [pic]                 Date: 15 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


