
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07822/2016
     HU/07826/2016
     HU/07828/2016
     HU/07831/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2018                  |On 27 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                        Shahin [A] (first Appellant)
                        Rumana [B] (second Appellant)
                           [S A] (third Appellant)
                          [Z A] (fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh and a family.  Their appeals
    came before the Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing on  11  July
    2018 and in a decision and reasons promulgated on  21  August  2018,  I
    found material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    and adjourned the  appeal  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal with directions to be listed for submissions only  in  respect
    of the  proportionality  of  removal.   A  copy  of  that  decision  is
    appended.

 2. At the resumed hearing the Appellants were represented by  Mr  Spurling
    of Counsel, who sought to rely on a skeleton argument dated 28 November
    2018.  He also sought to rely on some additional brief documents as  to
    the condition of the third Appellant, S.  Ms Pal had  no  objection  to
    submission of that evidence.

 3. I heard submissions from Ms Pal, who stated she wished to rely  on  the
    refusal dated  2  March  2016  in  particular  at  [43]  onwards.   She
    submitted that the factors in favour of removing  the  Appellants  from
    the UK were considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the factors
    on the Respondent's  side  as  set  out  in  the  Appellants'  skeleton
    argument  are  what  the  Respondent  sought  to  rely  on  today.   In
    particular,  the  first  two  Appellants  could  seek   employment   in
    Bangladesh, the children had been exposed to the language and  culture,
    their mother tongue is Bengali or Sylheti, they  are  young,  still  at
    primary school and not at a critical stage of their education  and  the
    family will continue to receive support from the  Appellants'  extended
    family.  Lastly there was  provision  for  the  education  of  autistic
    children in Bangladesh.  Ms Pal submitted that the Appellants were  not
    currently financially independent.  The first Appellant sought leave to
    remain in the UK when his leave as a student expired in 2012, referring
    to [97] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. She submitted the judge had considered whether the  third  Appellant  S
    would be able to return to Bangladesh with his  parents  and  would  be
    able to settle, given he had been born in the UK.  She appreciated that
    S had been in the UK for more  than  seven  years  thus  the  issue  is
    whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  family  unit  to  return  to
    Bangladesh.  Ms Pal submitted that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    reasons outlined earlier.  On the findings  of  the  judge,  the  third
    Appellant would be able to access some form of education: see [107] and
    would have access to the culture and  language  of  the  country.   She
    submitted that  the  conduct  of  the  parents  in  seeking  to  remain
    unlawfully in the UK for a considerable period of time  is  a  relevant
    factor in the proportionality exercise and it is expected that  parents
    who have no leave to remain would  leave  the  UK  and  children  would
    follow with them unless it was not reasonable to expect them to  leave.
    She submitted the decision to remove would not be disproportionate.

 5. In his submissions, Mr Spurling sought to rely on his skeleton argument
    and the factors set out therein  as  to  the  balancing  exercise  when
    considering the proportionality of removal.  He drew  my  attention  to
    the witness statement of the second Appellant at [46], [49],  [51]  and
    [53] which addresses  the  impact  on  their  daughter  Z  due  to  the
    discrimination they have experienced because  of  their  son's  autism.
    This  discrimination  has  been  by   Bangladeshi   people   who   lack
    understanding as to  the  condition  and  that  there  is  evidence  in
    Bangladesh of the abandonment of autistic children.  He submitted that,
    whilst he was not suggesting that connections could not be  formed,  it
    was relevant to consider the ease with which they could be  formed  and
    that Z's position was compromised by the fact that she had an  autistic
    brother and  there  would  be  social  discrimination  particularly  in
    Bangladesh given that the family have already experienced it in the UK.



 6. Mr Spurling took issue with some of the points raised on behalf of  the
    Respondent, in particular, he submitted that the third Appellant is not
    conversant in Bengali and this is clear from  the  report  from  Hatton
    School at subparagraphs  (5)  and  (6).   In  relation  to  the  second
    Appellant's overstay, this was due to the  fact  that  after  she  gave
    birth to the third Appellant, she had difficulties with him as  a  baby
    and this is why she overstayed.  He submitted it was necessary to  look
    at the family members as a whole and that the second Appellant had  had
    leave until 2012, her reasons for overstaying were more nuanced.

 7. In relation to the third Appellant, S, Mr Spurling  submitted  that  he
    has formed social connections outside the family with his teachers  and
    he referred to page 3 of  the  main  bundle  which  provides  that  the
    Appellant has made good relationships with all the adults in his class:
    see pages 16 to 17 of the letter dated  February  2017.   Thus  he  has
    developed a private life with people outside his immediate family.   Mr
    Spurling also sought to rely on a letter from Beverley Power  at  pages
    134 to 136, who found that S  would  have  delayed  development  absent
    access to PECS and  other  forms  of  support  and  that  he  has  made
    excellent progress.  Mr Spurling submitted it would be harder for S  as
    somebody suffering from autism to change because people in S's position
    are less adaptable.

 8. He submitted that the seven year starting point for whether or  not  it
    was reasonable for Z to leave the UK should apply no less than it would
    to any other child.  Mr Spurling submitted that the  children's  mother
    tongue is English.  He submitted that S is always at a crucial stage in
    his education, albeit his sister is not, and the ultimate question  was
    whether it was reasonable for the third Appellant to return and to then
    go on to consider the conduct of the parents.  Mr Spurling also  sought
    to rely on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MT  and  ET  (child's
    best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC)

 9. Mr Spurling submitted that it was clearly in the third Appellant's best
    interests to remain and also those of his younger sister.   Whilst  the
    Appellant's father's immigration history was poor it was not so poor as
    to make it reasonable for the Appellant and his family to leave the  UK
    and that in light of the test at Section 117B(6) of the  NIAA  2002  it
    was unreasonable for both children to have to leave the UK.




    Findings and reasons

10. I allowed the appeal and announced my decision at the hearing.   I  now
    give my reasons.

11. The First tier Tribunal Judge made the following preserved findings  of
    fact:

         (i)  the third Appellant has severe Autistic Spectrum disorder  and
         multiple special needs requiring educational and  health  resources
         support [87];

         (ii) his needs are catered for in the best possible manner [87];

         (iii)    removing the third Appellant would  significantly  disrupt
         the current care package [88];

         (iv) the provision of care in  Bangladesh  for  children  like  the
         third Appellant is considerably less advanced than it is in the  UK
         [88];

         (v)  if the third Appellant  is  returned  to  Bangladesh  he  will
         receive   considerably   reduced   care,   both    medically    and
         educationally, than he receives in the UK [88];

         (vi) the third Appellant and his wider family may be subjected to a
         higher level of social discrimination than would be the case in the
         UK [89];

         (vii)    it was in the third Appellant's best interests  to  remain
         in the UK with his parents [110];

         (viii)   the  Appellant  may  receive  assistance  from  the  first
         Appellant's parents [90] including financial  assistance  [93]  and
         could get some assistance from his sister [91] and there  may  also
         be some support from the second Appellant's family [92];

         (ix) the first two Appellants are relatively young and healthy  and
         as well placed as any other relatively young parents to get work in
         Bangladesh [94];

         (x)  the first Appellant has remained unlawfully since October 2003
         and the second Appellant's leave expired in 2012 and there has been
         a deliberate  and  persistent  refusal  to  comply  with  the  UK's
         immigration laws: [97];

         (xi) there are no very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
         Bangladesh: [98];

         (xii)    the fourth Appellant's best interests are to  return  with
         her family; [110] and

         (xiii)   the Appellants' stay has at  all  times  been  precarious:
         [111].

12. Since the decision and reasons of the First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    promulgated on 9 August 2018, the third Appellant became  a  qualifying
    child on 31 May 2018. The effect of this is that the proportionality of
    removal of the  family  must  take  place  following  consideration  of
    section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002; the associated Home  Office  guidance
    and the jurisprudence in respect of the reasonableness of  expecting  a
    qualifying child to leave the UK.

13. The current Home Office guidance in relation to "Family  Migration:  10
    year route," which was updated on 22 February 2018 and  provides  inter
    alia as follows:

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of  at  least  seven  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and to integrate into life in  the
         UK, to the extent that it may be unreasonable to require the  child
         to leave the UK.  Significant weight must be given to such a period
         of continuous residence.  The longer the child has resided  in  the
         UK, and the older the age at which they have done so, the more  the
         balance will begin to shift towards it being unreasonable to expect
         the child to leave the UK and strong reasons will  be  required  in
         order to refuse a case where the outcome will be removal of a child
         with continuous UK residence of seven years or more.

         Such strong reasons may arise where, for example, the child will be
         returning  with  the  family  unit  to  the  family's  country   of
         nationality, and the parents have deliberately sought to circumvent
         immigration control or abuse the immigration process.  For example,
         by entering or remaining in the UK illegally or by using  deception
         in an application for leave to remain or remain.  The consideration
         of the child's best interests must not be affected by  the  conduct
         or immigration history of the parents or primary carer,  but  these
         will  be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  public  interest,
         including in maintaining  effective  immigration  control;  whether
         this outweighs the child's best  interests;  and  whether,  in  the
         round, it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK....

         In particular circumstances, it may be  appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct  gives
         rise to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify
         their removal, where the child who has been resident here for seven
         years or more could  remain  in  the  UK  with  another  parent  or
         alternative primary carer, who is a British citizen or  settled  in
         the UK or who has been or is being granted leave  to  remain.   The
         circumstances envisaged include those in which to grant leave could
         undermine our immigration controls, for example the  applicant  has
         committed significant or persistent criminal offences falling below
         the thresholds for deportation set out  in  paragraph  398  of  the
         Immigration Rules or has a very poor  immigration  history,  having
         repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

14. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705,  Lord  Justice  Elias  held  as
    follows at [46]:

         "Applying the reasonableness test

         46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that
         a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

    And at [49}:

         "...the fact that the child has been in  the  UK  for  seven  years
         would need to be given significant weight  in  the  proportionality
         exercise for two related reasons: first, because of  its  relevance
         to  determining  the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
         interests; and second, because it establishes as a  starting  point
         that leave should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons  to
         the contrary."

15. In MT & ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria  [2018]
    UKUT 00088 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held inter alia as follows:

         "32. This is why both the age of the child and the amount  of  time
         spent by the child in  the  United  Kingdom  will  be  relevant  in
         determining, for the purposes of section 55/Article  8,  where  the
         best interests of the child lie.

         33.  On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we need to
         look for "powerful reasons" why a child who has been in the  United
         Kingdom for over ten years should be removed, notwithstanding  that
         her best interests lie in remaining.

         34.  In the present case, there are no such  powerful  reasons.  Of
         course, the public interest lies in removing a person, such as  MT,
         who has abused the immigration laws of the United Kingdom. Although
         Mr Deller did not seek to rely on it, we take account of  the  fact
         that, as recorded in Judge Baird's decision, MT had, at some stage,
         received a community order for using a  false  document  to  obtain
         employment. But, given the strength of ET's case, MT's  conduct  in
         our view comes nowhere close to requiring the respondent to succeed
         and Mr Deller did not strongly urge us to  so  find.  Mr  Nicholson
         submitted that, even on the findings of Judge Martin, MT  was  what
         might be described as  a  somewhat  run  of  the  mill  immigration
         offender  who  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  visit   visa,
         overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found to be false  and
         who has pursued various legal means  of  remaining  in  the  United
         Kingdom. None of this is to be taken in  any  way  as  excusing  or
         downplaying  MT's  unlawful  behaviour.  The  point  is  that   her
         immigration history is not so bad as  to  constitute  the  kind  of
         "powerful" reason that would render reasonable the removal of ET to
         Nigeria.

16. In light of the fact that the First tier Tribunal Judge found  that  it
    would be in the best interests of the third Appellant to remain in  the
    UK, due to his particular circumstances and given  that  he  is  now  a
    qualifying child, I find that on the basis of the preserved findings of
    fact and the additional submissions, that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the third Appellant to leave the UK and thus, in accordance with
    the statutory provisions set out at section 117B(6)(b) of the NIAA 2002
    that the public interest does not require his removal.

17. Having considered  the  relevant  jurisprudence  and  the  Home  Office
    guidance, set out at [13] above, I find on the particular facts of  the
    case that there are no powerful reasons to refuse leave, even if  as  a
    consequence of that the third Appellant's family are entitled to remain
    with him. Whilst the third Appellant's  parents  are  overstayers,  the
    second Appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully and has  leave  to
    remain when the third Appellant was born and until October 2012.  I  do
    not find that as such  this  can  be  characterised  as  a  "very  poor
    immigration history" in the absence of any criminality or deception.

    Decision

18. The appeals of all four Appellant are allowed on human  rights  grounds
    [Article 8].


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/07822/2016
                                                               HU/07826/2016
                                                               HU/07828/2016
                                                               hu/07831/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2018                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 SHAHIN [A]
                                 RUMANA [B]
                                    [S A]
                                    [Z A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafferiji, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh  and  a  family.  The  first
    Appellant was born on 1.3.72; his wife was born on 18.9.85 and the  two
    children were born on 31.5.11  and  30.10.13  respectively.  The  first
    Appellant claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in March  1998.
    He made an asylum claim which was rejected and his appeal against  that
    decision was upheld thus he became appeal rights exhausted on 6 October
    2003. His wife arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance as  a
    student after July 2010 and gave birth to the third Appellant on 31 May
    2011. An application for leave to remain was rejected on 1 March  2012.
    The fourth Appellant was born on 30 October 2013  following  which  the
    family were supported from 26 February  2015  by  Tower  Hamlets  local
    authority. Further submissions were made and refused on 12 March  2015;
    24 November 2015 and on 22 February 2016, which focused  on  the  third
    Appellant's diagnosis of autism and developmental difficulties.

2.   On 2 March 2016, the Respondent refused the representations in  support
    of an application for leave to remain. The Appellants appealed  against
    this decision and their appeal came before First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mayall  for  hearing  on  15  May  2017.  In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 9 August 2017, he dismissed the appeals.

3.   Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  First
    tier Tribunal Judge erred:

         (i)  having found at [110] that it would be in the  best  interests
         of the third Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom,  failed  to
         engage  appropriately  with  the  public  interest  without  giving
         adequate reasons or gave mistaken reasons;

         (ii) erred in finding that the family  would  remain  dependent  on
         public funds because if granted leave to remain one of  the  adults
         would work;

         (iii)    erred in concluding that the financial support the  family
         receive under section 17 of the Children  Act  amounted  to  public
         funds;

         (iv) erred in placing  weight  on  the  parents'  poor  immigration
         history, given the best interests of the children.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  on  the
    basis that it is arguable that the First tier Tribunal Judge  concluded
    that the answer to the question of the best interests of the child  not
    being an "emphatic yes" or an  "overwhelming  decision"  erred  in  his
    assessment of the proportionality of the decision, despite  having  set
    out the nature of the test to be applied and  despite  having  accepted
    the evidence in connection with the oldest child.

    Hearing

5.   At the hearing before me, Mr Jafferiji drew my attention  to  [17]-[20]
    of the decision and reasons and the evidence  of  Beverley  Power.  The
    Judge records the evidence  about  delayed  development  of  the  third
    Appellant if returned to Bangladesh; the fact it is unlikely  he  could
    get appropriate therapy; that it would take him a long time to adapt to
    new surroundings. At [21] and [22]  the  Judge  sets  out  the  medical
    evidence from Dr Gadong, paediatrician.

6.   Mr Jafferji submitted that there had been a failure by the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge to take account of material considerations in respect of
    the financial evidence and the evidence. Having accepted that evidence,
    his finding on best interests is incomplete: see [110] where  he  found
    "it is not,  however,  an  overwhelming  decision."  He  is  making  an
    assessment as to where the best interests of the child lies, however he
    failed to go on to say why despite this it was  proportionate  for  him
    and the family to leave, which is inconsistent with  his  accepting  of
    the evidence. In particular, at [89] the Judge accepted that the  third
    Appellant and possibly the wider family may be subjected  to  a  higher
    level of social discrimination than in the UK. Mr  Jafferiji  submitted
    that these factors do not seem to form part of the  balancing  exercise
    at [110]. Also no reasons were provided to support the finding at [110]
    that Zahra's best interests  would  be  best  served  by  returning  to
    Bangladesh with her parents and he needed to engage with the impact  on
    Zahra.

7.   Mr Jafferiji acknowledged that there was  no  evidence  of  section  17
    support by the local authority but equally there was no  evidence  that
    the family are in receipt of public funds.

8.   In his submissions,  Mr  Duffy  argued  that  it  makes  no  difference
    whether the funds come from the tax payer via local authority or  State
    funds and what the Judge is essentially saying  at  [96]  is  that  the
    family are costing the taxpayer money, whatever the source. It may  not
    be the case that section 17 support falls within public  funds  but  it
    can be taken into account. Education and health care are being supplied
    to [S]. They are a Bangladeshi family but  none  are  British  and  are
    supported because of children. Their leave has always  been  precarious
    and in the case of one parent unlawful and  they  had  children  during
    this period. Mr Duffy reminded me that the children are not  qualifying
    children within the meaning of section 117(B)(6) of the NIAA 2002.

9.   In reply, Mr Jafferji submitted that, in relation to public  funds,  he
    recognized the Judge was applying section 117B(6) and it  is  not  what
    the man on the Clapham omnibus says but what the law says. However,  he
    submitted that the source of funds is important as the council does not
    support every child who is here but the third  Appellant  falls  within
    the category of support because of his special needs  and  there  is  a
    difference between this and other support. It is an error for the Judge
    to place on the scales public funds - not as defined by the Rules - and
    is inconsistent with section 55  duty.  The  Immigration  Rules  define
    public funds at paragraph 6  and  this  does  not  include  section  17
    support. In  terms  of  future  reliance  on  public  funds  the  Judge
    addressed this at [95]  however  this  was  primarily  in  relation  to
    Bangladesh. He submitted that the  children  will  go  into  full  time
    education and the parents will not have to give up a career for good.

10.  Mr Jafferji sought to rely on the decision of the former  President  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Kaur [2017] UKUT 14 (IAC)  at  the  4th  headnote
    which makes clear that every balancing exercise must  contain  adequate
    reasoning. He submitted that the Judge has not placed on the scales the
    factors he should have placed at [110]. Mr Jafferji  further  submitted
    that the Judge had also failed to consider the  future  impact  on  the
    children as per the section 55 duty. There is no consideration  of  how
    the third Appellant's best interests would be promoted in the  UK.  The
    Judge further failed to consider the length of time the first Appellant
    has stayed in the UK, albeit as an overstayer but he does hold  against
    the family the adverse immigration history.

11.  I gave Mr Jafferji 7 days to provide evidence of  section  17  support.
    However, at the time of writing no further evidence had  been  received
    on the file or by email.

    Findings

12.  I find material errors of law in the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mayall, in his assessment of the proportionality  of  removal  of
    the Appellants in the following respects:

12.1.    the relevant test pursuant to section 117B(3) of the NIAA 2002  is:



         "It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society."

    Thus the test is financial independence, rather than receipt of  public
    funds and I accept  Mr  Duffy's  submission  in  this  respect  as  the
    Appellants are not financially independent. However, whilst no evidence
    of the local authority support pursuant to section 17 of  the  Children
    Act 1989 provided to the Appellants has  been  received  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in the refusal decision of 2 March 2016 reference is made  at
    [6] to the family receiving support from the local  authority  from  26
    February 2015. This was also the evidence of the first Appellant before
    the First tier Tribunal. I thus accept that the family are  in  receipt
    of section 17 support and I find that this does  not  fall  within  the
    definition of public funds set out at paragraph 6  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It follows, given that section 17 support is only provided where
    there is no other source of  financial  support,  that  the  Appellants
    would be ineligible for income support or housing benefit and the First
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in fact at [96] in finding that they were  in
    receipt of these benefits, as is asserted at  [3]  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal. I have concluded that this is a material error because  it  was
    one of the key reasons put forward by the Judge at [112] for concluding
    that it would be proportionate for the family to return  to  Bangladesh
    and  it  is  not  possible  to  know  whether,   absent   his   factual
    misapprehension as to the source of  funds,  this  would  have  made  a
    material difference to his overall decision.

12.2. I further find that, in light of the fact that, at  [106]  and  [110],
    the Judge made clear findings that it would be in the best interests of
    the third Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom with  his  parents,
    more was required by way of reasoning to substantiate his finding  that
    it would be proportionate  for  the  Appellants  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. In addition to the reliance  on  public  funds,  addressed  at
    12.1. above, the only other reason provided was the immigration  status
    of the parents. In this respect, the  former  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal addressed this issue in some detail in  Kaur  [2017]  UKUT  14
    (IAC) at [13]-[19] where he held at [31]:

         "The significance in the present context of Part 5A of the 2002 Act
         and section 117B (6) in particular is that Parliament, in  enacting
         the new regime, focused special attention on children and, in doing
         so, had the opportunity to make explicit provision for  the  weight
         to  be  attached  to  the  parental  immigration  misconduct  issue
         embedded in the seventh of the principles compromising the  Zoumbas
         code: it did not do so.

    And at [33]:

         "In a welcome contribution, the Lord  Chief  Justice,  echoing  the
         jurisprudence of this Tribunal, emphasises the importance of making
         clear findings on material issues of fact. The next requirement  on
         Judges is to "set out in clear and succinct terms their reasoning",
         with particular reference to [37] - [38],  [46]  and  [50]  of  the
         judgment of Lord Reed. Lord Thomas then advocates the  adoption  of
         the "balance sheet" approach. This is  a  self-evidently  important
         stage  in  the  judicial   decision   making.   It   involves   the
         identification of the material facts and factors belonging  to  the
         two basic sides of the equation."

    In conclusion, however, McCloskey J held at [40]:

         "40. My third observation is that an outcome for a family which has
         a prejudicial impact upon a child member is not  incompatible  with
         the seventh principle of the Zoumbas  code.  Where,  in  any  given
         case, the evaluation of  parental  immigration  misconduct  in  the
         balancing exercise contributes to a conclusion which  will  involve
         the entire family unit departing the United Kingdom, this does  not
         (per Elias LJ) "amount  to"  blaming  the  children.  Critically  -
         absent some other vitiating factor - the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children, always most aptly  carried  out  at  the
         beginning of the overall exercise,  will  be  unassailable  in  law
         provided that the factor of parental misconduct has not intruded at
         that stage."

12.3.    In light of the judgment in Kaur I have concluded  that  the  Judge
    did not materially err in law in his approach  to  best  interests  and
    parental misconduct. However, as stated at 12.2.  above,  there  is  an
    absence of reasoning and a "balance sheet" approach  in  that  material
    factors such as the ability  of  the  adult  Appellants  to  work;  the
    reasons for the overstay; the ability to speak English; the ages of the
    children,  their  length  of  residence,  whether  they  are  receiving
    education; to what extent  they  are  distanced  from  the  country  of
    return; the renewability of their connection with  it;  the  extent  of
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting  to  life  there,
    were  neither  considered  nor  factored   into   the   proportionality
    assessment.



Decision

13.  I find material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge. I adjourn the appeal for a resumed hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

    DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeal is to be listed for submissions only in respect of  the
    proportionality of  removal,  with  a  time  estimate  of  1  hour.  No
    interpreter will be booked unless specifically requested.

    2.   The findings of fact by the First tier Tribunal Judge  which  were
    unchallenged shall stand. This does not include  [96]  or  [112]  which
    were successfully challenged.

    3.   If the parties wish to submit any further evidence this should  be
    submitted in accordance with the  provisions  of  rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman 17 August 2018

