
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07486/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely by Skype for Business        |                              |
|On 25 March 2021                              |On 14 April 2021              |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     C A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (CA).  A failure to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Angola who was born on 24 March 1981.  He
    claims to have entered the UK in 1992 when he was around 10 years  old.
    His mother entered the UK separately.  She claimed asylum in  1995  but
    her claim was refused in  1996.   In  December  2003,  the  appellant's
    mother applied for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK.   She  was
    granted ILR in May 2004.  The appellant applied for ILR on 4 March 2004
    and he was granted ILR on 10 January 2005.

 4. Between 26  January  2004  and  26  January  2018,  the  appellant  was
    convicted on nine occasions of fifteen  offences.   Important  for  the
    purposes of this appeal, on 5 August 2016 the appellant  was  convicted
    of attempted robbery and sentenced, inter  alia,  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment suspended for 24 months.

 5. On 30 November 2017, the appellant was convicted at the  Kingston-upon-
    Thames Crown Court of possession/control  of  identity  documents  with
    intent and sentenced to a period of six months'  imprisonment.   As  he
    was in breach of the previous suspended sentence order,  that  sentence
    was activated in part to a custodial sentence of fifteen months making,
    in total with the consecutive  six  months'  imprisonment,  21  months'
    imprisonment.  The appellant did not appeal  against  the  sentence  or
    conviction.

 6. The appellant has, subsequently, on 26 January 2018 been  convicted  of
    travelling on a railway without paying the fare for which he was  fined
    �220.

 7. Following the appellant's conviction on 30 November 2017, the Secretary
    of State wrote to the appellant on 19 December 2017  notifying  him  of
    her intention to  deport  him  from  the  UK  as  a  'foreign  national
    criminal' under s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 8. On 4 January 2018, the appellant made representations to the  Secretary
    of State contending that his deportation to  Angola  would  breach  his
    human rights, in particular Art 8 of the ECHR.  The appellant relied on
    the fact that he had left Angola  as  a  10  year  old  and  had  lived
    thereafter in the UK.  He also relied on  the  fact  that  he  had  two
    children in the UK with his partner, who were British.

 9. On 14 February 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    human rights claim under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State was
    not satisfied that the  appellant  met  either  of  the  Exceptions  in
    ss.117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    (as amended) (the "NIA Act 2002") or that there were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above those in Exceptions 1 and 2  (s.117C(6)).
    As a result, the appellant's deportation was proportionate  and  not  a
    breach of Art 8.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard on 21 February 2020 by Judge M R Hoffman.  Both the appellant and
    Secretary of State were represented.  The appellant gave oral  evidence
    before the judge.  The judge concluded that  the  appellant  could  not
    establish a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR based upon his  mental  health,
    in particular PTSD he claimed to suffer as a result of being  a  forced
    child soldier in Angola from around the  age  of  7  years  old.   That
    finding is not challenged and I need say  no  more  about  it  in  this
    decision.

11. As regards Art  8,  the  judge  found  that  neither  Exception  1  nor
    Exception 2 in ss.117C(4) and  (5)  applied  to  the  appellant.   With
    regard to Exception 1, the judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    had spent "most of his life" lawfully in the UK.  As regards  Exception
    2, the judge accepted that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his two children (but not  as  was  conceded
    with his partner, their mother) but went on to find that it  would  not
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's children to remain in the UK if the
    appellant were deported.  Finally, the  judge  found  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances" over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 which
    outweighed the public interest reflected in the  appellant's  offending
    and so his deportation was disproportionate and a breach of Art 8.   On
    that basis, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on three grounds.

13. First, as explained by Mr McVeety in his submissions before me,  Ground
    1 that the judge had  erred  in  law  by  inconsistently  finding  that
    Exception 1 did not apply but, in determining  that  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances", had found that there were "very  significant
    obstacles" to the appellant re-establishing himself in Angola.

14. Secondly, Ground 2 contend that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his conclusion in relation to  s.117C(6)  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances" over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 which
    outweighed the public interest.

15. Thirdly, Ground 3 contend that the proceedings before  the  judge  were
    procedurally irregular and unfair due  to  the  appellant's  disruptive
    behaviour at the hearing.  This included  repeatedly  interrupting  the
    Presenting Officer, and his own  representative  and  resulted  in  the
    Presenting Officer being unable fairly to  question,  or  cross-examine
    the appellant as she would have liked.

16. On 1 April 2020, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ  Martin)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on all grounds.

17. Following directions from the Upper Tribunal,  further  representations
    were made both  by  the  appellant  (dated  13  August  2020)  and  the
    Secretary of State (dated 9 July 2020).  Because of the  issues  raised
    under Ground 3, I directed on 22 September 2020 that a Case  Management
    Hearing should be held.  That hearing was held before UTJ Perkins on 16
    December  2020.   As  a  result,  and  this  was   accepted   by   both
    representatives before me, it was agreed that Ms Short's record of what
    had transpired at the First-tier hearing was agreed.  It  was  accepted
    that the Presenting Officer had neither requested  an  adjournment  nor
    made a request to file further submissions after the hearing.

18. The appeal was listed before me on 25 March 2021 at the  Cardiff  Civil
    Justice Centre working remotely in order to determine the error of  law
    issue.  Ms Short, who represented the appellant, and  Mr  McVeety,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, joined the  hearing  by  Skype  for
    Business.

19. In addition, the appellant joined the hearing, apparently via his smart
    phone, by Skype.  At the outset  of  the  hearing,  I  noted  that  the
    appellant appeared to be walking outside rather than being based  in  a
    private room.  As a consequence, I enquired from the appellant where he
    was.  He told me that he was in a garden.  I asked him if he would  use
    his phone to show me his surroundings.  I wished to  confirm  that  the
    appellant was, even if outside, in a private area where the  Tribunal's
    proceedings could not be overheard.  In  response  to  my  request  the
    appellant became aggressive  and  engaged  in  a  sustained  tirade  of
    expletives and invectives directed against the Tribunal in seeking,  in
    the appellant's view, to control him.  His outburst was sustained  over
    several minutes.  Indeed, it only came to an end when, with Ms  Short's
    agreement, the appellant was informed that he would be removed from the
    remote hearing in order for it to carry on.  Ms Short was  entirely  in
    agreement with this as the proceedings  concerned  only  legal  issues.
    There was no  doubt,  in  my  mind,  that  the  appellant's  disruptive
    behaviour, which showed no  signs  of  abating,  would  have  made  the
    continuation of the hearing impossible.  The hearing then continued, as
    I have said with Ms Short's agreement and  indicating  that  she  would
    inform the appellant of what had transpired following the hearing, with
    oral submissions from both representatives.  In  addition,  I  had  the
    parties' earlier submissions and Ms Short's skeleton argument.

The Legal Framework

20. For the purposes of this appeal, the relevant legal framework  concerns
    Art 8 of the ECHR and Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002 and, principally,  as
    it  applies  in  deportation  cases.   In  particular,  the  appeal  is
    concerned with Exception 1 in s.117C(4) and Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)
    and  the  additional  provision  in  s.117C(6)  concerned  with   "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2".  It is common ground that  the  judge  was  required  to  apply
    s.117C in determining the issue of whether the appellant's  deportation
    would be disproportionate and a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

21. Sections 117C(1) and (2) set out the  position  regarding  the  "public
    interest" as follows:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal."

22. By virtue of s.117C(3), if a 'foreign criminal' has been  sentenced  to
    at least twelve months' imprisonment but not  to  four  years  or  more
    imprisonment, then if Exception 1 or Exception 2  applies,  deportation
    is not in the public interest (see, HA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1176 at [29]).

23. Section 117C(4) sets out Exception 1 as follows:

         "(4) Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported."

24. Exception 2 is found in s.117C(5) as follows:

         "(5)     Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

25. The proper approach to the "unduly harsh" requirement is set out in the
    decisions of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53
    and the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq), especially at [39]-[58].   It  is
    unnecessary to set out the approach, as the judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant did not satisfy Exception 2 because it  was  not  established
    that it would be "unduly harsh" for his two  qualifying  children  with
    whom he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship to remain in
    the UK if he were deported, is not challenged.

26. Section 117C(6) of the NIA Act 2002 provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstance, over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2."

27. Although s.117C(6) is phrased as only to apply to  a  foreign  criminal
    who has been sentenced to at least four years, imprisonment, the  Court
    of Appeal has held that this provision must also apply to a person  who
    has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  twelve
    months but less than four years (so-called 'medium offenders') and  who
    cannot bring themselves within either Exception 1 or Exception  2  (see
    NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [25]-[27]).

28. As regards "very compelling circumstances"  requirement  in  s.117C(6),
    the case law recognises the high threshold required to meet  this  test
    which requires the  individual  circumstances  as  a  whole,  including
    circumstances which did not in themselves  result  in  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2 being met, being considered  cumulatively  with  all  other
    relevant  circumstances  and  balanced  against  the  public   interest
    reflected in the seriousness of  the  individual's  criminal  offending
    (see NA (Pakistan) at [32] and HA (Iraq) at [60]).

29. In HA (Iraq), the Court of Appeal provided guidance on the  application
    of s.117C(6).  Underhill LJ (with whom Peter Jackson and Popplewell LJJ
    agreed) said this (at [31]-[38]):
         1. The effect of the phrase "very compelling circumstances over and
            above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2", and the nature  of
            the exercise required by section 117C (6) as it applies both  to
            medium  offenders  and  to  serious  offenders,  are   carefully
            discussed at paras. 28-34 of NA (Pakistan). It is  unnecessary
            that I quote that discussion in full here,  but  I  should  note
            four points applicable to the case of a medium offender.
         1. First, the discussion is underpinned by the fundamental point of
            principle  which  the  Court  identifies  at  para.  22  of  its
            judgment, as follows:
                 "Section 117C (1) of the 2002 Act, as inserted by the 2014
                 Act, re-states that the deportation of  foreign  criminals
                 is in the public interest. The  observations  of  Laws  LJ
                 in SS (Nigeria) [[2013]  EWCA  Civ  550, [2014]  1  WLR
                 998], concerning the significance of the 2007 Act,  as  a
                 particularly  strong  statement  of  public  policy,   are
                 equally applicable to the new provisions inserted into the
                 2002 Act  by  the  2014  Act.  Both  the  courts  and  the
                 tribunals  are  obliged  to  respect  the  high  level  of
                 importance  which  the   legislature   attaches   to   the
                 deportation of foreign criminals."
            It is because of  the  high  level  of  importance  attached  by
            Parliament to the deportation of foreign criminals  that,  where
            neither Exception 1 nor Exception 2 applies, the public interest
            in  deportation  can  only  be  outweighed  by  very  compelling
            circumstances.
         1. Secondly, the Court's explanation of the effect  of  the  phrase
            "over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2", at para.
            29, reads as follows:
                 "The phrase used in section 117C (6), in para. 398 of [the
                 Immigration Rules] and which we have held is  to  be  read
                 into section  117C  (3)  does  not  mean  that  a  foreign
                 criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from
                 seeking to rely on matters falling within the scope of the
                 circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking
                 to contend that 'there are very compelling  circumstances,
                 over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. ...
                 [A]  foreign  criminal  is  entitled  to  rely  upon  such
                 matters, but he would need to be able to point to features
                 of his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and
                 in paras. 399 or 399A of [the Rules]), or features falling
                 outside the circumstances described  in  those  Exceptions
                 and those  paragraphs,  which  made  his  claim  based  on
                 Article 8 especially strong."
            That passage is expressed to cover the case of both serious  and
            medium offenders. At para. 32 the Court  specifically  addresses
            the case of medium offenders, as follows:
                 "... [I]n the case of  a  medium  offender,  if  all  [the
                 potential  deportee]  could  advance  in  support  of  his
                 Article 8 claim was a 'near miss' case in  which  he  fell
                 short of bringing himself within  either  Exception  1  or
                 Exception 2, it would not be possible to say that  he  had
                 shown that there were 'very compelling circumstances, over
                 and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would
                 need to have a far stronger case than that by reference to
                 the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring  himself
                 within that fall back protection. But again, in  principle
                 there may be cases in which such an offender can say  that
                 features of his case of a kind described in  Exceptions  1
                 and 2 have such great force for Article  8  purposes  that
                 they do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,
                 whether taken by themselves or in conjunction  with  other
                 factors relevant to Article 8 but not falling  within  the
                 factors described in Exceptions  1  and  2.  The  decision
                 maker, be it the Secretary of State or  a  tribunal,  must
                 look at all the matters relied upon collectively, in order
                 to determine whether they are sufficiently  compelling  to
                 outweigh the high public interest in deportation."
            Those two passages make clear that, in  carrying  out  the  full
            proportionality  assessment  which  is   necessary   where   the
            Exceptions do not apply, facts and matters that were relevant to
            the assessment of  whether  either  Exception  applied  are  not
            "exhausted" if the conclusion is that they do not.  They  remain
            relevant to the overall assessment, and could be  sufficient  to
            outweigh the public interest in deportation either, if specially
            strong, by themselves[3] or in combination with other factors.
         1. Thirdly, at para. 33 the Court says:
                 "Although there is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
                 inexorably follows from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the
                 cases in which circumstances are  sufficiently  compelling
                 to outweigh the high public interest in  deportation  will
                 be rare. The commonplace incidents of family life, such as
                 ageing parents in poor health or the natural love  between
                 parents and children, will not be sufficient."
            This passage makes a point which appears often in the  case-law.
            But it is important to bear in mind that it is directed  at  the
            exercise under section 117C (6). The Court was not  saying  that
            it would be rare for cases to fall within section 117C (5).
         1. Fourthly, at para. 34 the Court addresses the relevance  of  the
            best interests of any children affected by the deportation of  a
            foreign criminal. It says:
                 "The best interests  of  children  certainly  carry  great
                 weight, as identified by Lord  Kerr  in H  (H)  v  Deputy
                 Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013]
                 1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it is a  consequence  of
                 criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be  separated  from
                 their children  for  many  years,  contrary  to  the  best
                 interests of those children. The desirability of  children
                 being with both parents is a commonplace of  family  life.
                 That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance
                 to outweigh the high public interest in deporting  foreign
                 criminals. ..."
            Again, this is a point frequently made  in  the  case-law;  but,
            again, it should be borne in mind that, as the  reference  to  a
            "sufficiently compelling circumstance" shows, the final sentence
            relates only to the exercise under section 117C (6).
         1. I have not so far referred to authorities about the regime which
            preceded the coming into force  of  Part  5A  in  2014  and  the
            associated changes to the Rules. However,  as  this  Court  made
            clear  in Akinyemi v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
            Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, [2020] 1 WLR 1843, ("Akinyemi
            (no. 2)") the underlying principles relevant to  the  assessment
            of the weight to be given to the  public  interest  and  article
            8 have not been changed by the introduction of the  new  regime
            (see per the Senior President of Tribunals  at  para.  46).  The
            purpose of the new  provisions  was  to  give  statutory  force,
            accompanied by some re-wording, to principles which had  already
            been established in the case-law  relating  to  the  Immigration
            Rules. That means that cases decided under the  old  regime  may
            still be authoritative. We have already  seen  that  this  Court
            in NA (Pakistan) referred to the important observations of Laws
            LJ in SS (Nigeria) about the weight to be given to the  public
            interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  It  also
            referred on several occasions to  the  decision  of  this  Court
            in MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
            Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, [2014] 1 WLR 544.
         1. The most authoritative exposition of the  principles  underlying
            the old regime can  be  found,  two  years  after  it  had  been
            superseded and even some months later than NA (Pakistan), in the
            decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State
            for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799. It is
            authoritative on the points of principle underlying both regimes
            and was so treated in Akinyemi no. 2 (see paras. 46-50).  That
            being so, I should say that I can see nothing in  the  judgments
            of the majority inconsistent with the  approach  taken  by  this
            Court in NA (Pakistan) as discussed above. At para. 26 of  his
            judgment Lord Reed summarises the effect of the Strasbourg case-
            law about foreign criminals, and at para. 33,  like  this  Court
            in NA (Pakistan), he makes it clear that the factors referred to
            in those cases need to be taken into account in  the  assessment
            of the proportionality of the deportation of  foreign  offenders
            (whether or not they are "settled migrants").
         1. Reference to the previous case-law is important for the  purpose
            of a particular point made by the Appellants in  these  appeals.
            It will be  seen  that  in  para.  32  of  its  judgment  in NA
            (Pakistan) this Court expresses the test under section 117C (6)
            as being whether the circumstances relied on  by  the  potential
            deportee "are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
            public  interest  in  deportation";  and  it   uses   the   same
            formulation in paras. 33 and 34 (see paras.  36-37  above).  The
            Appellants contend that that is the  only  correct  formulation,
            and that it is dangerous to refer  simply  to  "very  compelling
            circumstances". It would, to say the least, be surprising if  it
            were wrong to use the very language of the statute; but  in  any
            event the position becomes clear when  the  development  of  the
            case-law is understood. This Court in NA  (Pakistan) took  the
            language of "sufficiently compelling" from the  decision  in MF
            (Nigeria). Paragraph 398 of the  pre-2014  Rules  had  used  the
            phrase "exceptional circumstances". At para. 42 of its  judgment
            in MF the Court said that that did not mean  that  a  test  of
            exceptionality was  to  be  applied  (a  point  repeated  in NA
            (Pakistan) - see para. 36 above) and continued:
                 "Rather  ...,  in  approaching  the  question  of  whether
                 removal  is   a   proportionate   interference   with   an
                 individual's Article 8  rights,  the  scales  are  heavily
                 weighted in  favour  of  deportation  and  something very
                 compelling (which will be 'exceptional') is  required  to
                 outweigh  the  public  interest   in   removal   [emphasis
                 supplied]."
            At para. 46 it expressed the same  point  slightly  differently,
            referring           to           "circumstances            which
            are sufficiently compelling (and  therefore  exceptional)  to
            outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  [again,  emphasis
            supplied]". The effect is clear: circumstances will have  to  be
            very compelling  in  order  to  be  sufficiently  compelling  to
            outweigh the strong public interest in deportation. That remains
            the case under section 117C (6)."

30. Subsequently, the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1296 identified the four leading authorities in relation to  ss.117C(5)
    and (6) beyond which it would usually be unnecessary for a Tribunal  to
    make reference: KO(Nigeria); HA (Iraq), NA (Pakistan) and R  (Byndloss)
    v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42.

31. In respect of the Supreme Court's decision in Byndloss,  the  Court  of
    Appeal made specific mention to Lord Wilson's judgment at [33] and [55]
    where he said this about the approach to proportionality in deportation
    cases:



         "33. The deportation of a foreign  criminal  is  conducive  to  the
         public good. So said Parliament in enacting section  32(4)  of  the
         2007 Act: see para 11 above. Parliament's unusual statement of fact
         was expressed to be for the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the  1971
         Act so its consequence  was  that  every  foreign  criminal  became
         automatically  liable  to   deportation.   Parliament's   statement
         exemplifies the "strong  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
         foreign nationals who  have  committed  serious  offences": Ali  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] 1 WLR 4799, para
         14, per Lord Reed JSC. In the Ali case the court was required  to
         identify the criterion by reference to which  the  tribunal  should
         determine an appeal of a foreign criminal on human  rights  grounds
         against a deportation order.  The  decision  was  that  the  public
         interest in his deportation was  of  such  weight  that  only  very
         compelling reasons would outweigh it: see paras 37 and 38, per Lord
         Reed JSC.


         ...........


         55. The third [feature of the background] is that, particularly  in
         the light of this court's decision in the Ali case, every foreign
         criminal who appeals against a deportation order  by  reference  to
         his human rights must negotiate  a  formidable  hurdle  before  his
         appeal will succeed: see para  33  above.  He  needs  to  be  in  a
         position to assemble and present powerful evidence. I must  not  be
         taken to be prescriptive in suggesting  that  the  very  compelling
         reasons which the tribunal must find before it allows an appeal are
         likely to relate in particular to some  or  all  of  the  following
         matters: (a) the depth of  the  claimant's  integration  in  United
         Kingdom society in terms of family, employment and  otherwise;  (b)
         the quality of his relationship with any child,  partner  or  other
         family member in the United Kingdom; (c) the extent  to  which  any
         relationship with family members might reasonably be sustained even
         after  deportation,  whether  by  their  joining  him   abroad   or
         otherwise; (d) the  impact  of  his  deportation  on  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the  welfare  of  any  child  in  the  United
         Kingdom;  (e)  the  likely  strength  of  the  obstacles   to   his
         integration in the society of the country of his nationality;  and,
         surely in every case; (f) any significant risk of  his  reoffending
         in the United Kingdom, judged, no doubt  with  difficulty,  in  the
         light of his criminal record set against  the  credibility  of  his
         probable assertions of remorse and reform."

32. What is said there is particularly relevant to s.117C(6) and the  issue
    of "very compelling circumstances".

Discussion

    Ground 3

33. It is helpful to begin with Ground 3 and  the  respondent's  contention
    that the proceedings were procedurally  irregular  and  unfair  to  the
    respondent  because  of  the  appellant's  disruptive  and   aggressive
    behaviour during the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

34. What happened at the hearing  before  the  judge  is  not,  as  I  have
    indicated, in dispute.  The judge made  reference  to  the  appellant's
    behaviour during his evidence (at para 31  of  his  determination)  and
    during the submissions (at para 48 of his determination).  At para  31,
    the judge said this:

         "Ms Burrell [the Presenting Officer] asked the appellant to confirm
         that he had worked as a fitness instructor, warehouse operative and
         a security guard in the UK.  The appellant confirmed  that  he  had
         done all those jobs.  Ms Burrell next asked the  appellant  why  he
         could not use those skills to find work in Angola.  At this  point,
         the appellant became agitated.  He repeatedly asked Ms Burrell  why
         she "was here [in  the  UK]"  and  said  that  this  was  a  "funny
         question".  He said that he had children in the UK and that  if  he
         wanted to go to Angola, he would go to Angola.  He repeatedly asked
         Ms Burrell why she  did  not  go  to  Angola.   At  this  point,  I
         explained to the appellant that he should not be asking Ms  Burrell
         questions but should answer hers.  I put Ms Burrell's  question  to
         the appellant myself, but the appellant continued to display  signs
         of agitation and, at this point, I decided to adjourn  the  hearing
         for five minutes to enable the appellant to calm down."

35. It then transpires that the hearing resumed and the appellant continued
    to give his evidence which is set out at paras 32 and 33 of the judge's
    determination.

36. Consequently, it would appear, from the judge's determination, that  as
    a result of the appellant's attitude  and  approach  to  the  questions
    being put by Ms Burrell, the judge briefly  adjourned  the  hearing  in
    order for the appellant to resume a level of calmness which would allow
    the cross-examination to continue, which it did.

37.  As  regards  the  submissions,  at  para  48  the  judge  relates  the
    appellant's behaviour as follows:

         "At  this  point  of  the  determination  I  should   explain   the
         appellant's behaviour during oral submissions.  This began with the
         appellant repeatedly interrupting Ms Burrell's submissions,  asking
         her whether "she knew Angola?".  Despite my repeated  requests  for
         him to refrain from interrupting her, he continued  to  do  so.   I
         suggested to Ms Short [the appellant's  counsel]  that  she  should
         have a word with her client at which point he said, "I  don't  want
         to be here".  Ms Short confirmed  that  she  was  content  for  the
         appellant to leave the courtroom and that  she  was  confident  she
         would address his needs  if  he  was  outside.   I  therefore  gave
         permission for the appellant to wait outside  with  [an  individual
         who attended with the appellant].  He did,  however,  re-enter  the
         hearing a few  minutes  later.   Later,  when  Ms  Short  made  her
         submissions, the appellant began to interrupt her as well,  at  one
         point repeatedly claiming that if he  was  returned  to  Angola  he
         "will become  the  biggest  terrorist  in  the  world".   When  the
         appellant ignored my request that he refrain from interrupting  his
         own advocate I decided to adjourn the hearing for five  minutes  to
         allow him to compose himself.  Ms Short agreed but asked me to take
         into account that the appellant  became  agitated  when  Angola  is
         spoken about, which she said was evidence of his  PTSD.   Ms  Short
         left the courtroom for a  few  minutes  and  returned  without  the
         appellant whom she said had decided  to  (sic)  wait  outside.   Ms
         Short said that she was happy  to  proceed  in  his  absence.   The
         hearing therefore resumed, although the appellant returned  to  the
         courtroom a few minutes later.  While he  continued  to  interject,
         and I had to continually remind him not  to  interrupt  Ms  Short's
         submissions, the  appellant  appeared  to  be  less  agitated  than
         earlier."

38. Attached to the grounds of appeal is the note of the hearing made by Ms
    Burrell.  In that note she states:

         "Appellant was aggressive towards me throughout  the  evidence  and
         submissions.  He took a break at the beginning of cross-exam due to
         his aggression.  During this break I asked security to keep an  eye
         on my court.  When we reconvened he became aggressive again and was
         asked to leave the court by his  rep  and  litigation  friend.   We
         continued in his absence to submissions.   The  appellant  returned
         during submissions and proceedings  to  make  comments  and  talked
         throughout my subs which was intimidating and  rather  distracting.
         During cross and subs I made it clear to the  Judge  that  I  would
         usually go into more detail or push him  more  during  questioning,
         but felt unable to, considering the circumstances.   The  appellant
         left  the  room  again  and  then  came  back  during   his   rep's
         submissions.  He interrupted his rep's submissions and at one stage
         shouted 'I will be the biggest terrorist you will ever meet if  you
         send me back, and it will all be directed at  your  country'.   The
         appellant was given plenty of breaks, tissues and water during  the
         hearing.  It was reported by the Judge during  one  of  the  breaks
         that the appellant was swearing at the security guards."

39. In his submissions, Mr McVeety accepted that Ms Short's recollection of
    events was accurate.  The Presenting Officer had made no formal request
    for an adjournment and had not made any request to make further written
    submissions after the hearing.  Nevertheless, Mr McVeety submitted that
    the evidence showed that the appellant was hostile in  court  and  this
    was potentially unfair if the Presenting Officer was not  able  to  put
    further questions.  He candidly, however, accepted that  there  was  no
    detailed evidence from the Presenting Officer as to precisely what  she
    had  not  been  able  to  ask  or  explore  in   cross-examination   or
    submissions.  He acknowledged that perhaps the  place  to  have  raised
    this was at the hearing before the judge.

40. In response, Ms Short relied upon a number of decisions, referred to in
    her skeleton argument, concerning allegations of impropriety by a judge
    at a hearing:  PA  (protection  claim:  respondent's  enquiries;  bias)
    Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 0337 (IAC); HA  (conduct  of  hearing:  evidence
    required) Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT  00018  and  KD  (inattentive  judges)
    Afghanistan  [2010]  UKUT  261   (IAC).    She   submitted   that   the
    representative had a duty to raise inappropriate  behaviour,  including
    by an appellant, with the  judge  at  the  hearing.   Likewise  it  was
    relevant whether any complaint was not raised  at  the  hearing  or  at
    least shortly after.  Evidence to support the allegations was  crucial,
    she submitted.  In this case, Ms Short submitted  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had not raised contemporaneously the fairness  of  the  hearing
    and that her position was compromised.  She did not seek an adjournment
    and she did not seek to request permission to file  subsequent  written
    submissions.  Ms Short pointed out that the Presenting Officer's cross-
    examinations ended at the end of her questions rather than as a  result
    of the disruption by the appellant which had led  to  him  leaving  the
    hearing room before subsequently returning to  give  further  evidence.
    Likewise, that was the position  as  regards  her  submissions  to  the
    judge.  Ms Short pointed out that the appellant had  been  absent  from
    the room on a number of occasions and the Presenting Officer had had an
    opportunity to raise her concerns in his absence but had not  done  so.
    There was no statement of  truth  or  formal  evidence  concerning  the
    impact upon  the  Presenting  Officer  of  the  appellant's  disruptive
    conduct.

41. The requirement that proceedings must be procedurally fair  applies  in
    favour both of the appellant and the  respondent.   No  less  than  the
    appellant's representative, the  Secretary  of  State's  representative
    was, as a matter of fairness, entitled  to  the  opportunity  to  fully
    present the Secretary of  State's  case.   That  included,  within  the
    bounds of reasonable questioning, cross-examination and the  making  of
    relevant submissions to  the  judge.   If  the  appellant's  disruptive
    conduct,  which  Ms  Short  accepted  was  challenging,  prevented  the
    Presenting Officer fairly exploring the appellant's evidence in  cross-
    examination or making relevant submissions to the judge, there would be
    a prima facie case of unfairness.  Indeed,  in  an  extreme  case,  the
    conduct of an individual at a hearing, whether appellant or witness  or
    representative, might be such as to render the  proceedings  unfair  if
    that behaviour created a situation and an  atmosphere  antithetical  to
    the proper conduct of the proceedings.  I did not understand Mr McVeety
    to contend that latter situation appertained in this  appeal.   Rather,
    his submissions focused upon the impact upon the  Presenting  Officer's
    ability to ask questions and make submissions.

42. There is no doubt that the appellant's behaviour was  disruptive.   The
    circumstances were undoubtedly challenging for both advocates  and  the
    judge.  It  is  worth  noting,  of  course,  that  the  appellant  also
    interrupted on numerous occasions his own Counsel's  submissions.   The
    appellant's conduct was wholly inappropriate and inconsistent with  the
    required decorum and respect owed to each and every participant in  the
    judicial process.  The judge,  however,  dealing  with  this  difficult
    situation responded reasonably and appropriately by granting  temporary
    adjournments in order for the appellant to calm down.   That  endeavour
    was, of course, not  wholly  successful.   I  do  not  doubt  that  the
    Presenting Officer, in  particular,  found  the  appellant's  behaviour
    difficult and problematic.  However, I accept  Ms  Short's  submissions
    that, on the evidence available to me, it has not been shown  that  the
    Presenting Officer was unfairly prevented from presenting the Secretary
    of State's case through cross-examination or submissions.  There is not
    a  sufficient  evidential  basis  to  demonstrate  precisely  what  the
    Presenting  Officer  was  prevented  from  asking  the   appellant   or
    submitting to the judge.  As Ms Short submitted, the Presenting Officer
    did not seek an adjournment on the basis  that  she  could  not  fairly
    continue nor did she seek to make a request to file written submissions
    after the hearing on the basis that she had been  unable  to  make  her
    submissions.  There was an opportunity to do this, not least during the
    time that the appellant was absent from the hearing.

43. Looking at  the  judge's  determination  and  the  progression  at  the
    hearing, I am satisfied that the Presenting Officer  was,  albeit  with
    some difficulty, able to explore what she wished to  do  so  in  cross-
    examination or with the assistance of the judge asking  some  questions
    himself.  Likewise, the judge records in detail the submissions made by
    the Presenting Officer and, indeed, Ms Short at paras 35-39  and  40-47
    respectively.  Those submissions are, with respect, very full and  thus
    the relevant matters which  the  judge  had  to  reach  findings  upon.
    Despite the unacceptability  of  the  appellant's  conduct,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the proceedings were, as a result, unfair, in particular
    to the respondent's representative.  For these  reasons,  therefore,  I
    reject Ground 3.

44. I now turn to the remaining two grounds  which  challenge  the  judge's
    conclusion  that,  applying  s.117C(6),  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2  to
    outweigh the public interest  such  that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would be disproportionate and a breach of Art 8.

    Ground 1

45. Mr McVeety dealt briefly with  Ground  1.   He  acknowledged  that  the
    ground as drafted appeared to omit the point which was intended  to  be
    made.  He explained that the Secretary of State's contention  was  that
    it was inconsistent for the judge to find that Exception 1 in s.117C(4)
    did not apply but, at  the  same  time,  find  that  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to the  appellant's  reintegration  into  Angola
    when applying s.117C(6).

46. In the course of his submissions, I pointed out to Mr McVeety that  the
    judge had found that Exception 1 did not apply to the appellant  solely
    on the basis that he did not satisfy the requirement  in  s.117C(4)(a),
    namely that he had been "lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
    most of [his] life".  That was the judge's finding at paras 74  and  82
    of his determination.  Although the appellant claimed to have  been  in
    the UK since 1991 or 1992, he had only been resident in the UK lawfully
    from 10 January 2005 when he was granted ILR  until  14  February  2018
    when he was notified that a deportation order had  been  signed.   That
    was a total of thirteen years and the appellant is 30 years  old.   The
    requirement to have spent  "most"  of  his  life  in  the  UK  lawfully
    resident meant the majority of it, i.e. more than half (see SSHD  v  SC
    (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 at [53] per Sir Ernest Ryder (SPT)).  At
    para 74, having, therefore, considered that  the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirement in  para  399A(a)  of  the  Rules  (equivalent  of
    s.117C(4)(a)) the judge went on to say that it was:

         "Therefore unnecessary for me to consider whether the  requirements
         of sub-paras (b) and (c) have been met."

47. The requirements in sub-paras (a) to (c) of  para  399A  of  the  Rules
    reflect those in s.117C(4)(a)-(c).  The  judge  made  the  same  point,
    namely  that  he  was  only  deciding  the  issue  under  s.117C(4)(a),
    explicitly in para 82 of his determination  where  he  also  noted  the
    Presenting Officer's acceptance that the appellant met the  requirement
    in s.117C(4)(b) namely that he was "socially and culturally  integrated
    in the United Kingdom".

48. Consequently, the judge found  that  Exception  1  did  not  apply  but
    without making any finding as  to  whether  or  not  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to the  appellant's  integration  on  return  to
    Angola.  In the circumstances, it was not inconsistent for the judge to
    find, in para 98 of his determination when concluding there were  "very
    compelling circumstances", that there were "very significant obstacles"
    to the appellant re-establishing  himself  in  Angola.   Ground  1  is,
    therefore, not established.




    Ground 2

49. I turn now to Ground 2.

50. The judge's reasons for allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8  on
    the basis that there were "very compelling circumstances" are found  at
    paras 76-98 of his determination.

51. The judge accepted that the appellant enjoyed family life with his  two
    children and that he had developed a  private  life  in  the  UK  since
    arriving in the early 1990s (see para 76).

52. In paragraphs 78-79, referring to s.117C(2), the  judge  accepted  that
    the  appellant  had  committed  a  serious  offence,  namely  attempted
    robbery, and that he had a propensity to re-offend.

53. At para 81, the judge found, on a balance of probabilities,  that  "the
    appellant will likely continue to  re-offend  if  he  is  permitted  to
    remain in the UK".

54. At para 83, the judge noted the appellant's relationship with  his  two
    sons with whom he had regained contact since  release  from  prison  in
    November 2019.  Prior to that he had only had limited contact with  his
    one son and had  never  met  the  other.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant now had three months of supervised contact amounting  to  two
    hours per week and had had unsupervised contact for the past two  weeks
    (see para 83).

55. At para 84, the judge concluded that it  was  in  the  children's  best
    interests to remain in contact with their father.  Consistent with  his
    conclusion under Exception 2, whilst recognising that the appellant had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  children,  at
    para 86 the judge accepted that it would not be "unduly harsh" upon the
    children if he were deported.

56. Having done so, at para 87 the judge directed himself that  there  must
    be "very  compelling  circumstances"  to  outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in deportation.

57. At para 88, the judge found: "I do  not  accept  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances arising out of  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his sons".

58. Then at paras 89-92 the judge considered the appellant's  private  life
    in the UK.  At para 92 the judge reached the following conclusion:

         "I therefore find that the appellant's private life in  the  UK  is
         slight for a man who claims to have lived in the country since  the
         early 1990s.  With the exception  of  the  lady  who  attended  the
         hearing with him (but did not give evidence)  he  appears  to  have
         few, if any, friends.  There is no evidence that  he  has  obtained
         any qualifications.  I also take into  account  that  even  setting
         aside his period of imprisonment, he has not worked for a number of
         years.  Before that, he appears to have  worked  sporadically,  and
         held no jobs long-term.  Nevertheless, Ms Short submitted that  the
         factors against removal are as follows: the appellant has lived  in
         the UK for 26 years (although I note it may be slightly longer than
         that); he speaks English (therefore s.117C(2) does not  apply);  he
         only lived in Angola for the first ten years of his  life;  he  had
         never returned to that country and has no ties there; he  held  ILR
         for fourteen  years and, prior to that, he  was  in  the  UK  as  a
         child.  She refers to the fact that he was abandoned by his  mother
         with his stepsisters in Portugal, and when he came to  the  UK,  he
         was mistreated  by  his  stepbrother.   He  has  experienced  grief
         throughout his whole life, including  the  death  of  his  parents.
         Further he now has contact with the children and, she says, he  has
         rehabilitated himself in prison.  (On this  final  point,  for  the
         reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that  the  appellant  has
         been rehabilitated.)"

59. At para 93, the judge noted Ms Short's submission that there were "very
    significant obstacles" to the  appellant  re-establishing  his  private
    life in Angola due to his vulnerability  and  that  he  would  be  left
    destitute.  He relied on an expert report from Dr Amundsen which stated
    that state support was "non-existent" and that having been absent  from
    Angola for more than 25 years and having no family to return to posed a
    significant risk to the appellant's livelihood.   The  judge,  however,
    went on to say:

         "I accept that if the appellant does still have family  in  Angola,
         it is unlikely that he is still in contact with them given (a)  how
         long he has been absent from that country for and (b)  that  he  is
         not even close to his family in the  UK.  But while I  also  accept
         it might be difficult to  find  work  or  accommodation  without  a
         family or social network, it  seems  to  me  unlikely  that  it  is
         impossible to do so without them."

60. At para  94,  the  judge  noted  in  Ms  Short's  submission  that  the
    appellant's criminal record would  lead  to  social  discrimination  in
    Angola again relying upon Dr Amundsen's report.  However he  noted  the
    expert's view that there was "no reason to believe"  that  the  Angolan
    authorities would be informed about the  appellant's  criminal  record.
    He concluded that it was "plain", therefore, that if people  in  Angola
    became aware of the appellant's criminal record it would be because  he
    told them and the respondent could not be blamed for that.

61. At para 95, the judge noted Ms  Short's  submission,  relying  upon  Dr
    Amundsen's  conclusion,  that  the  appellant  faced  a  high  risk  of
    destitution on return to Angola.

62. At paras 96-98, the judge carried out the balancing  exercise  required
    under s.117C(6) in respect of the issue of proportionality as follows:

         "96. I  remind  myself  that  where  the  respondent  has  made  an
             assessment that the public interest is in favour of a  foreign
             criminal's deportation, that person's Article 8 claim must  be
             sufficiently strong to outweigh the public interest and  "only
             a claim that is very strong indeed - very  compelling,  as  it
             was put in MF Nigeria - will succeed": see  Hesham  Ali,  para
             50.  This is a very finely balanced case, and I have not found
             it  easy  to  reach  a  decision.   However,   after   careful
             consideration of all the evidence, I am - somewhat reluctantly
             - led to the conclusion that the appellant's circumstances are
             sufficiently compelling so as to outweigh  the  strong  public
             interest in his deportation.

         97.  I accept that the appellant's conduct in the UK (at  least  as
             an adult) has been incredibly poor, although his offences have
             not been at the most serious end  of  the  spectrum.   He  is,
             however, a persistent offender who has shown a  proclivity  to
             threaten  and  harass  and,  at  times,  result  to  violence,
             including against his former partner, Ms A.  I  do  have  very
             real  concerns  that  the  appellant  has   not   been   fully
             rehabilitated  and  is   likely   to   continue   to   offend.
             Furthermore, his claim during oral evidence that he would like
             to work in close protection  and  have  access  to  a  firearm
             suggests that the appellant has a distinct lack  of  awareness
             when it comes to the implications of his criminal  record  and
             violent behaviour.  There is,  in  my  view,  a  clear  public
             interest in his deportation.  Nevertheless, for the  following
             reasons, I find that the proportionality  balance  just  about
             weighs in the appellant's favour.

         98.  I take into account that while  the  appellant  has  not  been
             lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life (as  required
             under Exception 1 set out in s.117C(4)), he has lived here for
             most of his life, and for more than 25  years.   I  also  take
             into account that until 24 March 1999, he was present  in  the
             UK as a minor, in circumstances that were essentially  outside
             of his control.  Therefore, he has spent just under six  years
             in the UK as an adult with no leave to  remain,  but  fourteen
             years as an adult with ILR.  As Ms  Burrell  accepted  in  her
             submissions,  the  appellant  has  socially   and   culturally
             integrated in the UK during that time.  Furthermore, while  he
             speaks Portuguese and likely has some knowledge of Angola from
             his childhood and through his mother, I accept that there  are
             very significant obstacles to him re-establishing his  private
             life in Angola.  He has not lived there  since  his  childhood
             and, importantly, it was a childhood marred by  the  abuse  he
             suffered as a child soldier forced to fight for UNITA.  As the
             psychiatric report shows, the abuse the appellant suffered has
             almost certainly had repercussions  in  the  Complex  PTSD  he
             suffered from in the past; and, according to Dr  Chisholm,  it
             will likely re-surface if he is returned to  Angola.   I  have
             set out above why I have decided the appellant cannot  succeed
             on Article 3 ECHR medical grounds.   But  in  the  context  of
             Article  8,  I  find  that  the  cumulative  effect   of   the
             appellant's PTSD being re-triggered in Angola, the  difficulty
             in  obtaining  treatment  without  funds  (see  Dr  Amundsen's
             report, page 4) coupled with the lack of a family  or  support
             network there, which will make it difficult for the  appellant
             to find accommodation or work in a country  that  already  has
             high unemployment (Dr Amundsen's report, pages 7 to 8)  would,
             on balance, likely leave the appellant destitute (Dr Amundsen,
             pages 9 to 10).  When coming to that conclusion, I  have  also
             taken into account that the appellant's lack of  qualification
             while significant work experience in the UK would not give him
             any advantage in the jobs market in  Angola.   And  while  the
             appellant's relationship with his children would  not  on  its
             own have  led  me  to  find  that  his  deportation  would  be
             disproportionate, taking  it  in  the  round  with  the  other
             factors on the appellant's side of the scale, I find this adds
             additional weight to his claim."

63. The judge then went on in para 99 to give the following warning:

         "I would, therefore, make it clear to the appellant that should  he
         continue to re-offend, and should his crimes become  more  serious,
         that might well tip the  proportionality  back  in  favour  of  his
         deportation from the UK."

64. On behalf of the respondent, it is said that the judge failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his  conclusion  given  the  appellant's  criminal
    record and that  his  private  life  was  entitled  to  little  weight.
    Further, it is contended that the judge failed properly  to  take  into
    account his own finding that the appellant had failed  to  rehabilitate
    and Dr Chisholm's evidence that he was not presently suffering from any
    mental  health  problems.   It  was  wrong  to  take  into  account  Dr
    Amundsen's speculative views as to the appellant's situation in Angola.
     Paragraph 11 of the grounds adds that the judge erred  by  failing  to
    give  adequate  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation.

65. In a 'reasons' challenge, there are two potential bases  upon  which  a
    case can be made.

66. First, where the reasons  are  inadequate  to  understand  the  judge's
    ultimate conclusion and do not show that he has properly  engaged  with
    the relevant issues,  including  the  evidence  (see,  e.g.  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC)).   As  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated in English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA  Civ
    605 at [16}:

         "justice will not be done if it is not apparent to the parties  why
         one has won and the other has lost."

67. Secondly, the reasons, whilst adequate to explain the decision, do  not
    rationally support the conclusion or findings reached.

68. In this appeal, the first of those challenges is  not  explicitly  made
    and, as is plain from reading the detailed reasons given by the  judge,
    it cannot be said that it  is  unclear  why  the  judge  found  in  the
    appellant's  favour.   The  challenge  is,  therefore,  essentially   a
    challenge to the rationality of the reasons  given  by  the  judge  and
    whether or not he has properly took into account all relevant  factors.
    It  is  not  suggested  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  on  the
    applicable law.

69. The test of irrationality is an onerous one to meet.  It  requires  the
    Tribunal to be satisfied that no reasonable Tribunal properly directing
    itself could have reached the finding or  conclusion  challenged.   The
    fact that a Tribunal has reached  what  might  be  characterised  as  a
    generous view, for example in striking the balance between  the  public
    interest and an individual's circumstances under Art 8.2, does  not  in
    itself necessarily establish an error of law.

70. The point was made in  Mukarakar  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  and
    approved by the Supreme Court in R (MM) (Lebanon)  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 10 at [107] where Lady Hale and  Lord  Carnwath  (in  their
    joint judgment) said this:



         "107. It is no doubt desirable that there should  be  a  consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):

             "... It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that
             one tribunal has reached what may seem an  unusually  generous
             view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it
             has made an error of law ... Nor does it create any precedent,
             so as to limit the Secretary of State's right to argue  for  a
             more restrictive approach on a similar  case  in  the  future.
             However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of
             the specialist tribunal should be respected.""





71. In Lowe v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 62, McCombe  LJ  (with  whom  Asplin  LJ
    agreed) re-iterated the importance of appellate  courts  and  tribunals
    exercising caution before interfering with  "evaluative  judgments"  by
    first instance judges (see [29] citing Fage UK Ltd  v  Chobani  UK  Ltd
    [2014] EWCA Civ 5  at  [114]-[115]  per  Lewison  LJ).   In  Lowe,  the
    challenge was to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of whether  there
    were "very significant obstacles" to an individual's re-integration  on
    return to his own country.

72. In this appeal, the judge was entitled to have regard to  all  relevant
    factors, including the impact upon the appellant's children even though
    Exception 2 was not met.  As the judge noted, in itself the impact upon
    his   children   would   not   make   the    appellant's    deportation
    disproportionate but that impact was to be taken into account  as  part
    of  the  cumulative  set  of  factors  relevant  in   determining   the
    appellant's circumstances  and  whether  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances".  The judge set out a number of factors based  upon  the
    appellant's long time residence in the UK over  25  years  including  a
    period of fourteen  years as an adult with ILR and a significant period
    as a minor (his having come to the UK aged 10) even though at that time
    technically he had no leave to be here but that that  was  "essentially
    outside of his own control".

73. The appellant also had the background of having  been  a  forced  child
    solider in Angola.  The judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the
    expert evidence from Dr Amundsen which, as Ms  Short  submitted,  as  a
    country expert was necessarily projecting forward to what would be  the
    appellant's circumstances on return.  I  do  not  accept  Mr  McVeety's
    criticisms of the judge's  approach  to  the  evidence,  including  the
    expert evidence.  The judge was entitled to find, for  the  reasons  he
    gave, that the appellant would face  "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    establishing himself in Angola given the period of time he had been  in
    the UK (where in addition it was accepted he had become culturally  and
    socially integrated), his family  and  other  circumstances  in  Angola
    which he left when he was 10 years old and that  the  medical  evidence
    showed that, even though his Complex PTSD was not  currently  requiring
    treatment, because of his previous circumstances  in  Angola  it  would
    likely be reactivated on return.

74. It may well be, as the judge found, that none of  these  factors  taken
    individually outweighed the public interest on the basis of being "very
    compelling circumstances".  The case law makes plain, however, that the
    judge was required to consider all the features - positive and negative
    - including features of the case which did not, in  themselves,  engage
    either of the Exceptions in ss.117C(4) and (5).

75. It cannot be said that the judge failed properly to have regard to  the
    public interest demonstrated by the appellant's criminal offending (see
    paras 79-81).  The judge was plainly well aware of  it,  including  his
    risk of re-offending and his incomplete rehabilitation (see  e.g.  para
    97).  He balanced against that "strong public interest" (para  96)  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant given his long time residence
    in the UK since the age of 10 (over 25 years) and the impact  upon  him
    on return to Angola given his history  as  an  enforced  child  soldier
    there and the difficulties he would face of establishing  himself  with
    family that he is, as the judge found, unlikely still to be in  contact
    with.  Even if it was unlikely to be impossible for him to find work or
    accommodation without such a family or social network, the judge  found
    that there were real difficulties in doing  so.   The  grounds  do  not
    directly challenge the  judge's  finding  that  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to him re-establishing himself in Angola.

76. Bearing in mind the need to establish that  the  judge's  decision  was
    irrational or one  which  no  reasonable  Tribunal  properly  directing
    itself could reach, I am unpersuaded that is established.  It may  well
    be that the  decision  is  somewhat  generous  and  not  necessarily  a
    decision which every judge assessing these circumstances  would  reach.
    Indeed, it might not have been a decision that I  would  have  reached.
    But, as the Supreme Court reminds us, that  is  not  the  yardstick  of
    irrationality  or  Wednesbury  unreasonableness.   The  judge   himself
    remarked that it was a "very finely balanced  case"  and  that,  taking
    into account the "strong public interest" the  proportionality  balance
    "just about weighs in the appellant's favour".

77. In these  circumstances,  and  despite  my  own  hesitancy  as  to  the
    conclusion I might have made on the facts had I been the judge at first
    instance, I am not persuaded that the judge's finding, though generous,
    was irrational or Wednesbury unreasonable and not,  therefore,  one  he
    was properly entitled to reach on all the evidence.

78. For these reasons, I reject Ground 2.

Decision

79. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands  as  does  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under  Art  3  of  the  ECHR
    which has not been challenged.

80. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                1 April 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge, despite allowing the appeal, made no fee award  as  his  decision
had been made on the basis of evidence that was not before  the  respondent.
That decision has not been challenged and I see no  reason  to  depart  from
it.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                1 April 2021

