
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/07806/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 October 2018                        |On 19 March 2019                   |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               shaheen musarat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Caswell, instructed by Reiss Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the  appellant  (as  they  appear  respectively  for   the   First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Shaheen Musarat,  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Pakistan who was born on  3  March  1981.   She  made  a  human  rights
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the
    basis of a marriage to a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  By a decision dated 3 March  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Monaghan)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5
    December 2017, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal. The finding of  the  judge  that
    the appellant had not falsified the result of  a  Life  in  the  United
    Kingdom test is not challenged.

 2. Inter alia, the Secretary of State challenges the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the basis that the judge has failed to carry out any or any
    proper consideration of Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):

         Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a) a private life, or

         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State  also  relies  upon  Dube  (Sections  117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 0090 (IAC):
    1) Key features of ss.117A-117D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 include the following:

    (a) judges are required statutorily to take into account  a  number  of
    enumerated considerations. Sections 117A-117D are not, therefore, an a
    la carte menu of considerations that it is at  the  discretion  of  the
    judge to apply or not apply.  Judges are duty-bound to "have regard" to
    the specified considerations.




 4. The judge has made  no  specific  reference  to  Section  117  and  the
    Secretary of State contends that she has fallen into error  by  failing
    to apply it.

 5. The facts are unusual.  The appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a spouse. Her application was refused in the  first  instance
    because the Secretary of State considered that  she  had  relied  on  a
    false document. Further, the appellant failed to submit  evidence  that
    she had an English language test at level B1 or above. The  application
    was considered outside the immigration rules under Article 8  ECHR  and
    within the rules under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. In each  case,
    respondent found that the appellant could  not  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain. The judge found that the refusal in respect of  false  document
    not been established on the facts. She  did  find,  however,  that  the
    appellant could not meet  the  requirements  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 287 because she did not  demonstrate  sufficient
    knowledge  of  the  English  language.  Otherwise,  however,  she   was
    satisfied that the respondent had  not  submitted  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the other requirements for leave to remain as a  spouse.
    The judge found that the appellant fell within the provisions of D-ILRP
    1.2;

    D-ILRP.1.2. If  the  applicant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a partner only for one  or  both  of  the
    following reasons-

    (a) paragraph S-ILR.1.5. or S-ILR.1.6. applies;

    (b) the applicant has not  demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    English language or

    about life in the United Kingdom in accordance with Appendix KoLL,

    the applicant will be granted further limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner for a period not

    exceeding 30 months, and subject to  a  condition  of  no  recourse  to
    public funds

    Not surprisingly, given the refusal on the basis of submission of false
    document, the Secretary of State had  not  proceeded  to  consider  the
    provisions  of  D-ILRP.1.2.  However,  the  rule  is  unequivocal;  the
    applicant should be granted a further period of limited  leave  in  the
    light of the unchallenged findings of the judge. The submission made in
    the grounds of appeal that the appellant would need  to  make  a  fresh
    application to the Secretary of State is not valid.  If,  for  example,
    the only issue taken by the  Secretary  of  State  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's application had been that of English language knowledge (in
    other words, what the judge has now found) then D-ILRP.1.2. would  have
    required the respondent to issue a period of 30 months leave; in such a
    scenario, the  rule  does  not  require  the  apply  to  make  a  fresh
    application for limited leave. I find that the  judge  was  correct  to
    hold  that  D-ILRP.1.2.  was  immediately  brought  into  play   as   a
    consequence of her findings of fact in respect of  the  false  document
    refusal and the English language requirement.

 6. It follows that the judge was also correct to take into account in  the
    Article 8  ECHR  appeal  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of D-ILRP.1.2 and should be granted  30  months  leave  to
    remain. The judge found at this factor 'must weigh  very  significantly
    in favour of the appellant in the assessment of proportionality such as
    to mean that any attempt to remove her  would  not  be  in  the  public
    interest and would be disproportionate in all the circumstances.'  That
    was an analysis which I consider to be free of legal error.

 7. Other than with regards to her ability to speak English, the judge  did
    not, as the grounds of appeal assert,  in  terms  apply  Section  117B,
    which applies in all Article 8 ECHR appeals:

    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
    interest.

    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b) are better able to integrate into society.

    (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-

    (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b) are better able to integrate into society.

    (4) Little weight should be given to-

    (a) a private life, or

    (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,   that   is
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child, and

    (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. Whilst the judge's  omission  may  have  been  a  legal  error,  it  is
    necessary to consider whether or not it was material to the outcome  of
    the appeal. Considering the detailed provisions  of  the  section,  the
    only relevant consideration is in sub-section (3).  Although  she  does
    not say so in terms, it is clear from the  evidence  before  the  judge
    that the appellant does not  have  recourse  to  public  funds  but  is
    reliant financially upon her husband. She is not, therefore, the burden
    upon  taxpayers  and,  in  that   context,   financially   independent.
    Significantly, the leave to remain  which  should  be  granted  to  the
    appellant under D-ILRP.1.2. must contain a condition that she would not
    have recourse to public funds.  It  follows  logically  that  leave  to
    remain subject to such a condition is issued  on  the  basis  that  the
    recipient is financially independent. In my opinion, whilst  the  judge
    should have considered and applied the entirety  of  section  117,  her
    failure to do so has not vitiated her analysis or the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  her  decision  is
    dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.








Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






