
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/07245/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2018                         |   On 09 April 2018                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     a r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Kosovo,  born  in  1989.   He  made  an
    application for entry clearance as a partner on 30 December 2015.  That
    application was refused in a decision  dated  17  February  2016.   The
    respondent refused the application on the basis that the appellant  had
    not  demonstrated  that  the   relationship   between   him   and   his
    sponsor/partner (whom I shall identify  as  SR)  and  to  whom  he  was
    married, was a genuine and subsisting  relationship.   The  application
    was further refused in terms of the accommodation  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), a matter which was ultimately conceded
    on behalf of the respondent. That  is  no  longer  an  issue.   It  was
    further  refused  because  the  appellant  had  not  provided  evidence
    sufficient to meet the English language requirement of the  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph E-ECP.4.2.  He did provide an  English  language
    test certificate but  it  was  from  a  provider  that  was  no  longer
    approved.

 2. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Caswell at  a  hearing
    on 8 May 2017.  Judge Caswell dismissed the appeal, concluding that the
    genuineness of  the  relationship  had  not  been  established  by  the
    appellant.  She also concluded that he was unable to meet  the  English
    language requirement of the Rules. She dismissed the appeal on  Article
    8 grounds as well.  It appears that there was a  previous  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance but that  decision  is  not  within  the  papers
    before me and was not able to be provided today.  Nothing  however,  is
    said to turn on that decision.

 3. Permission to appeal against Judge Caswell's decision was granted by  a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that
    Judge Caswell had erred in her assessment of  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship because she took into account points that were not  raised
    in the respondent's decision.   It  was  also  said  in  the  grant  of
    permission that it was arguable that Judge Caswell had failed  to  give
    reasons as to why the English language certificate was  not  sufficient
    to meet the English language requirement.  Lastly it  was  said  to  be
    arguable that Judge Caswell had not undertaken a proper  assessment  of
    the best interests of the sponsor's grandchildren who, at the  date  of
    the hearing, were aged between 11 and 15 years. The  children's  mother
    was not living with them and there was a residence order in  favour  of
    the sponsor.

 4. The appellant was  born  in  1989.   The  sponsor  was  born  in  1957.
    Therefore, at the date of decision the appellant was 26  years  of  age
    and the sponsor was 57 years of age.  There is therefore, an age gap of
    about 30 years.  Judge Caswell found that that was a significant matter
    that told against  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship.   She  also
    concluded that the appellant being  Muslim  and  the  sponsor  being  a
    Christian was also a significant matter.

 5. In her conclusions she said that although on behalf  of  the  appellant
    the sponsor had shown that there was a genuine and subsisting  marriage
    and that the parties intended to live permanently together  as  husband
    and wife, the question was whether that was true of the appellant.  She
    referred to the sponsor's  evidence  to  the  effect  that  she  was  a
    sensible person who had been trusted by the authorities to bring up her
    three grandchildren and  that  she  would  not  have  introduced  those
    children to the appellant if she had not been sure of  his  intentions.
    Judge Caswell  nevertheless  pointed  out  that  it  appears  that  the
    relationship was established at a vulnerable  point  in  the  sponsor's
    life, her previous partner of 31 years having recently  died  of  motor
    neurone disease.

 6. Furthermore, it appeared from  her  oral  evidence  that  she  had  not
    enquired sufficiently, or at all, into the reasons why  the  appellant,
    who she described as a strange younger man from Kosovo, would  suddenly
    appear on her Facebook page with a friend request.  It appears that her
    Facebook settings were such that anyone could access it and  apparently
    the sponsor was unaware of the possibility  that  the  appellant  might
    have been looking on Facebook for someone to sponsor him as  a  partner
    to come to the UK.  At  paragraph  21  of  her  decision  she  said  as
    follows:

         "In the papers before me  there  was  nothing  from  the  Appellant
         dealing with the important 32 [year] age gap between  the  parties,
         the fact he cannot have children of his own with the  sponsor,  and
         the fact they are of different religions.  Even in the statement of
         the sponsor, those matters are not addressed.  The sponsor told  me
         that her daughter knows about the marriage and  supports  her,  but
         there was no evidence from the daughter, either in writing or as  a
         witness in the hearing.  There was no evidence from the Appellant's
         family in Kosovo to confirm the marriage is a genuine one from  his
         side.  The sponsor has visited Kosovo numerous times, including the
         children, in the five  years  since  the  marriage,  and  has  been
         welcomed  by  the  Appellant  and  his  family,  but  this  is  not
         inconsistent with the marriage being a device by which he hopes  to
         come to the UK.  On the evidence  before  me  he  is  not  in  high
         earning employment, lives with his parents,  and  the  sponsor  has
         been sending him money with which to take his English test, and for
         general spending.  She herself is not a wealthy woman,  her  income
         deriving from income support and disability  living  allowance,  as
         well as child benefit and child tax credit."

 7. Next, at paragraph 22,  Judge  Caswell  referred  to  the  evidence  of
    contact between them being limited,  stating  that  there  was  nothing
    substantial in the phone records and the Facebook evidence  being  very
    slight.  She referred to photographs of the appellant and  the  sponsor
    getting married in Kosovo, and photographs on other occasions, but  she
    concluded that overall the evidence was insufficient to show that  this
    was a genuine and subsisting marriage and that the  appellant  intended
    to live permanently with the sponsor  and  her  grandchildren,  as  her
    husband. Apart from the photographs, there was  evidence  before  Judge
    Caswell of some money receipts, phone bills and letters from the  local
    authority in relation to accommodation.

 8. In relation to the complaint about Judge Caswell having taken  a  point
    against the appellant which was not identified to the appellant,  I  am
    not satisfied that it has any merit.  Whilst it is true that the  issue
    of the age gap and the difference of religion were  not  identified  in
    the respondent's decision, the genuineness of the relationship patently
    was.  Furthermore, it seems to me to be plain that where one has an age
    gap of 32 years that is a matter that needs  to  be  addressed  by  the
    parties to the relationship if they are asserting that it is a  genuine
    relationship.

 9. Those observations aside, it is clear that in  the  evidence  that  the
    sponsor gave before Judge Caswell the issue of the age  difference  was
    raised, the sponsor having been asked about it in cross-examination, as
    can be seen from paragraph 7 of her decision where she  said  that  the
    sponsor's evidence was that there is a 32-year age gap but  neither  of
    them was concerned about it.

10. Although I consider that the issue is not so  stark  in  terms  of  the
    differences in their religions, that nevertheless  was  a  factor  that
    Judge Caswell was also entitled to take  into  account.  The  sponsor's
    evidence was that although there was that difference, it had never been
    an issue for them.

11. On the issue of not being able to have any children between  them,  the
    sponsor said that the appellant's attitude was  that  they  have  three
    children anyway (presumably a reference to the sponsor's  grandchildren
    in respect of whom she has a residence order).

12. Furthermore, as part of  the  respondent's  submissions  summarised  at
    paragraph 17 of Judge Caswell's decision, the issues of the substantial
    age gap and the difference in  religions  were  raised,  amongst  other
    matters that were said  to  indicate  a  lack  of  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.

13. It is also significant  that  the  appellant  was  legally  represented
    before Judge Caswell.  At no point does it appear  that  any  objection
    was raised about any of these issues having been raised at the  hearing
    with the sponsor in cross-examination, and there was  no  objection  to
    the respondent's submissions on those  points.  Thus,  the  significant
    point is that no complaint was made about  these  matters  having  been
    raised at the hearing as opposed to in the  decision.   I  am  entirely
    satisfied  that  Judge  Caswell's  conclusions  on  the  issue  of  the
    relationship were conclusions that were open to her.

14. That puts into context the other arguments  in  relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children and the English language certificate.  So far
    as the English language certificate is concerned, it  is  not  disputed
    that the appellant was not able to provide an approved English language
    certificate at the date of the decision.  In the grounds of  appeal  he
    said that an English language certificate would follow shortly.

15. Paragraph E-ECP.1.1 and E-ECP.4.1 indicate what the requirement is  for
    an English language  certificate  to  be  produced  in  order  for  the
    appellant to be able to succeed in the application for entry  clearance
    as a partner.

16. Paragraph FM-SE is the section that deals with specified  evidence  and
    at paragraph D it is made clear that the evidence needs to be  provided
    with the application.  The English language certificate that is  relied
    on that was in fact provided to the First-tier Tribunal and  which  did
    apparently comply with the technical  requirements  of  being  from  an
    approved provider, was not provided at the  time  of  the  application.
    Looking further at whether there was any requirement for the respondent
    to verify the certificate or to make further enquiries of the appellant
    in terms of why it was not produced at the  time  of  the  application,
    what can be described as the evidential flexibility  requirements  have
    no application.  The question of verification is not to the point.  The
    fact of the matter is, the appellant  did  not  produce  the  specified
    evidence at the date of the application which is what he  was  required
    to do.

17. It could be said that in considering Article 8  in  its  wider  context
    Judge Caswell ought to have taken into account that  there  was  before
    her a relevant English language certificate. However,  she  would  have
    been bound to conclude that nevertheless the appellant was not able  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules in that respect because the  English
    language certificate was not provided at the time of  the  application.
    The failure to meet the requirements of the Rules  would  have  been  a
    significant matter for her to have taken into account under  Article  8
    in its wider context.  So, even if  the  English  language  certificate
    ought to  have  been  taken  into  account  by  Judge  Caswell  in  her
    assessment of Article 8, and even it could be  said  that  she  was  in
    error in not  doing  so,  any  such  error  is  hardly  material.  More
    importantly,  it  is  immaterial  in  the  light  of  her   sustainable
    assessment of the lack of genuineness of the relationship.

18. Lastly in terms of the best interests of the children, I consider  that
    Judge Caswell need have done nothing more than she did at paragraph  27
    where she said as follows:

         "In addition,  considering  the  best  interests  of  any  relevant
         children, there are three children living with the sponsor as their
         primary  carer,  one  at  least  of  whom   has   some   particular
         difficulties.  I do not  find  that  it  would  be  in  their  best
         interests to have living with them, even for a short  time,  a  man
         whom I have found (despite his claims in the application  form  and
         grounds of appeal) not to  have  shown  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting marriage with that primary carer."

19. On no basis could it be said that Judge Caswell could have come to  any
    other conclusion in terms of the best  interests  of  the  children  in
    circumstances where she found that the relationship was not  a  genuine
    one.  The best interests of the children are patently  not  compromised
    in any way at all by the appellant  not  living  with  the  sponsor  in
    circumstances where the relationship was not a genuine one;  quite  the
    contrary.  Accordingly, in this respect also there is no error  of  law
    in Judge Caswell's decision.

20. Summarising, I am not satisfied that Judge Caswell's decision  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law in any respect.  Her  decision
    to dismiss the appeal on all grounds therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this appeal involves children, unless and until a tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
or the sponsor's family.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 4/04/18

