
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/07468/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2018                     |On 23 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                  Maria [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N B Khan of Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  6  July  1994.   In
    September 2007 she arrived as a child visitor.   Her  next  application
    for leave to remain as the child of a settled person  was  refused  and
    her appeal dismissed in December 2008.  She  subsequently  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of her private and family life  which  was
    refused in August 2015.  A further application was made  on  a  similar
    basis which the Respondent refused on 11 February 2016 and which is the
    subject of this appeal.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 2. By a decision promulgated on 27 October 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thorne dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal.   He  accepted  her
    account of what had happened to her as a child both in Nigeria and  the
    United Kingdom but found the public interest in maintaining immigration
    control outweighed her claim to remain in the United Kingdom and so  it
    was proportionate for her to return to Nigeria.

 3. On 19 December 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan refused the
    Appellant permission to appeal.  She renewed  her  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. On 7 March 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal McGeachy granted  her  permission
    to appeal because it was arguable the Judge had erred  in  law  by  not
    referring to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  in  his
    consideration of her claim based on her private and family life in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Appellant attended with Jonathan [S] and Debora [O], his niece  and
    her friend, who like the Appellant lives at the same address as part of
    Mr [S]'s family.

Submissions for the Appellant

 6. The Appellant's representative Mr Khan relied on the grounds for appeal
    submitted to the Upper Tribunal.  These were the same as  submitted  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.   They  refer  to   the   absence   of   any
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules  which
    resulted in a lack of a finding whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's re-integration on return to Nigeria.   The
    other ground refers to the Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  had.
    lived with Mr [S] and his family since she was 18 and looks  upon  them
    as a surrogate family.  The grounds challenge the Judge's finding  that
    upon return to Nigeria the Appellant would be able to call upon members
    of Mr [S]'s extended family for assistance.

 7. The Judge had made positive credibility findings.  At para.50(x) of his
    decision he had rejected the conclusion in the Social Work report  that
    the Appellant's psychological health would be at risk on  return.   The
    Judge had not challenged any other aspect  of  the  report  and  so  it
    should be considered as having been accepted.  Mr  Khan  submitted  the
    Judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting   the   report's
    conclusion that the Appellant's psychological health would be  at  risk
    on return.  The decision contained a material error of law  and  should
    be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

 8. Mr Bramble accepted that the Judge had not dealt with  the  Appellant's
    claim under Article  8  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Whilst this might be an error it was  not  material
    because the Judge's findings at para.50 were extensive and  exhaustive.
    The Judge had dealt with the Social Work report at paras.23 and  26-28.
    He had accepted the Appellant's account of what had happened to her  in
    her childhood. He had taken this into consideration when assessing  the
    proportionality of her return to Nigeria.

 9. Para.50 of the Judge's decision had taken into account all his findings
    and was sufficient to support his assessment of the proportionality  of
    the  Appellant's  removal  and  his  conclusion  at  para.51.    Having
    considered all the circumstances identified in para.50, the failure  of
    the Judge specifically to make a finding that there were not  any  very
    significant obstacles to her return to Nigeria was not a material error
    of law.  The assessment of the obstacles to her return to  Nigeria  had
    been comprehensively in paras.50 and 51 of his  decision  which  should
    stand.

Findings and consideration.

10. Given  the  narrow  grounds  upon  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal, Mr Bramble's argument that the Judge  at  para.50
    had conducted a  comprehensive  assessment  sufficient  to  render  any
    reference to paragraph 276 ADE unnecessary had a certain attraction and
    some force.

11. At paras.26-28 the Judge accepted the Appellant's evidence that she had
    been sexually abused as a child in Nigeria and  bullied  by  her  older
    sister.  Her father had brought her to the United Kingdom in  September
    2007 when she was aged 13 and had left  her  with  a  couple  who  were
    strangers to her.  Both the man and the woman were violent towards  her
    and after some fifteen months she went to live  with  her  step-sister.
    At the age of 15  she  was  sexually  assaulted  by  her  step-sister's
    husband and later assaulted by her step-sister, who threw  her  out  of
    the house.  Subsequently in December 2012 she was taken in  by  Mr  [S]
    and his family.

12. The Judge made his assessment of the proportionality of the decision to
    return the Appellant to Nigeria at paras.50 and 51 of his decision.  He
    made  no  reference  to  any  difficulties  which  she  might  face  in
    consequence of the sexual and physical abuse  she  had  suffered  as  a
    child and a teenager and considered only the physical circumstances  of
    her likely reception in Nigeria. The omission of any express  reference
    to the issue whether there were any very significant obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's re-integration on return to Nigeria and the omission of any
    express reference to the Appellant's history of abuse  in  the  Judge's
    proportionality assessment is an error of  law  such  as  to  make  the
    proportionality assessment and safe.

13. The Judge found she would be able to rely on the support  of  Mr  [S]'s
    extended family.  The hearing before the Judge disclosed  that  Mr  [S]
    had extended family in  Nigeria  whom  he  visited  but  there  was  no
    evidence  or  explanation  of  their  circumstances  and  capacity  and
    willingness to assist the Appellant if she were returned.

14. At para.50(x) of his decision the Judge rejected  the  social  worker's
    view that the Appellant's psychological health  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Nigeria but gave no reasons for the difference of opinion.

15. I find these matters amount to material errors of law in that the Judge
    did not adequately take into account the Appellant's past history which
    is an important element in the  assessments  of  any  difficulties  she
    might face on return to Nigeria  and  of  the  proportionality  of  her
    return to Nigeria and whether she would face very significant obstacles
    to re-integration. Consequently, the decision must be set aside.   Both
    parties agreed that the findings of fact already referred to were sound
    and should stand.

16. I have set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  have
    considered whether I am in a position to re-make it.  Mr Khan indicated
    the  Appellant  may  need  to  obtain  additional  evidence  about  the
    circumstances  of  Mr  [S]'s  extended  family  in  Nigeria  and  their
    willingness to assist and support her may need to be obtained and  that
    he was not in a position to proceed with a re-hearing.

17. I have had regard to Practice Statement 7.2 and  bearing  in  mind  the
    extent of the additional fact-finding which is likely  to  be  required
    and its  impact  on  any  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    Respondent's decision, I consider it appropriate to  remit  the  appeal
    for re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

18. There was no request for an anonymity direction and having the  appeal,
    I find none is warranted.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law because it did not adequately  deal  with  the  issue  whether  the
    Appellant would face very significant obstacles  to  re-integration  on
    return  to   Nigeria   and   consequently   the   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of  the  decision  was  also  in  error.   The  Judge's
    findings of facts contained or referred to in paragraphs 12 - 23 and 26
    - 28 shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  02.
v. 2018


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
