
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08799/2018
                                                               RP/00168/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 4 September 2020              |On 16 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Sarwar, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  appeals  with  permission
         against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who  dismissed  his  appeal
         against the decision of the respondent to revoke his refugee status
         (made on 26 January 2018) and the  decision  to  refuse  his  human
         rights claim in the context of his deportation. The decision of the
         FtTJ was promulgated on the 24 April 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or  his  family  members.
         This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
          Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 4 September 2020, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant.  There  were  no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no
         substantial technical problems were encountered during the  hearing
         and  I  am  satisfied  both  advocates  were  able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Sarwar and Ms Petterson for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      5. There  is  a  lengthy  procedural  and  factual  history  which  is
         summarised in the the decision letters  and  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ.

      6. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe and entered the UK at age 16
         in September 2002  along  with  his  sister  having  fled  Zimbabwe
         because of their father's political activities. They  were  granted
         refugee status on 16 June  2003  and  indefinite  leave  to  remain
         following successful appeals to the Tribunal.

      7. The appellant has a long history of criminal offending which is set
         out in the decision to refuse his human rights claim at  paragraphs
         14 onwards and in the decision of FtTJ Chapman at paragraphs 24-38.
         From 2007 he began  committing  offences  including  road  traffic,
         battery and criminal damage offences interspersed with  failing  to
         comply with bail and community orders. On 15  August  2008  he  was
         issued with a warning letter as a result of his conviction advising
         him that he may be considered for deportation should he come to the
         adverse attention of the Home Office. Again, a similar  letter  was
         issued on 12 June 2009 following further convictions.

      8. In October 2009 he was convicted of actual bodily harm against  his
         former partner (and mother of his four children) and was  sentenced
         to two years imprisonment  .The  previous  suspended  sentence  for
         assault was activated to be  served  consecutively  which  gave  an
         overall sentence of two years and six months imprisonment.  In  his
         sentencing remarks, the judge  noted  that  the  offences  were  of
         domestic violence towards his partner and that the previous offence
         of violence also related to her. This was a  brutal  and  sustained
         assault upon her and that the suspended sentence had  been  imposed
         only a few weeks before the offence.

      9. His ILR was revoked in 2010 and his appeal against  revocation  was
         dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on
         29 October  2010  (Judge  Frankish).  He  was  granted  six  months
         discretionary leave to remain.

     10. In January 2015 the appellant was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment
         for  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily   harm.   An   indefinite
         restraining order was made to prevent the appellant contacting  his
         ex-partner. In his sentencing remarks  the  judge  noted  that  the
         assault was on an ex-partner who was  particularly  vulnerable.  He
         was released from this sentence on 20 July 2016.

     11. In February 2015  whilst  in  prison,  the  appellant  applied  for
         discretionary leave to remain claiming that he not been aware  that
         his indefinite leave to remain had been  revoked.  His  application
         was not progressed because it was invalid.

     12. On 14 February 2015, notification of liability to  deportation  was
         served following his conviction in  January  2015.  His  solicitors
         responded saying that his life would be  at  risk  if  returned  to
         Zimbabwe and that he had a family life with his  partner  and  four
         children.

     13. On 12 April 2016, a referral was made to the UNHCR inform it of the
         respondent's intention to cease  his  refugee  status  due  to  his
         criminality. Their comments were received on 5 May  2016  and  they
         were told on 26 October 2016 that the  respondent  had  decided  to
         cease refugee status.

     14. On 26 January 2018, the decision was made to revoke the appellant's
         refugee status.

     15. On 4 April 2018, the appellant's human rights claim was refused.

     16. His appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 28 February  2019
         and his appeal against the decision of the respondent to  r  revoke
         his refugee status was allowed and the FtTJ failed to determine his
         appeal against the decision to refuse his human rights  claim.  The
         Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
         permission was granted on 28 May 2019 by the Upper Tribunal.  In  a
         decision promulgated on 13 January 2020 the Upper Tribunal  reached
         the conclusion that the FtTJ had erred in law  and  set  aside  the
         decision for it to be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.

     17. The appeal therefore came before the First-tier Tribunal  again  on
         the on the 27 February 2020 and in a decision promulgated on the 24
         April 2020 Judge Thomas dismissed his appeal.

     18. In that decision the FtTJ considered the basis of  the  appellant's
         claim which was set out at paragraphs 4 -  11.  This  included  his
         early life in Zimbabwe  and  his  grant  of  status  in  2003,  his
         criminal offending, and his lack of ties to Zimbabwe. Reference was
         made to family life with his  current  partner  with  whom  he  had
         lived since 2014 and their two children and that it would be unduly
         harsh for the children and his partner to remain in the UK  without
         the appellant  or for the children and his  partner  to  return  to
         Zimbabwe with him.

     19. The FtTJ and set out the respondent's case and that in the decision
         of 26 January 2018, the respondent revoked the appellant's  refugee
         status because his fear of persecution  was  no  longer  applicable
         because the background information had shown that there had been  a
         fundamental and non-temporary  change  in  Zimbabwe  and  that  the
         appellant no longer continued to be a category  of  individual  who
         would face persecution in Zimbabwe. The Respondent  relied  on  the
         case of CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
         UKUT 00059 (IAC). The appellant left Zimbabwe in 2002, and there is
         no evidence of high-profile opposition activity. He is unlikely  to
         be perceived to be active member of any political  organisation  on
         return. He does not fall in  a  category  of  those  likely  to  be
         targeted, as in general, the return  of  a  failed  asylum  seeker,
         having no significant adverse political profile, is not  likely  to
         face a risk of  having  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  Zanu-PF.  The
         appellant  would  not  be  specifically  targeted  because  of  his
         political beliefs or lack thereof and return to Zimbabwe would  not
         breach Article 3 ECHR.

     20. The FtTJ concluded at [30] that on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
         personal characteristics and that he was not personally involved in
         politics and  that  he  was  persecuted  because  of  his  father's
         activities, that he would return to Zimbabwe as an  adult  with  no
         personal political profile and no history or membership or  support
         for the MDC or any other political party, either in Zimbabwe or  in
         the  UK  and  that  there  had  been  a  durable  change   in   his
         circumstances. The judge considered the background material  showed
         that the circumstances remained difficult in Zimbabwe  that  having
         taken into account the regime change, and that a return to Bulawayo
         which was identified at his  home  area  was  possible,  the  judge
         concluded that the appellant, who had no critical profile  and  was
         no longer at risk in Zimbabwe led to the  conclusion  that  Article
         1)( C) (5) applied and  that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
         burden of proof in revoking refugee status under paragraph 339A(v).

     21. As to his family life the judge observed that it was common  ground
         that  in  relation  to  his  four  children   from   his   previous
         relationship, he had no parental relationship or contact with these
         four children for the reasons set out  at  [18].  However,  it  was
         accepted that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with his two children and that he had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his partner, all  three  were  British
         citizens. At paragraph 34 of her decision, the judge addressed  the
         best interests of the children and reached the conclusion  that  it
         would be unduly harsh for them to leave the UK to live in Zimbabwe.
         On her factual assessment, the judge also  found  that  whilst  the
         appellant's deportation would be harsh for the children, the  level
         of harshness identified from the facts did not go beyond that which
         would be inevitably suffered by any child whose father was deported
         such as it to be unduly harsh. Thus at  [35]  the  judge  concluded
         that it would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the
         UK without the appellant.

     22. At paragraph 36, the FtTJ considered the relationship  between  the
         appellant and his partner. They had met in 2014 at a time  when  he
         had refugee status. At paragraph 38 the judge noted that whilst  it
         would be difficult for the appellant's partner to remain in the  UK
         without the appellant, in the light of her assessment at  paragraph
         34 it would not be unduly harsh for her to do so.

     23. At paragraphs 39 - 41 the judge assessed  the  appellant's  private
         life under paragraph  399A,  finding  that  he  had  been  lawfully
         resident in the UK for more than half his  life  and  that  he  was
         socially and culturally  integrated  (paragraphs  39  and  40).  At
         paragraph 41 the  judge  set  out  her  reasons  for  reaching  the
         conclusion that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration in Zimbabwe. At paragraphs 42  -  45  judge  considered
         whether there were any  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         those described in the rules to outweigh the public interest in the
         appellant's deportation. However at paragraphs 44 -  45  the  judge
         took  into  account  the  relevant  factors  which   included   the
         appellant's offending history (started when he was 23 and increased
         in seriousness from March 2007 to April 2014, there was no evidence
         of further offending and he  was  considered  a  low  risk  to  the
         community, he lived in the UK for seven  years  without  offending.
         The judge took into account that he and his partner  engaged  in  a
         relationship in the full knowledge of his offending  and  the  real
         possibility of deportation and that knowing this they had  had  two
         children. The judge placed reliance upon her assessment of  whether
         there were very significant obstacles to his reintegration  as  set
         out at paragraph 41, finding that he retained cultural knowledge of
         Zimbabwe,  was  in  good  health  and  that  he   had   educational
         qualifications and work experience gained in the UK to  assist  him
         to secure employment upon return and therefore he would be able  to
         forge a private life in Zimbabwe. Having considered the evidence in
         the  round,  the  judge  concluded  that  there  were  "no  factors
         identified of such  force,  whether  by  themselves,  or  taken  in
         conjunction with any other relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the
         exceptions to  satisfy  the  "very  compelling"  test".  The  judge
         therefore dismissed both appeals.

     24. Permission to appeal was issued and on 11 June 2020 permission  was
         granted by FtTJ Keane for the following reasons:

             "The grounds disclose arguable errors of law but for which the
             outcome of the appeal might have been  different.  First,  the
             judge  arguably  acted  irrationally  in  finding   that   the
             appellant   could   reasonably   relocate   to   Bulawayo   in
             circumstances where it was not in dispute at the hearing  that
             the appellant did not have ties to Zimbabwe,  would  not  have
             recollection of life in Zimbabwe and would be  destitute  upon
             his return. Second, the judge arguably acted  irrationally  in
             finding that it would not be unduly harsh in  the  appellant's
             children to be separated from him in circumstances  where  the
             appellant's removal would mean for their mother, his  partner,
             that she either stopped work or  found  alternative  childcare
             but in circumstances where her  immediate  family,  comprising
             her parents and a sister  resident in the United Kingdom,  was
             able to provide practical or emotional support to her  and  to
             her children. The judge arguably acted irrationally in failing
             to find the best interests of  the  appellant's  children  lay
             with him remaining  with  them  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
             application for permission is granted."

     25. Insofar as the grounds  refer  to  "irrationality",  Mr  Sarwar  on
         behalf of the appellant made it clear that  he  was  not  asserting
         that the judge had made any irrational findings but that he  relied
         upon the grounds as drafted.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     26. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     27. Mr Sarwar, Counsel on behalf of the appellant, who appeared  before
         the FtTJ relied upon the written grounds of appeal. There  were  no
         further written submissions.

     28.  There  were  also  written  submission  filed  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent in the form of a Rule 24 response.

     29.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     30. There are two grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.  I  will
         set out the relevant aspects of those submissions when dealing with
         the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of   the   appellant   and   my
         consideration of those issues.

Ground 1:

     31. Mr Sarwar  began  his  submissions  by  referring  to  the  written
         grounds.  He  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had   made   a   material
         misdirection in law by failing to reach reasoned findings as to why
         Bulawayo was considered  the  appellant's  "home"  area,  and/or  a
         failure to consider the socio-economic impact of relocation.

     32. He submitted that as part of the FtTJ's analysis and  applying  the
         decision  CM  (Zimbabwe),  that  the  political  circumstances   in
         Zimbabwe had changed such that the  appellant  may  now  return  to
         Bulawayo, the FtTJ at paragraph 30 referred to the durable  changes
         in general political conditions in Zimbabwe and that his return  to
         Bulawayo, a predominantly MDC area was now possible.  However,  the
         judge failed to apply headnote 7 of CM. The judge was  required  to
         consider the home area of the appellant as a  matter  of  fact  and
         submitted that headnote 7 stated  "the issue of what is a  person's
         home for the purposes of internal relocation is to be decided as  a
         matter of fact and is not necessarily to be determined by reference
         to the place a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or  her  auroral
         homeland".  Furthermore if relocation to Bulawayo applied, then the
         judge was bound to apply headnote 8 of CM  (Zimbabwe)   which  made
         reference to the socio-economic circumstances which would  need  to
         be considered to determine whether or not it would be  unreasonable
         or unduly harsh to expect such a person to relocate.

     33. Thus he submitted that the judge failed to reach reasoned  findings
         as to the  appellant's  "home"  area  as  being  Bulawayo  for  the
         purposes of internal relocation ( as set out  at  headnote  7)  and
         secondly, in circumstances where the appellant had been absent from
         Zimbabwe for 17 years (since he was aged 16), the judge  failed  to
         conduct any analysis as  to  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in
         which the appellant will be reasonably likely to  find  himself  on
         return (applying headnote 8).

     34. The appellant's position insofar as Bulawayo not  being  his  "home
         area" is because he had not lived in Zimbabwe since he was  16  nor
         had he visited the country since leaving as a child. His father was
         no longer in Bulawayo and  there  is  no  suggestion  of  the  home
         resided in as a teenager being available. Therefore, in view of the
         length of time and asserted lack of connection to the country,  the
         judge should have assessed the appellant's position as  though  the
         appellant were "relocating" to Bulawayo.

     35. Furthermore, insofar as the impact of internal relocation apply  to
         the appellant socio-economic conditions (headnote eight)  appellant
         had no ties Zimbabwe or recollection of life there and asserted  he
         would be destitute upon return.

     36. It was therefore submitted that had  the  judge  properly  directed
         herself to CM the appellant may have demonstrated that it would  be
         unduly harsh him to relocate to Bulawayo and the secretary of state
         could not succeed in revocation and  the  appeal  would  have  been
         allowed.

     37. Ms Petterson relied upon her Rule 24 response. She  submitted  that
         the first ground of appeal which goes to the current risk on return
         to  Zimbabwe  is  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  FtT   Judge's
         conclusion that the situation in the appellant's home  country  has
         changed and there  is  no  realistic  prospect  that  his  father's
         historic MDC connections would pose any risk to the appellant  over
         15 years later.

     38. In her oral  submissions  Ms  Petterson  submitted  that  the  FtTJ
         properly considered the issue of return at  [30]  where  the  judge
         concluded that there had been a durable change in Zimbabwe and that
         Bulawayo was the appellant's home area. The judge took into account
         that the appellant was an adult  but  that  he  could  re-establish
         himself with or without support.

     39. She submitted that the judge did deal with headnote 7 at  paragraph
         30 and  gave  sufficient  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant  who
         originated from Bulawayo would not be at risk.

     40. In his reply, Mr Sarwar submitted that no reasonable reading  could
         it be concluded that paragraph 30 assessed the  question  of  where
         the appellant's home area was and read as a presumption of a return
         to Bulawayo. When looking at headnote 7 of CM, the  judge  did  not
         address the question properly and determining that the home area as
         a matter of fact and there was nothing in  the  assessment  of  the
         FtTJ in this regard.

     41.  Having  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  and  considering   the
         submissions of the parties, I am not satisfied that the judge erred
         in law as asserted on behalf of the appellant. I shall set  out  my
         reasons for reaching that decision.

     42. The thrust of the submissions made on behalf the appellant are that
         the judge made a material misdirection in law by failing  to  reach
         reasoned findings as to why Bulawayo was the appellant's home  area
         and the judge failed to apply headnote 7 of CM.

     43. The country guidance in CM (Zimbabwe) so  far  as  relevant  is  as
         follows:

             "(1)  As  a  general  matter,  there  is  significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT in  RN.   In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

             (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise  in  the
             case of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from
             the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area
             of Zimbabwe, other than  Matabeleland  North  or  Matabeleland
             South. Such a person may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid
             adverse attention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from
             ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.  The adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).

             (3)  The situation is not uniform across  the  relevant  rural
             areas and there may be reasons why  a  particular  individual,
             although at first sight appearing to fall within the  category
             described in the preceding paragraph, in reality does  not  do
             so. For example, the evidence might disclose that, in the home
             village, ZANU-PF power structures or other means  of  coercion
             are weak or absent.

             (4)  In general, a returnee from the United Kingdom  to  rural
             Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to
             face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF  elements,  including
             the security forces, even if the returnee is an MDC member  or
             supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that his  or
             her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the  sway
             of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.

             (5)  A returnee to Harare will in general face no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

             (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in  general  not  suffer  the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the  security  forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.

             (7)  The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

             (8)  Internal relocation  from  a  rural  area  to  Harare  or
             (subject to what we have just said) Bulawayo is,  in  general,
             more realistic; but the socio-economic circumstances in  which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need  to
             be considered, in order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.

             (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved  since  the
             period considered in RN. The  replacement  of  the  Zimbabwean
             currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has ended
             the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these  improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.

             (10) As was the position in RN, those who  are  or  have  been
             teachers require to have their cases determined on  the  basis
             that this fact places them in an enhanced or  heightened  risk
             category, the significance of which will need to  be  assessed
             on an individual basis.

             (11) In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking
             in credibility may properly be  found  as  a  result  to  have
             failed to show a reasonable likelihood  (a)  that  they  would
             not, in fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned with  ZANU-PF
             and/or (b) that they would be returning  to  a  socio-economic
             milieu  in  which  problems  with  ZANU-PF  will  arise.  This
             important point was identified in RN ... and remains valid.

     44. The judge considered the appellant's personal circumstances and set
         out his omnibus findings at [30] as follows:

             "30. To assess whether  Article  1(C)  is  effective,  I  must
             consider (a) the changes in the general  political  conditions
             in Zimbabwe and  (b)  changes  in  this  Appellant's  personal
             circumstances. The Appellant left  Bulawayo  as  a  16-yearold
             child. He was not personally  involved  in  politics  but  was
             persecuted  because  of  his  father's  MDC  activities.   The
             Appellant would return  to  Zimbabwe  as  adult  man  with  no
             personal political profile and no  history  of  membership  or
             support for the MDC or any other political  party,  either  in
             Zimbabwe or in the UK. His father is no  longer  in  Bulawayo,
             and the two have had no  contact  since  2002.  The  Appellant
             believes his father has `disappeared'. These factors amount to
             a durable change in the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances.
             The background information shows  the  situation  in  Zimbabwe
             remains difficult and protection  concerns  for  some  remain.
             However, the durable changes in general  political  conditions
             in Zimbabwe, namely (a) a regime  change  and  (b)  return  to
             Bulawayo a predominantly MDC area is now possible; lead me  to
             find this Appellant, who  has  no  political  profile,  is  no
             longer  at  risk  in  Zimbabwe  on  account  of  his  father's
             political activities in  2002.  There  is  no  likelihood  the
             Appellant will be  identified  on  as  a  political  opponent,
             political activist or threat to the current government, and no
             likelihood of him having to show loyalty to the ZANU-  PF,  on
             arrival in Zimbabwe or  thereafter.  I  take  account  of  the
             Appellant's claim his criminal conviction was published in  an
             article in the Zimbabwe Weekly online. There is no evidence of
             this before me, and no evidence it is  known  in  Zimbabwe  or
             would cause problems for him now. It is also said  headnote  7
             of CM applies. There is no  evidence  the  Appellant  suffered
             discrimination on account of his ethnicity in Bulawayo in  the
             past, and I do  not  find  he  is  likely  to  encounter  such
             discrimination on return. On the totality of the  evidence,  I
             find Article 1C (5) applies and the Respondent has  discharged
             the burden of proof in revoking refugee status under paragraph
             339A(v) of the Immigration Rules.

     45. There is no dispute that on the evidence before the FtTJ the  judge
         was entitled to find that the appellant had left  Zimbabwe  at  the
         age of 16 and that he had not personally be  involved  in  politics
         but  his  claim  had  arisen  as  a  result  of  his  father's  MDC
         activities. This was set out in the decision of adjudicator  Kirvan
         promulgated on 6/5/2003 at paragraph 38.

     46. It was therefore open to the judge to find that the appellant would
         return to Zimbabwe as an  adult  man  with  no  personal  political
         profile and no history or membership or support for the MDC or  any
         other  political  party,  either  in  Zimbabwe  or   in   the   UK.
         Furthermore, his father was no longer in Bulawayo and they  had  no
         contact since 2002.The  judge  made  reference  to  the  background
         evidence  as  showing  that  the  situation  in  Zimbabwe  remained
         difficult and that  protection  concerns  for  some  remained.  The
         grounds do not challenge this assessment  and  there  has  been  no
         objective material cited in the grounds or before this tribunal  in
         the submissions advanced to demonstrate any error  in  the  general
         assessment made of the country conditions.

     47. Consequently the judge was entitled to rely upon his assessment  of
         the appellant's  particular  personal  circumstances  that  he  was
         someone with no political profile and would no longer be at risk in
         Zimbabwe on account of his father's political  activities  in  2002
         nor that he would be identified as a political  opponent,  activist
         or threat  to  the  current  government  nor  that  there  was  any
         likelihood of him having to show loyalty to Zanu-PF on  arrival  in
         Zimbabwe or thereafter. That latter finding is consistent with  the
         decision in CM as to screening at the airport. At paragraph 181  CM
         examined evidence and made findings about the risk arising from the
         screening procedures  at  Harare  at  paragraphs  202  -  205.  The
         Tribunal confirmed country guidance given in HS (at paragraph  203)
         but that  there  was  no  scrutiny  at  the  airport  for  positive
         indications of loyalty to ZANU- PF (2004) and that  "low-level  MDC
         supporters" are not the sort of activists who the  Tribunal  in  HS
         thought likely to fall foul  of  the  authorities  at  the  airport
         (paragraph 205). The general guidance finding CM at  paragraph  211
         is in line with this.  The  tribunal  in  HS  (risk  of  return  at
         airport) did not say that any level of involvement with the MDC  in
         the past gave rise to a risk of ill treatment at the airport.

     48. It is submitted by Mr Sarwar  that  the  judge  failed  to  address
         headnote 7. However, in my judgement  the  decision  of  the  judge
         should be read as a whole. It is plain from the decision letter  of
         the Secretary of State and  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  that  the
         appellant's return to Zimbabwe was  based  on  him  being  able  to
         return  to  his  home  area  which  was  identified  as   Bulawayo.
         Paragraphs 22-26 of the decision letter  expressly  considered  the
         appellant's home area as Bulawayo and  considered  return  to  that
         area in the light of the improved situation for returnees  and  his
         own circumstances and in light of the decision of CM.  It  was  not
         suggested that relocation should be to any other area  in  Zimbabwe
         and the judge found that he could  return  to  Bulawayo  which  was
         identified as his home area and therefore internal  relocation  did
         not arise. As set out above, the situation and return  to  Bulawayo
         was addressed at paragraph 30 and in my judgement the FtTJ was  not
         required to consider any other area.

     49. Nor do I accept the submission made by Mr Sarwar that  in  view  of
         the appellant's lack of ties and length of  absence  from  Bulawayo
         that the judge should have assessed his position as though  he  was
         "relocating" to Bulawayo.

     50. In my judgement, paragraph 30 should be properly read in  light  of
         the judge's findings set out at [41] which related to whether there
         were very significant obstacles to his reintegration  to  Zimbabwe.
         Those findings can be summarised as follows; the appellant  had  no
         cultural or linguistic difficulties in Zimbabwe where he  was  born
         and lived until he was 16. When assessing his ability to integrate,
         whilst there were no close family members  there,  the  judge  took
         into account that the appellant's  father's  business  partner  did
         live in Zimbabwe and had contact with the  appellant's  sister  and
         thus it was reasonably open to the judge to find  that  this  would
         offer some support for  the appellant on return in the same way  he
         did  in  assisting  the  appellant  to  come  to  the  UK.  In  the
         alternative,  the  judge  found  that  if  the  support   was   not
         forthcoming, the appellant was in good health and would  return  to
         Zimbabwe with educational qualifications and work experience gained
         in the UK to assist him to secure employment, which in turn,  would
         enable him to  obtain  accommodation  and  to  forge  a  meaningful
         private life.

     51. When paragraph 30 is read in the light of those findings, the judge
         gave adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching  the  conclusion
         that he would be able to return to his home area  which  the  judge
         properly identified as Bulawayo and took into account his  personal
         circumstances when reaching the conclusion that he would be able to
         resume life there as there were no very  significant  obstacles  to
         his reintegration.

     52. Consequently, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law as the
         grounds assert.

Ground 2:

     53. As to ground 2, this related to the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         partner. Mr Sarwar submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  give
         reasons for discounting the appellant's partner's  account  of  her
         family's inability to provide care for the  children.  His  partner
         had given evidence about the impact on children's best interests as
         to whether it would be unduly harsh  to  be  separated  from  their
         father. Mr Sarwar submitted that in that evidence  there  had  been
         emphasis on the inability of her family to provide assistance which
         had been recorded at paragraph 10. That evidence  stated  that  she
         had  parents, her sister and grandad living nearby but  her  sister
         had three children of her own so could not  assist  with  childcare
         and her parents lived separately; have mother worked as a full-time
         carer and she did not see her father often. She could not afford to
         pay for childcare would not be able to work and would have to go on
         benefits.

     54. Mr Sarwar submitted that despite her account of  the  inability  of
         the wider family to assist in the caring of the children, the judge
         went on to conclude that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         children to remain in the UK without their  father  (see  paragraph
         34). He directed the Tribunal to that paragraph and where it stated
         in relation to the relatives "...  Doubtless  (they)  will  provide
         practical and emotional support to the appellant's partner and  the
         children in his absence...". Mr Sarwar  submitted  that  the  judge
         fell  into  error  by  rejecting  his  partner's  account  of   her
         circumstances but failed to advance any reasons for doing  so.  The
         judge did not say for example that her evidence was unreasonable or
         incredible and there was a lack of reasoning in dealing  with  that
         issue (see MK (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 00641.

     55. He further submitted that given  the  issue  related  to  the  best
         interests of the two British children, the judge failed to set  out
         a clear idea of the child's circumstances and  what  was  in  their
         best interests (applying the decision in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC
         74 at paragraph 10.

     56. Ms Petterson submitted that the second ground claimed that  it  was
         unfair for the Judge to find that the  effect  of  the  appellant's
         deportation on his children in the  United  Kingdom  would  not  be
         unduly harsh, since he had found it would be unduly harsh for  them
         or their mother to go to Zimbabwe. The respondent argues that these
         are two separate tests, and the FTT Judge  treated  them  as  such.
         Notwithstanding that the FTT Judge  appeared  to  make  no  adverse
         credibility findings against the mother of the children, that  does
         not mean he was not entitled to conclude  that  she  had  a  family
         support network to assist her  in  the  event  of  the  appellant's
         deportation and / or could claim  any  benefits  to  which  she  is
         entitled if she had to give up work for childcare reasons.

     57. In her oral submissions she submitted  that  at  paragraph  34  the
         judge considered in the alternative that if there was no  childcare
         support from family members she would  be  entitled  to  assistance
         from the state. Therefore, the criticism set out in the grounds  is
         not made out if paragraph 34 was read as a  whole.  The  judge  was
         aware of the potential emotional damage for the children  if  their
         father was deported but by way of the evidence whilst it  might  be
         harsh it was not unduly harsh  and  would  not  take  it  over  the
         necessary threshold.

     58. As to the best interests  of  the  children,  the  judge  did  take
         account of their best  interests  and  the  reference  is  made  to
         possible difficulties in relation to the appellant's  partner  (see
         paragraph 35). Consequently, it was  submitted  that  there  is  no
         material error in the determination.

     59. In his reply, Mr  Sarwar  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  rejected  the
         appellant's partner's  evidence  but  did  not  give  any  reasons.
         Furthermore, at paragraph  34,  the  judge  did  not  say  "in  the
         alternative" and that on a natural reading of  that  paragraph  the
         judge had referred to the assistance  of  the  state  as  being  an
         alternative fact to the familial support.

     60. As  to  the  children's  best  interests,  it  requires  a  careful
         examination of all the facts and in the light of the  decision  the
         judge failed to give reasons, and this was a material error of law.

     61. I have carefully considered the submissions of the advocates as set
         out in the preceding paragraphs. The second ground relates  to  the
         FtTJ's assessment of the evidence of the appellant's partner  which
         was relevant to the issue of undue  harshness.  The  appellant  had
         four children from his previous relationship but at [33]  the  FtTJ
         found that the appellant did not have a  parental  relationship  or
         contact with those children. There is no challenge in  the  grounds
         to that finding. However, the appellant had two children  with  his
         current partner and with whom the FtTJ found he had a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship. When considering their circumstances,  the
         FtTJ reached the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for  them
         to leave the UK and live in Zimbabwe (at paragraph [34]).

     62. The judge then went on to address the issue of whether it would  be
         unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
         appellant.

     63. On the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant it is  submitted
         that the judge failed to address the best interests of the children
         and failed to set out a clear idea of their circumstances.

     64. By virtue of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
         Act 2009, in making decisions on removal, the  Secretary  of  State
         must have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare
         of children who are in the UK.

     65. The House of Lords, in ZH (Tanzania) v Home  Secretary  [2011]2  AC
         166 , held that, in the application of article 8(2), the children's
         best interests should be treated as "a primary  consideration",  to
         give effect to article 3.1 of the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of
         the Child.  Nationality  and  the  rights  of  citizenship  are  of
         particular importance in assessing the best interests of any child.
         Thus, the decision-maker must  ask  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect the child to live in another country, and to be deprived  of
         the opportunity to  exercise  the  rights  of  a  British  citizen.
         However, even if it is found to be in the  best  interests  of  the
         child to remain in the UK, that factor can  be  outweighed  by  the
         strength of "countervailing considerations" in  favour  of  removal
         (per Lady Hale at [29] - [33]).

     66. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
         74, Lord Hodge, delivering the judgment of  the  Court,  summarised
         the principles to be applied, at [10]:

             "(1) The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR.

             (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child
             must be a primary consideration, although not always the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

             (3)  Although the best interests of a child can be  outweighed
             by the cumulative effect of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

             (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the
             best interests of a child in different ways, it  is  important
             to ask oneself the right questions in  an  orderly  manner  in
             order to avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child
             might be undervalued when other important considerations  were
             in play;

             (5)  It is important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

             (6)  To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a
             child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

             (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for  which  he  or
             she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

     67. It is plain from reading paragraph  34  that  the  FtTJ  began  her
         assessment by expressly considering section 55 of the BCIA 2009 and
         stated that "it is well established children  fare  better  in  the
         care of both parents, wherever possible." The FtTJ then went on  to
         address the particular circumstances of the  children  taking  into
         account their respective ages (two years 10 months  and  aged  one)
         stating "the children are very young and at  the  early  stages  of
         developing parental bonds with the appellant." The judge considered
         their age and development stating, "they are entirely dependent  on
         their parents and have not established social ties of  their  own."
         And in terms of a change in the  circumstances  the  judge  stated,
         "they are young enough to adapt to changes in their lives." Further
         reference was made to their nationality as British citizens and the
         issue of their welfare and safety concluding that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to remain in the UK with the  mother  and
         if appropriate for the appellant to remain ( at [34]).

     68. In my judgement the FtTJ carried out  the  evaluative  exercise  in
         accordance with the case law and properly did so  by  reference  to
         these children's particular circumstances  as  outlined  above.   I
         find no error of law in the judge's approach to the  assessment  of
         the best interests of the children.

     69. The thrust of ground two relates to the FtTJ's  assessment  of  the
         evidence of the appellant's partner and that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
         give reasons for rejecting her evidence concerning the inability of
         her family to assist with the care of the children. No other aspect
         of the FtTJ's decision is challenged.

     70. The evidence of the appellant's partner was summarised by the  FtTJ
         at paragraph 10 where it was stated that the appellant looked after
         the children whilst his partner worked and also took  care  of  the
         home and cooked for the family. Her evidence was that  her  parents
         could not assist as they lived separately, her mother  worked  full
         time and that her sister had the care of her  own  three  children.
         She could not pay for childcare.

     71. I do not accept the submission made on behalf of the appellant that
         the FtTJ did not address the evidence  in  her  assessment  of  the
         issue of whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
         remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant.  The  FtTJ  expressly
         considered this  in  the  context  of  the  children's  safety  and
         welfare. At [34] the judge took into account the  children's  young
         ages and their dependency on their parents and that the removal  of
         the appellant would have a greater impact on the eldest child  whom
         he took and collected from nursery. The judge expressly  took  into
         account the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  partner  that  if  the
         appellant would be deported "that  would  necessarily  require  his
         partner,  the  children's  mother  to  either  stop  work  or  find
         alternative  childcare.  The   latter   would   be   possible   and
         reasonable." I see no error in the judges' assessment that it would
         be possible and reasonable  to  find  alternative  childcare  as  a
         general finding.

     72. Furthermore, as submitted on behalf of the respondent,  whilst  the
         FtTJ did not  appear  to  make  any  adverse  findings  as  to  the
         appellant's partner's evidence that did not mean that the judge was
         not entitled to conclude that she did have a family support network
         to assist her. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant
         was close to the appellant's parents and family and was involved in
         the life of her nephews (paragraph 8) and therefore it demonstrated
         that support and  contact  between  the  children  and  the  family
         members had taken place and that such support (  whether  emotional
         or practical) was likely in the circumstances to  continue  in  the
         event of the appellant's deportation.

     73. In any event, even if it could be said that the appellant's partner
         would not have any assistance from her family, the judge considered
         that in the alternative that as a  British  citizen  she  would  be
         entitled to state assistance, whether financial or practical, which
         would be available to single parents and that her situation did not
         differ from others in a similar position. The judge therefore  made
         a reasoned finding that in  the  event  of  the  lack  of  familial
         support, the children's safety and well-being would be  safeguarded
         by assistance that the appellant's partner would be  able  to  take
         advantage of.

     74. I therefore  find  no  error  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         appellant's partner's evidence.

     75. The grounds do not challenge the overall assessment of  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK with the
         appellant and as set out  above  the  only  challenge  was  in  the
         context of the  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         partner.

     76. I remind myself as to the law and the guidance as to the meaning of
         the expression "unduly harsh" was provided by the decision  of  the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR  5273.  At  [22]-[23]  Lord
         Carnwath said:

             "On its face [Exception 2] raises a factual  issue  seen  from
             the point of view of the partner or child: would the effect of
             C's deportation be "unduly harsh"? Although  the  language  is
             perhaps less precise  than  that  of  exception  1,  there  is
             nothing to suggest that the word "unduly"  is  intended  as  a
             reference back to the issue of relative seriousness introduced
             by subsection (2). Like exception 1,  and  like  the  test  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B, exception 2 appears self-
             contained.

             23.  On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal  in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be
             equated with a requirement to show "very compelling  reasons".
             That would be in  effect  to  replicate  the  additional  test
             applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences  of  four
             years or more."

     77. Subsequent decisions of this Court  have  emphasised  that  "unduly
         harsh" requires the court or  tribunal  to  focus  on  whether  the
         effects of deportation of a foreign criminal on a child or  partner
         would go beyond the degree of harshness which would necessarily  be
         involved for any child or partner of  any  foreign  criminal  faced
         with deportation: see for  example  per  Holroyde  LJ  at  [34]  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 1213.

     78. On the facts of the appeal as found by the FtTJ, she accepted  that
         the impact of the Appellant's deportation on his wife and  children
         would be adverse, in terms of the likely impact on their  emotional
         well-being. However, the evidence did not show that the  effect  of
         the Appellant's deportation would reach the high threshold of being
         unduly harsh on his children.

     79. The evidence   relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,  and  his  partner
         concerning her lack of child care / assistance did  not  go  beyond
         what would reasonably be expected or necessarily  be  involved  for
         any child faced with the deportation of a parent or a partner faced
         with the deportation of their partner. It was also open to the FtTJ
         to find that she could obtain  if  necessary  assistance  from  the
         state, whether  practical  or  financial  to  which  she  would  be
         entitled to.  Consequently it was open to the  FtTJ  to  reach  the
         conclusion that whilst the family situation after deportation would
         undoubtedly be difficult or as the FtTJ stated "  harsh"  that  was
         insufficient to meet the high threshold of deportation being unduly
         harsh on the children to satisfy the exception to deportation.

     80. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision of the FTT shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtTJ shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated   7 September 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

