
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08795/2016
     HU/08799/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2017                    |On 13 December 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    H T A
                                    A C A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Tampuri, Tamsons Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria who entered the UK  lawfully  as
    visitors in September 2008 and who became overstayers in March 2009. On
    23 November 2015, as overstayers, and having borne two further children
    whilst living in the UK, but not  having  made  any  other  attempt  to
    regularise her immigration status,  the  First  Appellant  applied  for
    herself and the Second Appellant, (but not on behalf of her two younger
    children) for a grant of DLR outside the Immigration Rules. There is no
    obvious reason why an application was not made on  behalf  of  her  two
    younger children. Those applications were refused by the Respondent  on
    18 March 2016.

 2. The Appellants duly appealed that  decision,  and  their  appeals  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese sitting at Taylor House on 16
    August 2017. The Judge allowed the Article 8 appeals by way of decision
    promulgated on 6 September. The Respondent duly applied to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  that
    was granted by a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Alis  on  20  October
    2017. Thus the matter comes before me.

 3. It is plain that the First Appellant could not demonstrate that she met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, either at the  date  of  her
    application, or at  the  date  of  the  hearing.  The  success  of  her
    application and appeal was therefore dependent upon the position of her
    eldest daughter. The decision of the Judge does  not  acknowledge  that
    reality in terms, and indeed within the decision the Judge analyses the
    position of the eldest daughter as if her mother and  younger  siblings
    had leave to remain, and it was she who faced removal from  the  UK  on
    her own [19]. The reality was, of course, that the family did not  face
    being separated; they would all leave the UK together,  or  they  would
    remain in the UK together.

 4. It is also plain that in the course of a very brief decision, the Judge
    failed  to  make  reference  to  the  relevant  current  jurisprudence.
    Although this hearing took place in August  2017,  the  Judge  made  no
    reference to the guidance of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM  (Pakistan)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 180 (promulgated in March 2017) upon the true nature of
    the "reasonableness" test. There is also no reference to  be  found  in
    the decision to the guidance upon the proper  approach  to  such  cases
    given in EV  (Phillipines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.  Even  reading  the
    decision as a whole and making all due allowances, I am  not  satisfied
    that the decision demonstrates that the Judge had the  proper  test  in
    mind when approaching the evidence before him. The  decision  does  not
    demonstrate  that  the   Judge   approached   the   question   of   the
    reasonableness of the Second  Appellant's  removal  from  the  starting
    point that no member of  the  family  had  leave  to  remain,  and  the
    decision clearly demonstrates that he elevated his  assessment  of  the
    best interests of this child to a trump card [19]. Although  the  Judge
    did go on to state that he had in the alternative  given  consideration
    to whether the appeals should be allowed on Article 8 grounds,  it  was
    therefore not at all clear on what other basis he had  first  purported
    to allow them. The clear inference is that he, wrongly,  saw  the  best
    interests of the child, and the s55 consideration that he  was  obliged
    to undertake, as a ground of appeal in and of itself.

 5. Arguably the clear and obvious  errors  in  the  Judge's  approach  are
    sufficient to suggest that any alternative  decision  he  undertook  in
    relation to the Article 8 appeal was fundamentally tainted and  unsafe.
    However, since the Judge  did  purport  to  allow  the  appeal  in  the
    alternative on Article 8 grounds I too shall  consider  his  Article  8
    decision in the alternative. There are clear errors  of  law  disclosed
    here too.

 6. Although the Judge found [20-21] that the decision under appeal was not
    proportionate, before he had found that Article  8  was  engaged,  this
    could (perhaps) be excused as merely  poor  draftsmanship  if  it  were
    indeed clear as to why  he  had  found  that  Article  8  was  engaged.
    Regrettably this is not the case. This was not, as the Judge appears to
    have presumed, a "family life" case, since there was no prospect of the
    family not being removed from the UK together. There was no  suggestion
    that either Appellant had formed a "family life" in the UK with  anyone
    other than each other and the two younger siblings; the First Appellant
    did not rely upon any relationship in the UK with either the father  of
    the Second Appellant, or with the father of her younger  two  children.
    Thus the appeals were in reality only ever based  upon  their  "private
    lives".

 7. The First Appellant appears to have provided  no  evidence  to  suggest
    that her own "private life" had the necessary quality and  strength  to
    engage Article 8; certainly the  Judge  does  not  identify  any.  Mere
    presence in the UK for 9 years was not enough  to  do  so.  Whilst  the
    Second Appellant, her eldest child, had indeed lived in the UK for more
    than seven years she had not, as the Judge  appears  to  have  assumed,
    reached an important stage in her education. She was only 11.

 8.  If  Article  8  was  indeed  engaged,  then  the  assessment  of   the
    proportionality of the removal begged a number of questions,  once  the
    public  interest  in  that  removal  had  been  identified  and  placed
    correctly into the balance. The Judge would be obliged to consider, for
    example, the question of whether any  member  of  the  family  had  any
    health issue that could not be adequately catered for in  Nigeria.  The
    Judge did not address that matter, although it was  argued  before  him
    that the First Appellant had a diagnosis  of  hepatitis  B.  The  Judge
    ought also to have assessed the circumstances to which the family would
    be returning and whether there was any basis to fear for their personal
    safety or integrity. He did not do  so.  Unless  there  was  some  good
    reason to find to the contrary, the natural inference would normally be
    that the Appellants would return to the extended family  who  they  had
    left behind when they travelled to the UK  as  visitors,  so  that  all
    three children would have  the  opportunity  to  grow  up  within  that
    extended family.

 9. In the circumstances the decision discloses a  material  error  of  law
    that requires  it  to  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
    circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  or  whether  to  proceed  to
    remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where it would appear
    that the relevant evidence has not  properly  been  considered  by  the
    First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of  law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for her case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial
    fact finding exercise is such that having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  25
    September 2012. Having reached that conclusion, with the  agreement  of
    the parties I make the following directions;

      i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
         Tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo at the  North  Shields  hearing
         centre,  the  Appellants  having  recently  moved  from  London  to
         Newcastle. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Abebrese. No
         findings of fact are preserved.

     ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

    iii) There is presently anticipated to be First and Second Appellants as
         witnesses, and the time estimate is as a result,  2  hours.  It  is
         anticipated that further evidence will be filed and  served,  which
         must be filed and served by 5pm 9 January 2018.

     iv) The appeal will be listed for hearing at North Shields on the first
         available date after 12 January 2018.

Notice of decision

10. The decision promulgated on 6 September 2017 did involve the making  of
    an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Since the Second Appellant is a child, unless and until a Tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

