
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08036/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th November 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Houcine [M]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Charyas (Solicitor), Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler, promulgated on 26th February 2018 following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 30th January  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Tunisia, and  was  born  on  10th
    March 1989.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    2nd March 2016, refusing his application to remain in the UK  with  his
    British citizen partner, his wife, Mrs Teresa [M],  whom  he  had  met,
    when the latter was on holiday in Tunisia.  The applicable  Immigration
    Rules are paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife and had a family life  right  to  remain  in
    this country with her.  The Respondent accepted that it  was  the  case
    that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the two of
    them.  She accepted that the two of them had met in  Tunisia  when  the
    Appellant's wife  was  on  holiday  with  the  mother  there  in  2012.
    Subsequently she had made two visits to Tunisia, both of them being  in
    2014.  During the second visit, they were married on  13th  July  2014.
    Mrs [M] and the Appellant were in Tunisia for a month before  she  then
    returned to the United Kingdom.

 4. It is a feature of this appeal that when the Appellant came to the  UK,
    he did not come directly to England.   He  arrived,  in  fact,  in  the
    Republic of Ireland, issued with visa on 28th October 2014,  which  was
    valid until 22nd January 2014, and the issue of the  visa  was  on  the
    basis of "join/ACC EU Cit (spouse)", such that the  Appellant  obtained
    the Irish visa to enable him to  join  or  accompany  his  new  citizen
    spouse.  The reality is that the Appellant's spouse,  Mrs  Teresa  [M],
    had never lived in the Republic of Ireland.  She had only ever  visited
    for a couple of days when she stayed in a hotel.  She did not know what
    the Appellant told the Irish authorities in order to obtain  his  visa.
    In any case, this is how he arrived, before the two of them entered the
    United Kingdom.

 5. The Appellant now states, that although he has entered in a manner that
    was less than lawful, he cannot go back  to  Tunisia  to  make  another
    application because his wife, Mrs Teresa [M], is highly dependent  upon
    her own mother, and that there is a subsisting Article 8  life  between
    the two of them.   At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Pooler,  there  was
    evidence from Dr James Turner, a consultant psychiatrist, who confirmed
    that Mrs [M] was his patient and that it  would  be  detriment  to  her
    mental health if she had to accompany the Appellant to  Tunisia  as  it
    would isolate her from the support network in the UK.  There was also a
    letter dated 12th September 2016 from Dr Tanner to the effect that  the
    Appellant's wife needed psychiatric help which comprised access  to  Dr
    Tanner as well as the psychiatric clinic and the  NHS  Trust  services,
    which  included  the  crisis  resolution,  and  in-patient  psychiatric
    services.  He stated that it  would  be  detrimental  for  Mrs  [M]  to
    continue her family life in Tunisia  because  her  entire  family  were
    present in the UK where she was established and a foreign climate would
    not agree with her.  A further letter dated  31st  October  from  Dr  T
    Cheesman, the wife's GP, stated  that  the  wife  had  a  long-standing
    learning disability, which would impact  on  her  mental  health,  with
    anxiety and depression.  Finally, there was a letter dated 31st October
    2017 from Dr Khokhar, a consultant psychiatrist, with the  City  Centre
    Community Mental Health Team in  Leicester,  the  team  from  which  Dr
    Tanner had previously written, and this mirrored  what  Dr  Tanner  had
    said himself.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge stated that he had taken into account,

         "The statement of the Appellant's wife and letters written by  her,
         her mother, and her stepfather.  Mrs [M] has said that  she  has  a
         very close bond with her mother and  that  if  she  would  live  in
         Tunisia, she would kill herself because she would be unable to  see
         or speak to her mother.   She  says  that  she  has  difficulty  in
         meeting strangers or in going out of the home other than in a taxi"
         (paragraph 20).

 7. The judge stated  that  "I  accept  the  medical  evidence  by  way  of
    diagnosis".  However, the judge  went  on  to  say  that  "the  medical
    evidence is insufficiently detailed to allow me to make findings as  to
    the extent to which the Appellant has ever needed either the support of
    a crisis resolution team or an  inpatient  admission"  (paragraph  22).
    The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    take into account the import of the House of Lords decision  in  Beoku-
    Betts [2009] AC 115, where Lady Hale, had made it  clear  that  it  was
    artificial and impracticable to only  consider  family  life  from  the
    viewpoint of the Appellant, without much attention being  paid  to  the
    wider family  (at  paragraph  4).   Lord  Brown  had  also  stated  (at
    paragraph 20) that "together these members enjoy a single  family  life
    and whether or not the removal would interfere disproportionately  with
    it has to be looked at by reference to the family unit as a whole ...".



 9. In this case the judge had accepted (at paragraph 25) that the symptoms
    identified by Dr Tanner in his letter related  to  the  Appellant,  and
    these would be capable of amounting to very significant difficulties if
    they were sufficiently severe or the risk of self-harm was sufficiently
    high.  However, he had then wrongly concluded that there would  not  be
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant's  spouse  were  the
    Appellant to be required to leave and return to Tunisia.

10. On 25th April 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on
    the basis that the  judge  had  neglected  to  take  into  account  the
    dependency elements disclosed, which arose from the Appellant's  wife's
    combined  diagnosis  of  mild  learning  disability  and  long-standing
    depression and anxiety, together with a  history  of  self-harming  and
    suicidal behaviour.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 9th November 2018, Mr Charyas, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, stated that Judge Pooler had erred in  law  by
    failing to come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant's wife  relocating  to  Tunisia,  given  her
    overall medical situation, and her dependency upon her mother.  Second,
    he  had  failed  to  make  a  proper  assessment  of   the   compelling
    circumstances applicable to the Appellant's wife.  Finally, the "Razgar
    steps" had not been  properly  followed.   Mr  Charyas  made  good  his
    submission by stating that the judge had early on in his  determination
    (at paragraph  6)  recognised  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  "a
    vulnerable adult" (paragraph 6).  This  being  so,  everything  had  to
    follow from this.

12. This meant two things.  First, that Dr Tanner's report  (considered  by
    the judge at paragraph 25) assumed a particular importance,  especially
    given  that  the  judge  had  stated  that  "Dr   Tanner   expected   a
    deterioration in Mrs [M]'s mental state if she and the  Appellant  have
    to live in Tunisia in order to continue family life".  Second,  if  one
    looked at the evidence in the Appellant's first bundle it is clear from
    her own testimony (at pages 10 to 19) that she is very  vulnerable  and
    feels that she has a low IQ such that she is unable to cope with  going
    to live in Tunisia.  There was also a written account from her  mother,
    Gillian Lock (at page 23 of the first bundle) which explained how there
    was contact between the Appellant's wife and her  mother  some  two  to
    three times per week, where the Appellant's wife's mother supported the
    Appellant's wife.

13. This, submitted, Mr Charyas, was the background against  which  matters
    had to be assessed.  The level of family  support  to  the  Appellant's
    wife was considerable.  Indeed, on  22nd  February  2018,  Home  Office
    guidance  was  provided  in  relation   to   EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
    obstacles".  This makes it clear that:

         "Being separated from extended family members - such as  where  the
         partner's parents, their siblings or both live  here  -  would  not
         usually amount to an insurmountable  obstacle,  unless  there  were
         particular  factors  in  the  case  to  establish  the  unusual  or
         exceptional dependency required for Article 8 to be engaged".

    Mr Charyas submitted that this was indeed the position here.   In  this
    case there  was  "an  usual  or  exceptional  dependency"  between  the
    Appellant's wife and her mother, which the judge had overlooked.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the judge did not disagree  that,
    conditions presented by the Appellant could amount  to  "insurmountable
    obstacles (see paragraphs 19 to 20)", but the judge's view was that the
    Appellant's situation was not one such.  Second, it  is  not  the  case
    that the judge had overlooked the letter from the mother (at  page  23)
    and the Appellant's own written account (at pages  10  to  19)  of  the
    first bundle.  Indeed, the judge makes expressed reference to  this  as
    soon as he starts to  look  at  the  compelling  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant.  He observes that he has taken into account the statement of
    the Appellant's wife and letters "written by her, her  mother  and  her
    stepfather.  Mrs [M] has said she has a very close bond with her mother
    and that if she were to live in Tunisia, she would  kill  herself  ..."
    (paragraph 20).  The judge had also said that  "I  accept  the  medical
    evidence by way of diagnosis".

15. However, it was for the judge to then make a finding of fact, and  what
    he had concluded was  that  "the  medical  evidence  is  insufficiently
    detailed to allow me to make findings as to the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant has ever needed either the support  of  a  crisis  resolution
    team or an in-patient admission" (paragraph 22).

16. Mr Mills submitted that it was open to the Appellant to furnish further
    new evidence in a  new  application,  and  to  strengthen  the  medical
    evidence in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  wife.   As  things  stood,
    however, the case was simply made not out and it was open to the  judge
    to make a finding to exactly that effect.

17. Furthermore, it ought not to  be  forgotten  that  since  marrying  the
    Appellant, his wife Teresa [M], had left her mother's  house,  and  had
    begun to live with the Appellant in their  own  marital  accommodation.
    This being so, the family support now came from the  Appellant  to  his
    wife.  He was her primary carer.  It did  not  come  from  her  mother.
    Therefore, there was no reason, if the Appellant were to be returned to
    Tunisia, that his wife could not go there with him and be supported  by
    the Appellant.

18. In reply, Mr Charyas submitted  that  the  impact  on  the  Appellant's
    spouse, given her vulnerable  condition,  and  her  dependency  on  the
    mother, together with the doctor's prognosis of her mental  state,  was
    something that had not been properly  taken  into  account.   I  should
    allow the appeal.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision and remake the  decision.   I
    come to  this  conclusion,  notwithstanding  Mr  Charyas'  valiant  and
    commendable efforts to persuade me otherwise, on behalf of his  client.
    The plain fact is that this is a case where the judge has taken all the
    evidence into account.  He has taken into account all  of  the  medical
    evidence  (see  paragraph  19)  in   properly   structured   individual
    paragraphs, where every single expert medical  report  is  specifically
    set out.  He has taken into  account  the  Appellant  and  her  mother,
    together with her  stepfather's  written  statements  before  him  (see
    paragraph 20).  He has then "also accepted the medical evidence" by way
    of diagnosis.

20. However, the conclusion that he was entitled to come to  was  that  the
    medical evidence,  as  it  stood  at  the  point,  was  "insufficiently
    detailed to allow me to make findings as to the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant has ever needed" the  kind  of  the  support  that  is  being
    referred to here.  Indeed, the judge had  then  gone  to  say  that  Dr
    Tanner had worries about the Appellant not having access to psychiatric
    support in Tunisia.

21.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  was  clear  here  that  "the  evidence   is
    insufficient to persuade me that,  on  balance,  the  Appellant's  wife
    would be unable to access psychiatric care or  medication"  in  Tunisia
    (paragraph 23).  The judge also took into account the evidence from  Dr
    Tanner that he expected a deterioration in Mrs [M]'s  mental  state  if
    she had to go and live in Tunisia,  and  that  suicidal  behaviour  was
    likely.

22. Of this, the judge stated,

         "I am satisfied that these symptoms, particularly  in  combination,
         are capable of amounting to very significant difficulties  if  they
         are sufficiently severe or if the risk of self-harming behaviour is
         sufficiently high or involves a sufficiently severe level  of  risk
         taking behaviour".

23. However, his view was again that, "the evidence  does  not  satisfy  me
    that  any  difficulties  could  not  be  overcome,  for  example,  with
    psychiatric support" (paragraph 25).

24. Finally, the judge considered the position to be ultimately  resolvable
    simply by reference to the Immigration Rules.  He came  to  this  view,
    because Counsel appearing before him on the day, when expressly  asked,
    had submitted that there were no  particular  circumstances  that  were
    unique or exceptional to the Appellant.  The judge recorded that,

         "In his submissions he referred me to the medical evidence which  I
         have taken into account in the assessment under paragraph  EX.1  of
         whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the  continuation  of
         family life in  Tunisia.   Those  factors  and  that  evidence  can
         appropriately taken into account under the Immigration Rules and  I
         do  not  point  to  compelling  circumstances  which   require   an
         assessment outside the Rules" (paragraph 27).

25. Yet, despite this, the judge did then  go  on  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules as was clear from what is said at paragraph 29, where
    he applies a  proportionality  test.   Here  the  judge's  approach  is
    actually quite generous to the Appellant because, while  commenting  on
    the Appellant's abilities in relation to the speaking  of  the  English
    language or being financially independent, the judge does not refer  to
    Section 117B(iv) which is to the effect that little  weight  is  to  be
    accorded to private life that is created  in  circumstances  where  the
    Appellant's circumstances are precarious.  In the  circumstances  there
    is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.  I have come  to
    this conclusion notwithstanding Mr Charyas' submission before  me  that
    the guidance from the Home Office of  22  February  2018  is  one  that
    allows an Appellant to succeed if circumstances are such as  to  amount
    to unusual or exceptional dependency.  The judge did not find  this  to
    be the case.  In the circumstances this guidance does  not  assist  the
    Appellant either.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

28. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018


