
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08792/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2019                  |On 09 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 sony mathew
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is Mr Mathew's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which refused his application for leave to remain on the basis
    of family life with a partner by reference to Appendix FM.

2.    The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  he  met  the   eligibility
    relationship requirement and there were no insurmountable obstacles for
    family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.  Nobody appeared  on
    behalf of the appellant or the respondent.  The respondent was happy to
    go ahead without representation and the judge was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and the legal representatives for the appellant had  adequate
    notice of the hearing and went ahead, heard the appeal and dismissed it
    and it was challenged on the basis  that  in  fact  there  had  been  a
    request made by fax sent in two days, I think, before the  hearing  for
    it to be dealt with on the  papers and it was also written at that time
    that his wife's appeal had been allowed and his  appeal  needed  to  be
    allowed in line with the decision  in  her  case  and  a  copy  of  the
    determination was sent.  Clearly these matters did not get in front  of
    the judge and I do not think there can be criticism of  the  judge  for
    that, but the fact of the matter is that they were not before the judge
    and permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  there  had
    arguably been a procedural error in that Mr Mathew's wife's appeal  had
    been allowed but the decision on her appeal was not placed  before  the
    judge.

3.   Although I hear what Mr Avery says about the fact that the  wife  still
    does not have leave to remain and the fact that obviously it was not  a
    matter before the  judge  that  now  her  successful  appeal  has  been
    challenged unsuccessfully by the Secretary of State, but it  does  seem
    to me that there is a procedural error in this case.  As I say,  it  is
    not the judge's fault but the fact of the matter is that  the  decision
    in the wife's case was sent to him and that was  something  that  could
    have made a difference in the judge's  thinking,  being  aware  of  her
    successful appeal.  So, as a consequence,  as  it  seems  to  me,  this
    decision will have to be set aside and there will have  to  be  a  full
    rehearing of the matter at Taylor House.



No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

