
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: HU/08355/2019 P       |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Decided under Rule 34  |             |        |Decision & Reasons           |
|without a hearing on   |             |        |Promulgated                  |
|28 June 2020           |             |        |On 7 September 2020          |
|                       |             |        |                             |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |Ms Emiola Mabayoje                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

     This is a decision on the  papers  without  a  hearing.  Neither  party
    objected. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing was not  held  for
    the reasons given at paras 10-18 below. The documents described at para
    8 below were submitted. The order made is set out  at  para  42  below.
    (Administrative  Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior  President   of
    Tribunals).

Representation (by submissions in writing):

For the appellant:         OJN Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Specialist Appeals Team.

                                  Decision


 1. The appellant, a national of Nigeria born on 12 February 1968,  appeals
    against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Buttar
    (hereafter referred to as the "judge") who, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 7 October 2019 following a hearing on 20 September  2019,  dismissed
    her appeal against a decision of the respondent of  24  April  2019  to
    refuse her human rights (Article 8) claim of 11 July 2018.

 2. The issues before the judge were as follows:

     (i) whether the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  continuously
         for a period of at least 20 years, so that para  276ADE(1)(iii)  of
         the Immigration Rules was satisfied;

     (ii)     if not, whether there were very significant obstacles  to  the
         appellant's reintegration in  Nigeria  for  the  purposes  of  para
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and

     (iii)    if not, whether the appellant's removal would nevertheless  be
         disproportionate.

 3. The evidence that the appellant relied upon in order to establish  that
    she had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 20  years
    was, in part, that she had been treated in hospital  for  cancer  after
    being diagnosed with breast cancer in 2014 and that she  had  used  the
    name "Sola Motolani" (according to her witness statement) to obtain the
    diagnosis and the treatment.

 4. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  three  witnesses.
    However, the judge noted, inter alia, that the appellant and one of her
    witnesses (Ms Barbara  Tinubi,  the  appellant's  aunt)  said  in  oral
    evidence that the name in  which  the  appellant  had  obtained  cancer
    treatment was "Solomon Salani".

 5. The judge found that the appellant had not  established  that  she  had
    lived in the United Kingdom continuously for a period of  at  least  20
    years  or  that  there  were  very   significant   obstacles   to   her
    reintegration in Nigeria. He found that the decision was proportionate,
    having followed the step-by-step approach in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  (2004)
    UKHL 27 and the balance sheet approach in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC
    60.

The issues

 6. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"):

     (i) whether  it  is  appropriate  to  decide  the  following  questions
without a hearing:

         (a)  whether the decision of the judge involved the  making  of  an
             error on a point of law; and

         (b)  whether the judge's decision should be set aside.

     (ii)     if I conclude that it is  appropriate  to  proceed  without  a
         hearing and if the answer to both questions (a) and  (b)  above  is
         "yes", then whether the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
         Tribunal or whether the decision on the appeal should be re-made in
         the Upper Tribunal.

 7. A lockdown was imposed on 23 March 2020 due to the  Covid-19  pandemic.
    On 30 April 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge  Mandalia.  Para  1  of  the
    "Note and Directions" stated  that,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions against the spread of Covid-19, Judge Mandalia had  reached
    the provisional view, having reviewed the file in this  case,  that  it
    would be appropriate  to  determine  questions  (i)(a)  and  (b)  above
    without a hearing. He gave the following directions:

     (i) Para 2  of  the  "Note  and  Directions"  issued  directions  which
         provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
         submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
         the question  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ("FtT") should be set aside if error of law  is  found,  within  14
         days of the "Note and Directions" being sent to  the  parties;  for
         any other party to file and serve submissions in  response,  within
         21 days of the "Note and  Directions"  being  sent;  and,  if  such
         submissions in  response  were  made,  for  the  party  who  sought
         permission to file a reply no later than 28 days of the  "Note  and
         Directions" being sent.

     (ii)     Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any party  who
         considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
         necessary to consider questions 1(a) and (b) may submit reasons for
         that view no later than 21 days of the "Note and Directions"  being
         sent to the parties.

 8.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  received  the  following  documents   since
    permission to appeal was granted:

     (i) from the appellant in response  to  the  directions  given  in  the
          "Note and Directions", a document entitled  "Further  Submissions"
          submitted by OJN Solicitors under cover of an email dated  14  May
          2020 timed at 15:27 hours;

     (ii)     from the respondent in response to the "Note and  Directions",
          a document entitled: "Respondent's submissions on  error  in  law"
          dated 20 May 2020 by Ms J Isherwood submitted under  cover  of  an
          email dated 20 May 2020 timed at 13:10 hours.

     (iii)    from the respondent in response to  the  grant  of  permission
          and pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
          Rules 2008, a document dated 26 February 2020 entitled  "Secretary
          of State's response to the grounds of appeal under Rule  24"  (the
          "Rule 24 Reply").

     To the extent that any of the above submissions  were  late,  I  extend
    time for compliance with the relevant direction and admit them.

 9. Although the "Respondent's submissions on error in law"  dated  20  May
    2020 post-dated the appellant's "Further Submissions" of 14  May  2020,
    the respondent merely relied upon her Rule 24 Reply which pre-dated the
    appellant's "Further Submissions" and  the  date  of  Judge  Mandalia's
    "Note and Directions".  Accordingly, I did not  consider  it  necessary
    for me to postpone consideration of the Issues and give  directions  to
    enable the appellant to respond to  the  "Respondent's  submissions  on
    error in law".

Issue (i) - whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

10. Neither party has objected to the Upper Tribunal proceeding  to  decide
    the Issues without a hearing.

11. Whilst the limitations imposed during the lockdown have been relaxed to
    a certain extent since the  "Note  and  Directions"  was  sent  to  the
    parties, the Upper Tribunal is not  yet  listing  appeals  for  hearing
    (whether remotely or face-to-face) at the capacity  that  it  had  been
    prior to the lockdown being  imposed.  Resolution  of  the  appellant's
    appeal may therefore be unduly delayed if it is  to  be  listed  to  be
    heard remotely or at a face-to-face hearing.

12. I have the benefit of the parties' detailed submissions on the  Issues.
    I have considered the grounds, the parties' submissions on  the  Issues
    and the decision of  the  judge  in  order  to  decide  whether  it  is
    appropriate for me to decide the Issues without a hearing. I have  also
    considered the guidance at para 2 of the judgment of the Supreme  Court
    in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61.

13. The grounds contend, at para 3, that the appellant  and  her  witnesses
    had correctly said, when asked under cross-examination, that  the  name
    the appellant had used for her cancer treatment  was  "Sola  Motolani".
    Paras 3 and 4 of the grounds read:


     "3. It is noted  that  the  appellant  and  her  witnesses,  correctly
             answered when asked under cross-examination that the  name  she
             used for her cancer treatment was Sola Motolani. That  was  the
             name she had already mentioned in her witness statement and  it
             is inconceivable that she  would  give  a  different  name.  It
             appears that the FTJ, probably, did not  hear  the  appellant's
             and her witness' answer properly, in which case  she  ought  to
             have sought clarification, but did not.


     4.  It is also worthy to note that the respondent's presenting officer
             did not mention that  the  appellant  or  her  witness  gave  a
             different name to the one she had used for cancer treatment. If
             the appellant had given  such  incorrect  answer,  surely,  the
             respondent's presenting officer would have mentioned it, in her
             submissions."

14. Whilst paras 3 and  4  of  the  grounds  suggest  that  the  judge  had
    misapprehended the evidence before him and therefore, on one  view,  it
    may be suggested that there is some dispute as to a fact (i.e.  whether
    or not the appellant and/or her witness(es) had given an incorrect name
    in cross-examination), the reality is that no evidence  whatsoever  has
    been produced in support of the assertion at para  3  of  the  grounds.
    Grounds do not prove themselves.

15. In addition, no evidence was adduced with the grounds  to  support  the
    assertion at para  4  that  the  respondent's  representative  did  not
    mention that the appellant or her witness(es)  had  given  a  different
    name.

16. In the absence of evidence to support the assertions at paras 3  and  4
    of the grounds, there is in fact no factual dispute  because  the  only
    evidence on the point is the judge's record of the proceedings  ("RoP")
    which he  relied  upon  in  reaching  his  adverse  assessment  of  the
    appellant's  credibility.  Accordingly,  I  concluded  that  there  was
    nothing in the grounds which made it unfair or inappropriate for me  to
    decide the Issues without a hearing. I deal further with paras 3 and  4
    of the grounds, at paras 23-30 below.

17. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence at this stage.

18. In all of the circumstances, and taking  into  account  the  overriding
    objective and having considered Osborn and others  v  Parole  Board,  I
    have concluded that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise
    my discretion and proceed to decide the Issues without a hearing.

Issues (i) (a) and (b) - whether the judge erred  in  law  and  whether  his
                  decision should be set aside

19. I have already set out the issues that were before the judge at para  2
    above.

The grounds

20. There are two grounds, as follows:

     (i) The first ground (ground 1) is raised  at  para  3  and  4  of  the
         grounds which I have set out at para 13  above  and  which  concern
         whether or not the judge had misapprehended the  evidence  when  he
         said that the appellant  and  one  of  her  witnesses  (Ms  Barbara
         Tinubi) had given an incorrect name in cross-examination when asked
         the name in which the appellant had received treatment  for  breast
         cancer. I have summarised part of the evidence that was before  the
         judge, at paras 3-4 above.

     (ii)     The second ground (ground  2)  is  that  the  judge  erred  in
         finding (at para  40  of  his  decision)  that  the  appellant  had
         returned to Nigeria and made  an  entry  clearance  application  in
         2004. In this regard,  para  7  of  the  grounds  relies  upon  the
         "respondent's own admission in their record, which was presented to
         the [judge], ... that there was no trace on  their  system  of  the
         appellant making any entry clearance application."

21. The grounds do not challenge the judge's finding that the appellant had
    not  shown  that  there  were  very  significant   obstacles   to   her
    reintegration in Nigeria (paras 46-49 of the judge's decision)  or  his
    assessment of her Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules  (paras
    50-59 of the judge's decision).

22. The judge considered the evidence that was before  him  concerning  the
    appellant's case that she had lived in the United Kingdom  continuously
    for a period of at least 20 years, at paras 37-45 of his decision which
    read:

     "37.     I have considered all of the evidence provided to me  in  both
             bundles submitted and the oral evidence I  have  heard  today.
             Essentially the issue is whether I can be satisfied whether it
             is  more  likely  than  not  that  the  appellant   has   been
             continuously resident in the UK since her arrival in  1988  or
             1989 or for a period of at least 20 years. It is  accepted  by
             the appellant that she cannot evidence through documents alone
             a period of 14 years between 1992-2006 when she says  she  has
             been in the UK and that reliance should be placed  instead  on
             her own evidence to the tribunal and that of her witnesses  to
             establish both her presence in the UK and  the  reason  for  a
             lack of any documentary evidence to support this.

     38. I did not find that  the  appellant  gave  a  credible  account  to
             establish that she had been in the country continuously for 20
             years. She told the Home Office she had been  in  the  country
             since the 13th March 1989 but Home Office records showed  that
             she had in fact been in the country  since  1988.  She  stated
             that  she  was  staying  with  friends  and  family  to  avoid
             detection since her appeal was dismissed in 1990 and therefore
             did not have any documents to show  she  was  present  in  the
             country during this time. She admitted in her  statement  that
             she had used false documents to work as  a  carer,  which  was
             also confirmed at page 91 of the bundle, where the case record
             sheet confirms that  she  was  working  as  a  carer  and  had
             purportedly produced a false ID in order to do  so.  She  also
             said that her account to the immigration officer in interview,
             again at page 91, had been misunderstood. She said she had not
             applied for an entry visa in 2004 having left the country on a
             previous occasion. However, in the same interview she admitted
             not disclosing her previous adverse immigration  history  when
             applying for an entry visa,  having  "previously  overstayed",
             which by implication suggests she had left the country  before
             applying for an entry visa in 2004. I  found  her  explanation
             that she had been misunderstood when she said she had  applied
             for entry clearance was not credible in light of  the  account
             she gave to  the  immigration  officer  of  having  previously
             overstayed. I find that it is more likely than  not  that  she
             returned to Nigeria in this period as she impliedly  told  the
             interviewer.

     39. In relation to  her  involvement  with  police,  she  admits  to  a
             caution for theft in 2006 and a conviction for shoplifting  in
             2010.  I  note  that  these  are   both   offences   involving
             dishonesty. She also relies on medical records showing she had
             breast cancer treatment in 2014 under a false name.  Today  in
             court she did not remember the name Sola Motolani and  instead
             said the name she had used was  Solomon  Salani.  I  found  it
             incredible that having used this false name to obtain  medical
             treatment on an  ongoing  basis  in  relation  to  her  cancer
             diagnosis, she would not be able to recall this name.[pic]

     40. I find that based on her  continual  use  of  false  identities  to
             obtain work and medical treatment, her lack of  disclosure  to
             immigration authorities when applying for  an  entry  visa  in
             2004 and her caution and conviction  for  dishonest  offences,
             her account of being in the UK continuously for  20  years  is
             not credible. For these reasons I do not accept on her account
             and on the balance of probabilities that she has been  present
             in the UK continuously since her arrival.[pic]

     41. Turning to the witnesses who gave evidence today.  Barbara  Tinubi,
             her aunt, stated that the appellant had used the name  Solomon
             Salani when she received breast cancer treatment. This was not
             the name used. Although she gave evidence to confirm that  the
             appellant had remained in the country since her arrival, prior
             to 2014 the appellant had lived with her  "on  and  off".  She
             accepted  in  her  statement  that  it  was  unusual  for  the
             appellant not to have any documents but said this was  because
             she was living in hiding. The witness in court said  she  knew
             where the appellant was when she was not living  with  her.  I
             found the  witness'  evidence  to  be  lacking  in  detail  in
             relation to where the appellant had been in the  period  where
             the appellant cannot provide any documentary evidence.  I  was
             not given much specific detail about  where  the  witness  was
             staying prior to 2014 or told how the  witness  knew  she  had
             been present in the UK apart from explanations such as "I knew
             where she was" and she lived with me "on and off" and was with
             "friends and family". This lack of detail and her relationship
             with  the  appellant  meant  I  did  not  find  her   evidence
             demonstrated that  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the
             appellant had lived continuously in the UK since her arrival.

     42. Ms Ibironke Tinubu gave evidence that was also lacking  in  detail.
             I did not know which  family  or  friends  the  appellant  had
             stayed  with  apart  from  Edith  Mabayoje  or  this   witness
             "sometimes" or even when. Her  evidence  in  court  today  was
             based on her saying she visited the appellant in hospital when
             she was receiving breast cancer treatment during 2014.  I  did
             not find her evidence assisted me in establishing whether  the
             appellant had been in  the  UK  continuously  prior  to  2014.
             However, I found her evidence credible in relation  to  having
             visited the appellant in hospital. She knew the name that  had
             been used and was specific about her visits.

     43. Finally, Ms Osungbesan gave evidence. She  said  to  her  knowledge
             the appellant had not  left  the  UK  since  arrival.  In  her
             statement she  said  had  known  her  for  20  years  but  her
             statement focussed particularly on  the  last  ten  years.  In
             particular the appellant helping her out with her  wedding  in
             2009 and the appellant's circumstances  thereafter.  Today  in
             court I was unaware of how long the appellant had been looking
             after the children of  the  witness  or  indeed  how  old  her
             children  were.  The  fact  that  she  had  looked  after   Ms
             Osungbesan's children as regularly as was described  in  court
             today was not mentioned in her statement. She gave a  detailed
             account of the appellant's medical  conditions  but  today  in
             court said she had not gone to visit her and did not know  the
             alias name that had been  used  by  her  to  obtain  treatment
             despite weekly  contact  by  phone  during  this  period.  Her
             evidence did not assist in establishing whether the  appellant
             had been in the UK continuously for a period of 20 years as it
             was not specific in relation to  the  appellant's  whereabouts
             between 1999-2009. For these reasons I attach little weight to
             her evidence including  whether  the  appellant  has  been  in
             country continuously since 2009.

     44. Based on the  findings  I  have  made  and  as  I  have  found  the
             appellant's account  to  be  unreliable  and  found  that  her
             witnesses do  not  assist  me  in  establishing  a  period  of
             continuous residency for the reasons given  above,  I  do  not
             find on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  has
             been resident in the UK continuously as she  has  claimed.  In
             coming to this  finding,  I  take  into  account  all  of  the
             evidence presented to me in the round, including the lack of a
             credible account and the absolute lack of documentary evidence
             for a period of 14 years at least between 1992-2006. I do find
             however taking into account Ms I Tinubu's evidence that it  is
             more likely than  not  that  the  appellant  received  medical
             treatment for breast cancer in the UK.

     45. For the reasons given above the appellant is unable to  satisfy  me
             on  the  balance  of  probabilities   that   she   meets   the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) because I have found  that
             she has not lived continuously in the UK for a  period  of  20
             years."

Assessment of ground 1

23. It is clear from the judge's decision that  he  considered  that,  when
    questioned in cross-examination, the appellant and her  witnesses  gave
    the following evidence concerning the name in which the  appellant  had
    allegedly obtained a cancer diagnosis:

     (i) the appellant who said that the name was "Solomon Salani" (para  39
         of the judge's decision);

     (ii)     Ms Barbara Tinubi who said that the name was "Solomon  Salani"
         (para 41);

     (iii)    Ms Ibironke Tinubu knew the name  that  had  been  used  (para
         42); and

     (iv)     Ms Osungbesan who did not know the alias name  that  had  been
         used by the appellant to obtain treatment (para 43).

24. In the appellant's "Error of law" submissions, it is contended,  again,
    that the appellant was very clear about the name she  had  used  during
    her  cancer  treatment,  being  "Sola  Motolani",  that  the  same  was
    confirmed by her, that the appellant was not mistaken in  her  evidence
    and did not tell an untruth about this.

25. However, as I have said, no evidence whatsoever  has  been  adduced  in
    support of the factual assertion at para 3  of  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant had given the correct name in cross-examination  whereas  the
    judge took contemporaneous notes of the oral evidence.

26. I have consulted the judge's RoP which is in typed form  and  on  file.
    This clearly records the relevant part of the oral evidence as follows:

     The appellant's oral evidence (on the first page of  the  RoP,  at  the
    end of cross-examination):

         "Solomon Salani - is the name used  for  breast  cancer  diagnosis.
             Have I been diagnosed under Emiola Mabayoje? No"

      Ms  Barbara  Tinubi's  oral  evidence  (on  the  second  page,  second
    paragraph under the heading "XX":

         "Known by a different name? yes, but I know her as  her  real  name
             Emiola Mabayoje. What other name do I  know  her  by?  Solomon
             Salani but I know he[r] as Emiola Mabayoje."

     Ms Ibironke Tinubu (second page,  first  paragraph  under  the  heading
             "XIC"):

         "At para 6 - app diagnosed with cancer in 2014. What name  did  she
             use? Shola Mutalani..."

     Ms Maria Osungbesan (third page,  fifth  paragraph  under  the  heading
             "EIC"):

         "In 2014 she was diagnosed with cancer. I  don't  know  under  what
             name. I know her a Emi, Emiola."

27. As I have said, the appellant has adduced no evidence  to  substantiate
    the assertion in  ground  1  that  the  judge  had  misapprehended  her
    evidence and the evidence of her witnesses whereas  the  judge  took  a
    contemporaneous note of the evidence.  His record of the evidence of Ms
    Ibironke Tinubu assisted the appellant because her answer tallied  with
    the name given by  the  appellant  in  her  witness  statement.  It  is
    therefore quite clear that he was taking a careful record.

28. Furthermore, there is no evidence to support the assertion at para 4 of
    the grounds that the respondent did not mention that the  appellant  or
    her witnesses gave a different name, as I have said. To  the  contrary,
    para 4 of the grounds ignores not only the fact that the appellant  and
    all of her witnesses were cross-examined on this very  point  but  also
    para 28 of the judge's decision where he summarised this aspect of  the
    submissions of the respondent's representative as follows:

         "... In relation to the  breast  cancer  diagnosis  there  were  no
             documents she was being treated under her  current  name.  The
             medical fact of the diagnosis is not accepted but even  if  it
             were then  the  use  of  a  false  ID  adversely  affects  her
             credibility."

29. Accordingly, it is clear that it was indeed part  of  the  respondent's
    case before the judge that the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    person who  had  obtained  medical  treatment  in  the  name  of  "Sola
    Motolani" was the appellant.  It  follows  that  it  was  part  of  the
    respondent's case that the evidence given  by  the  appellant  and  her
    witnesses under cross-examination about the identity of the person  who
    received medical treatment was not credible.

30. In all of the circumstances, I reject the bare assertion  in  ground  1
    that  the   judge   had   misapprehended   the   evidence   as   wholly
    unsubstantiated and untenable.

31. Ground 1 also contends that it  is  inconceivable  that  the  appellant
    would give a different name from the name that she had mentioned in her
    witness statement.  This  submission  is  also  untenable.  It  is  the
    experience of judges who hear oral evidence that witnesses can  and  do
    give oral evidence which is not consistent with the evidence  in  their
    witness statements and also that witnesses can  and  do  give  evidence
    that is entirely consistent.

32. I therefore reject ground 1.

Assessment of paras 7 and 8 of the appellant's "Error of law" submissions

33. Before turning to ground 2, I shall deal with paras  7  and  8  of  the
    appellant's "Error of law" submissions.  These contend  that  the  fact
    that the appellant might have used false  identities  to  work  in  the
    United Kingdom and has a conviction for offences of  dishonesty,  ought
    not to have been accorded significant weight as the  judge  did,  given
    that it is common knowledge that those who apply for leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence of  at  least  20  years  usually  have  a
    history of some of contravention of law. Accordingly, it  is  contended
    that minor unlawful acts ought not to count  against  persons  applying
    under the 20 years' residence requirement in para 276ADE(1)(iii).

34. However, the appellant did not seek or obtain permission on  the  issue
    raised at paras 7 and 8 of her "Error of law" submissions. Further, and
    in any event, paras 7 and 8 are devoid of substance, for the  following
    reasons:

     i)  Firstly, the context in which the  judge  considered  the  evidence
         concerning the alleged use by the appellant  of  a  false  name  in
         order to obtain a cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment was that it
         was part of the appellant's case in establishing that she had lived
         in the United Kingdom continuously for at least 20 years. The judge
         found that the appellant had not established  this  aspect  of  her
         case. Therefore, it was the appellant who was advancing a  positive
         case that she had used a false identity as  going  in  her  favour.
         That is the context in which the judge considered  this  aspect  of
         the evidence.

     ii) Furthermore, the criminal record in question  concerned  a  caution
         for theft and a conviction  for  shoplifting,  as  opposed  to  any
         conviction for the use of a false identity in order,  for  example,
         to secure employment or accommodation both of which may be rendered
         more difficult  if  a  person  lacks  immigration  status.  That  a
         different scenario from that presented by a person who  engages  in
         theft and shoplifting. In my judgment, the judge was fully entitled
         to take account  of  the  appellant's  caution  and  conviction  in
         considering the reliability of her evidence.

Assessment of ground 2

35. The appellant's "Error of law" submissions place reliance upon the fact
    that the respondent had confirmed that searches  on  her  database  had
    been carried out and that nothing had been found on her system to  show
    that the appellant had departed or re-entered the  United  Kingdom.  In
    addition, reliance is placed on the fact that the  respondent  had  not
    suggested before and/or during the hearing that the appellant had  used
    or could have used a different identity for the alleged entry clearance
    application and that this has never been the respondent's position.

36. However, para 28 of the judge's decision, where  the  judge  summarised
    part of the submissions on behalf of the respondent, reads (insofar  as
    relevant) as follows:


     "28.     [The Presenting Officer] relied on the  refusal  letter  when
             addressing me. She said that between  1990-2006  there  was  no
             evidence to show that the appellant  was  present  in  the  UK,
             apart from the caution for  theft....  There  was  insufficient
             evidence to show that the appellant had been resident in the UK
             continuously for the last 20 years. At the very least there was
             a gap of 16 years. She may have left the UK especially  as  she
             had told the Home Office she would be returning to Nigeria..."

37. It is therefore clear that the respondent's case was that the appellant
    may have left the United Kingdom at some point and thus interrupted her
    residence in the United Kingdom,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    respondent had not been able to produce any evidence of  the  appellant
    having departed or re-entering.

38. The appellant's representative, Mr Jeyede, drew the  judge's  attention
    to the fact that the respondent had not produced evidence of  departure
    and re-entry. The judge summarised this aspect of  his  submissions  at
    para 32 of his decision which reads:

         "32. On numerous occasions solicitors had asked the  respondent  to
             show that the appellant had not left and  then  re-entered  the
             UK. The tribunal should make an inference on the basis that the
             respondent had failed to provide any evidence to  this  effect,
             having offered to do so at one point."

39. Accordingly, the question whether the appellant had departed the United
    Kingdom was a factual issue before the judge which he had to decide  on
    the whole of the evidence, including the fact that the  respondent  had
    not been able to produce any evidence of departure or re-entry. That is
    precisely what the judge did. In effect, ground 2 amounts  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's reasoning and  findings.  It  does
    not disclose any error of law.

40. I therefore reject ground 2.

41. For all of the reasons given above, I have concluded that the judge did
    not err in law.

Notice of Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of  law.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Signed: 28 June 2020
