
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08330/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 11th June 2021                |On the 12th July 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swaney, promulgated on  2  February  2021.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 9 February 2021.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however an  obvious  reason  for
    directing anonymity is that the  respondent's  case  involves  evidence
    that he was sexually abused as a minor.

Background

 3. The respondent entered the United Kingdom from Jamaica  aged  5  during
    2001 with 6 months leave to enter as a visitor.  He was a dependent  on
    unsuccessful applications for leave to remain and asylum  made  by  his
    mother. The respondent was convicted of violent disorder on 19  January
    2012 and was sentenced to  a  4-month  detention  and  training  order.
    Subsequently, he was  detained  as  an  overstayer  in  September  2012
    following which he made a human rights claim. His  appeal  against  the
    refusal of that application was allowed on 29 August 2014 and  he  was,
    ultimately, granted Discretionary Leave to Remain until 6 October 2018.



 4. On 25  November  2016,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  affray  and
    sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. Subsequently, on 30 May 2017, the
    Secretary of State made a decision to deport the respondent and refused
    his human rights claim based on  a  relationship  with  a  partner  and
    qualifying child. This appeal is against a further decision made on  28
    July 2017 to the same effect. Briefly, the Secretary of  State  refused
    the respondent's human rights claim owing to his failure to provide any
    evidence, it was not accepted that he met the private life requirements
    of the Rules nor that there were  any  very  compelling  circumstances.
    Subsequent to that decision, the respondent was,  on  15  August  2018,
    convicted of further offences involving assault,  an  offensive  weapon
    and intent to supply and on  20  December  2019  he  was  convicted  of
    wounding, grievous bodily harm and assault by beating and sentenced  to
    three years in prison. He was still serving his sentence at the time of
    his appeal hearing.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the respondent, his partner
    (Ms Wright) and a friend (Ms Goodman). In addition,  there  was  expert
    evidence relating to the respondent's  mental  health  upon  which  the
    judge placed "significant weight." The following findings were made. It
    was accepted that the respondent enjoyed family life with his  partner;
    the  respondent  did  not  satisfy  the  private  life   exception   to
    deportation;  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the
    respondent's integration in Jamaica; the respondent was not relying  on
    family life with his child from a previous relationship;  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the  partner  to  accompany  the  respondent  to
    Jamaica but not so for her to remain in the United Kingdom without him;
      the  respondent  could  not  satisfy  either  of  the  exceptions  to
    deportation but could  demonstrate  that  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances including the respondent being a victim of  sexual  abuse
    and the mental health concerns emanating from that, including PTSD.



The grounds of appeal

 6. It was argued that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that it would be unduly harsh to expect the partner to live  in
    Jamaica; failed to have regard to the  respondent  being  a  persistent
    offender and failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to his integration  in  Jamaica.  Issue
    was also taken with the judge's acceptance that the respondent had been
    subjected to sexual abuse. The foregoing arguable errors were  said  to
    infect  the  subsequent  finding  that  there  were   very   compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the public interest in the  respondent's
    deportation and that this finding was inadequately reasoned.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. Mr Tufan's submissions concentrated on an issue which formed no part of
    the grounds. He argued that the judge did not  refer  the  further  two
    offences committed by the respondent. He said that the judge had simply
    concentrated on  the  offence  which  resulted  in  a  12-month  prison
    sentence and which had triggered the decision to deport. Otherwise,  Mr
    Tufan made the following points. It was perplexing that the judge found
    that the respondent did not meet the exceptions to deportation while at
    the same time finding there to be very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration. The judge's findings as to the respondent's mental  health
    issues were perfunctory and without analysis. There ought to have  been
    a mention of the  facilitated  returns  scheme  in  the  assessment  of
    whether there were very compelling circumstances.

10. In reply, Ms Short emphasised that the first submission was not part of
    the Secretary of State's grounds and no  formal  application  to  amend
    grounds had been made nor permission granted. Addressing the point,  Ms
    Short argued that the respondent's convictions were not in dispute, the
    judge explained that the 12 months' sentence triggered  deportation  at
    [69] and she  did  not  ignore  additional  offences.   Addressing  the
    comments of Judge Parkes, Ms Short contended that the judge's  findings
    were open to her on the evidence. There was medical evidence from  Lisa
    Davies, a consultant forensic psychologist who prepared a psychological
    risk assessment exploring abuse and she  made  findings  regarding  the
    respondent's account of abuse, trauma from witnessing his mother's drug
    abuse and being subject to domestic violence. The respondent was cross-
    examined and confirmed that the abuse happened in the UK,  and  it  was
    not put to him that he was making it up. The respondent was  identified
    as a vulnerable witness and the Secretary of State  did  not  challenge
    the  point  on  the  abuse.   At  [26]  during  cross-examination,  the
    presenting officer explored the most recent and most serious offence in
    prison following which the respondent became very upset and a break was
    taken. The Secretary of State's complaint in grounds was flawed  as  it
    was not part of her case in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  there  was
    medical evidence which was not subject to any attack.

11. Responding to paragraph 4 of the grounds, Ms Short submitted  that  the
    drafter of the grounds was wrong to find that the appeal was allowed on
    the  basis  of  the  respondent's  integration  and  finding  of   very
    significant obstacles. The judge  found  that  these  matters  did  not
    prevent  the  respondent's  deportation.  Furthermore,  Chege  did  not
    provide authority for persistent offending breaking  integrative  ties.
    The judge's analysis was adequate and in accordance with  the  judgment
    in Kamara. Paragraph 3 of the grounds was similarly flawed as while the
    judge found it was unduly harsh for the respondent's partner to  go  to
    Jamaica, the judge did not allow the appeal on this ground.

12. Responding to paragraph 6 of the grounds, Ms Short argued that a  judge
    should take into account parts of the Rules which  were  met.  In  this
    case the judge found that the respondent's  traumatic  childhood,  when
    considered with the parts of the Rules which were met amounted to  very
    compelling circumstances.

13. At the end of the hearing, I informed the parties that  there  were  no
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    that the decision was upheld. I give my reasons below.

Decision on error of law

14. There was one ground of appeal, that being that the First-tier Tribunal
    failed to give adequate reasons for findings on a material matter. None
    of the claims in the grounds were developed before me. On the contrary,
    the Secretary of State's submissions raised a separate issue which  was
    not part of the grounds. That issue being  that  the  judge  completely
    ignored the respondent's most recent convictions.  No  application  was
    made to amend the grounds either  before  or  during  the  hearing  and
    indeed no permission was given. While I need not  consider  this  point
    further, it suffices to say that this ground is  as  unfounded  as  the
    original grounds of appeal. The  judge  engages  with  the  convictions
    subsequent to the 2017 decision on a number of occasions, including  at
    [85], [93], [107-108].

15. Furthermore, contrary to what is argued in the grounds, the judge  made
    no errors in reaching her findings regarding the  respondent's  ability
    to meet the requirements of the Rules and she gave more  than  adequate
    reasons.  Paragraphs 3 and 4 of  the  grounds  allege  that  the  judge
    allowed the appeal because she found that it was unduly harsh  for  the
    respondent's  wife  to  accompany  him  to  Jamaica,  because  he   was
    integrated into life in the UK and because there were very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Jamaica. This was not the case  as  can
    be seen from a cursory reading of the decision which plainly shows that
    the respondent did not meet the exceptions to deportation.  The  appeal
    was allowed because  the  judge  found  there  to  be  very  compelling
    circumstances and she provides sustainable reasons for this  conclusion
    between [105] and [124] of the decision.

16. While the judge did  consider  the  exceptions,  she  was  required  to
    undertake a holistic evaluation of all relevant factors including those
    which were assessed in the context of the exceptions, with reference to
    NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662; PF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  1139,
    HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 at [33].  That the judge undertook  that
    assessment cannot amount to an error which  "infected"  her  subsequent
    findings as argued in paragraph 6 of the grounds.

17. That leaves paragraph 5 of the grounds, where it was asserted that  the
    judge found that the respondent was subjected to sexual  abuse  in  the
    absence of evidence. That erroneous claim overlooks the fact  that  the
    respondent relied on a report of a clinical psychologist,  referred  to
    at [56],[57] and [68] of the decision and reasons and  that  the  judge
    was satisfied that the author of the report was appropriately qualified
    to provide a report in relation to the respondent's mental health.  The
    grounds as a whole are most misleading and amount to  no  more  than  a
    poorly drafted series of disagreements with the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. While it may be the case that many judges might not have
    been inclined to allow the appeal  given  the  respondent's  persistent
    offending, the judge approached her  task  diligently  and  provided  a
    careful, detailed decision which was replete with reasons.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:  Date 09 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

