
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08225/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 May 2017                        |On 8 June 2017                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                 anand singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Brien, instructed by MK Gill Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                       (Delivered orally 26 May 2017)

 1. This is an  appeal  brought  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 22  November
    2016. Judge Aujla dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
    of the Secretary of  State  (SSHD)  of  8  October  2015  refusing  the
    appellant leave to remain.

 2. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and permission  was  not  granted  in
    relation to each of the grounds pleaded.  I do not,  however,  need  to
    consider the grounds in detail as a  consequence  of  a  most  sensible
    agreement  between  the  parties  as  to  the  appropriate  course  for
    disposing of the proceedings before me.

 3. At the outset of the hearing I observed, and it had not  been  lost  on
    either party, that since the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant's wife had given birth to  a  British  citizen  child  -  the
    appellant being the father of the child.  It is plain that  this  event
    has strengthened  the  appellant's  article  8  claim,  in  part  as  a
    consequence of provisions of the section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  in
    part as a consequence of the terms of the guidance the SSHD provides to
    her decision makers when consideration is to be given to whether it  is
    reasonable to require a British citizen child to move  outside  of  the
    EU.

 4. Mr Tarlow made efforts to take instructions on whether the SSHD wished,
    in light of  the  aforementioned  significant  even,  to  withdraw  the
    decision under challenge and reconsider the appellant's application  in
    light of the facts as they now stand. Unfortunately he  was  unable  to
    take such instructions  but,  nevertheless,  of  his  own  motion  (and
    entirely properly in my view) withdrew the decision under challenge.

 5. Mr O'Brien, upon instructions, subsequently  withdrew  the  appellant's
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  As a consequence, I am left with one
    decision to make,  that  is  whether  to  consent  to  the  appellant's
    withdrawal of the appeal. I, of course, fully concur with the  approach
    taken by the parties and give such consent.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is withdrawn for  the  reasons  I  have
alluded to above.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
26 May 2017

