
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08372/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              Mr FRANCIS XAVIER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Najma, Counsel instructed by Walker Prestons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the widow of appellant Mr  Francis  Xavier  who  sadly
    died on 17 May 2018 of organ failure.  She has permission to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Moxon of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  5
    October 2018 dismissing her appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 22 March 2018 refusing leave to remain.  The appellant is
    aged 70 and she and her late husband entered the UK on 13 January  2016
    with entry clearance as visitors.

2.   The appellant's written grounds had two main components.  It was  first
    of all contended that the judge materially erred in law in (1)  failing
    to consider appropriately whether there was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her adult son-in-law aged 33.  Ms Najma indicated at  the
    outset of the hearing that no reliance was now placed on  this  ground.
    I consider that a prudent step since the  judge  clearly  did  consider
    very carefully whether the relationship between the appellant and adult
    son in law amounted to family life within the meaning of Article 8  and
    gave sound reasons for concluding at paragraph 34 that it did not.  Nor
    did the appellant's grounds challenge key findings of fact made by  the
    judge which concerned her family  situation  (and  care  situation)  in
    Pakistan.

3.   The appellant's second ground contended that the judge failed  to  give
    any proper consideration  to  the  appellant's  family  life  with  her
    grandchildren if she  was  removed  to  Pakistan  and  gave  inadequate
    consideration to the best interests of the child.  Despite  Ms  Najma's
    excellent submissions in support of this ground,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that it establishes a material error of law.

4.   Ms Najma, when amplifying the appellant's written grounds, is right  to
    say that the judge did not conduct any express assessment of  the  best
    interests of the appellant's grandchildren.  The only reference to them
    is a cursory one in paragraph 40:

         "40. Contact can be maintained between the Appellant and  those  in
             the United Kingdom by letter, telephone call and by  utilising
             modern technology and the Sponsor can  continue  to  regularly
             visit.  Whilst I understand her departure would be of upset to
             her grandchildren, they can nevertheless maintain contact".

5.   Ms Najma is also right  to  say  that  where  children  are  concerned,
    regard has to  be  had  to  their  best  interests.   However,  in  the
    appellant's case the application made to the respondent  for  leave  to
    remain had not relied on any family life ties with  the  grandchildren,
    nor had the appellant's grounds of appeal referred to  them.   For  the
    appeal hearing,  no  evidence  was  produced  that  particularised  her
    relationship with her grandchildren.  The  witness  statement  evidence
    simply said that her relationship with them was "very close".   In  the
    context of a case in which it is conceded that the judge  was  entitled
    to find that there was no family life between  the  appellant  and  her
    adult son in law, it was incumbent on the appellant to produce evidence
    to support her claim to  nevertheless  have  a  family  life  with  his
    children.  It has nowhere been suggested that the grandchildren's  best
    interests are not served by receiving care from their own parents.  The
    appellant had not been a part of their lives until coming  to  stay  in
    their house as a visitor.  In short, there was simply  an  insufficient
    evidential basis for the judge to consider that the best  interests  of
    the grandchildren would be significantly affected  by  the  appellant's
    departure.

6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  decision  of  the  judge  is
    free of material error of law and accordingly it must stand.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2019

            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
