
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08078/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2019                    |On 15th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Sammar [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan (Counsel), Prolegis Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petersen (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A M Buchanan, promulgated on 23rd  October  2018,  following  the
    hearing at North Shields on 20th August 2018.   In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  19th
    December 1989.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of
    his family life with his wife, [RK], whom he had married in Pakistan on
    20th September 2014.  The decision appealed against is dated 15th March
    2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's  claim  is  that,  after  marrying  his  wife  on  20th
    September 2014 in Pakistan, he came to the UK on 11th  June  2015.   He
    and his wife have had difficulty conceiving a child.  This  has  caused
    stress in their relationship.  Initially the two of them lived with his
    wife's parents.  They moved to their own home, however, in August 2016.
     The Appellant had an operation in March  2017  as  part  of  fertility
    treatment, but a child has not been conceived.

 4. One evening, the Appellant and his wife were invited to the home of her
    parents to discuss the situation.  This was in  May  2017.   When  they
    arrived the Appellant's wife's brother humiliated  the  Appellant.   He
    told his sister (the  Appellant's  wife)  that  she  should  leave  the
    Appellant and remarry.  The  Appellant's  brother  in  law  forced  the
    Appellant onto a  couch,  and  the  brother-in-law's  wife  called  the
    police.  The Appellant was  arrested.   He  was  taken  to  the  police
    station.  He spent the night in a cell.  He was asked by the police  to
    accept a  caution  rather  than  face  a  criminal  conviction,  and  a
    condition of the caution was that he  should  attend  anger  management
    courses at Carlisle Business Centre.

 5. The Appellant was told that once  he  had  completed  the  course,  the
    caution would be complete, although it would remain on his record,  but
    not affect his immigration case.  The Appellant and his wife have lived
    together since the incident and it has brought  them  closer  together.
    However, when the Appellant made his application for leave  to  remain,
    he was asked if he had any criminal convictions and he replied that  he
    did not.  Only when the application was refused, did he find  out  that
    the caution  remained  effective.   He  has  no  other  convictions  or
    cautions.  The Appellant even then submitted a complaint  to  the  West
    Yorkshire Police on 25th June  2018  about  the  circumstances  of  the
    caution.  The complaint was rejected.

The Judge's Findings

 6. At the hearing before Judge Buchanan, the Appellant's wife, [RK],  gave
    evidence to say that the caution on 22nd May 2017 was allegedly for the
    Appellant having assaulted her brother.  She did  not  understand  that
    the caution remained on her husband's record.  The  incident,  however,
    which led to the caution was  caused  by  her  brother.   She  did  not
    consider that her husband assaulted  anyone.   She  does  not  consider
    herself to be a victim of domestic violence in any  way  at  all.   The
    police were only called in the heat of the moment  when  emotions  were
    high.

 7. The judge noted that it was accepted that there was a  failure  by  the
    Appellant to disclose the fact of a caution dated 22nd May  2017.   The
    judge also  accepted  that  when  the  application  was  completed  the
    Appellant was not present before the immigration advisor.   The  answer
    to question 10.3, with respect to the  caution,  was  answered  by  the
    Appellant's wife instead.  She then took it home for the  Appellant  to
    sign the three or four pages of the application (numbering  79  pages).
    However, the judge did not accept that the Appellant only saw three  or
    four pages of the 79 page document.  It was an important document.   He
    ought not to have been negligent or reckless in this regard.

 8. On the other hand, the judge also accepted  that  [RK],  had  not  been
    asked about details of questions 10.2 and 10.3 on the application form.
     She had only been  asked  questions  about  terrorism  offences.   The
    answer she gave to question 10.2 was correct.  The answer she  gave  to
    question 10.3 was not correct.  Proper care  should  have  been  taken,
    according to the judge.  Nevertheless,

         "The Appellant laboured under a common  misunderstanding  that  the
         conditional caution was completed when he had undertaken the  anger
         management course but if he had read question 10.3  he  would  have
         seen that the question asked whether he had  'been  subject  to  or
         received any other penalty in relation to a criminal  offence:  for
         example caution ...'" (see paragraph 31).

 9. The judge concluded that the  Appellant  did  not  take  seriously  the
    completion of the application  form.   In  this  sense,  the  HOPO  was
    correct that the Secretary of State had received false information  and
    that "the fault lies with the Appellant  and  ultimately  no-one  else"
    (paragraph 31).  The judge went on to adopt a balance sheet approach.

10. Ultimately, the judge's conclusion was that "the subject matter of  the
    caution is an incident at the  minor  end  of  the  scale  of  domestic
    violence and that a conditional caution would not have been offered had
    that not been the case.  The Appellant meets all the other requirements
    for leave to be granted and he is a man otherwise  of  good  character.
    The interference with his family life  and  indeed  his  private  life,
    whilst not amounting to very significant difficulties or  causing  very
    serious hardship, would nonetheless cause difficulties and hardship for
    the Appellant and RZ [RK]  arising  out  of  the  failure  to  disclose
    information.  I take account of the fact that the failure  to  disclose
    the caution was not intentional and  indeed  was  always  bound  to  be
    discovered given that the Respondent makes appropriate checks with  the
    police as is stated plainly on the application form itself"  (paragraph
    33).

11. In undertaking the balancing exercise, the judge held that "this is one
    of those rare cases where there is  justification  to  go  outside  the
    Rules under Article 8 of ECHR in the circumstances of this  case",  and
    allowed the appeal on the basis of freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence
    (paragraph 34).

12. The appeal was allowed.





Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide a reasonable excuse for  not  declaring
    his convictions and the caution entered on his  record.   Nevertheless,
    he had gone on to allow the appeal.  There were three difficulties with
    this.  First, there was a  finding  (at  paragraph  33)  which  was  in
    complete contradiction to the earlier findings, which  meant  that  the
    decision to remove could not be disproportionate.   Second,  the  judge
    had found that there were no insurmountable obstacles, but  only  "very
    significant difficulties or hardship to the Appellant" (see  paragraphs
    32 to 33).  Third, the judge had  made  a  contradictory  finding  that
    there would be "difficulties and hardship" for the Appellant if he were
    to be removed, but did not identify what  these  were  (paragraph  33).
    Given that the judge  had  found  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles,  the  reference  to  "very   significant   difficulties   or
    hardships" was the application of a wrong test in allowing the appeal.

14. On 14th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 6th March 2019, Mr Petersen,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the grounds of
    application.  She submitted that the judge  had  plainly  confused  the
    application of the "insurmountable obstacles"  test  with  their  being
    "very significant difficulties" and this being so,  the  appeal  should
    not have been allowed.

16. For his part,  Mr  O'Ryan,  appearing  as  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that, even if it is the case that the Secretary of
    State did receive false information (see paragraph  31)  this  did  not
    fall under S-LTR.1.7.  This is because that provision states that:

         "The applicant has failed without reasonable excuse to comply  with
         a requirement to-

         (a)  attend an interview;

         (b)  provide information;

         (c)  provide physical data; or

         (d)  undergo a medical examination or provide a medical report."

    None of these four requirements were engaged  here.   Therefore,  there
    could not be a mandatory Ground for Refusal in existence in this  case.
    The failure to  disclose  material  facts  is  not  a  matter  that  is
    considered in S-LTR.1.7, but is something which falls  under  S-LTR.2.2
    (which is a discretionary Ground for Refusal), and which states that,

         "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation to the application ...; or

         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

    He submitted that there is a distinction between the mandatory  Grounds
    of Refusal (S-LTRP.1.1) and the discretionary Grounds for  Refusal  (S-
    LTRP.2.1).  If there were to be an ambiguity in the terms of  the  Rule
    to be applied, that ambiguity  should  be  resolved  in  favour  of  an
    applicant so as not to prejudice an applicant.  This  was  because  the
    harsh consequences of a mandatory refusal should only be applied  where
    there are clear grounds for doing so.  The purpose of S-LTRP.1.7 was to
    impose a sanction against an applicant who is purposely obstructing the
    Secretary of State's consideration of an application.   This  would  be
    the case  where,  without  reasonable  excuse,  an  applicant  had  not
    complied  with  the  requirement  to,  attend  an  interview,   provide
    information, or provide physical data.  In this case, the Appellant  is
    guilty of neither of these examples.

17. Second, if it is argued  that  a  requirement  to  provide  information
    necessarily implies that the information provided must be correct, such
    an argument is not  made  out  here,  if  the  provision  of  incorrect
    information alone was  sufficient  to  warrant  the  invocation  of  S-
    LTRP.1.7, because then there would be no distinction capable  of  being
    drawn between S-LTR.1.7 and S-LTR.2.2, which relates to  the  provision
    of false information and failure to disclose material facts.

18. Third, what this meant was  that  the  judge  ought  to  have  directed
    himself as to the terms of S-LTR.2.2, and not to S-LTR.1.7.  The  judge
    should have considered whether the requirements of S-LTR.2.2 were  met.
    If there were, then he ought to have  considered  whether  applying  S-
    LTR.2.1, it could be said that this was a case where it was appropriate
    for the Appellant to have been refused on the grounds  of  suitability.
    Mr O'Ryan submitted that had the judge so directed  himself,  then  the
    outcome would have been the same.  The appeal would have been  allowed.
    This is because it was plainly the case that the judge was of the  view
    that the caution itself did not provide the Secretary of State with any
    proper grounds for refusing the application for leave to remain on  the
    ground of  the  Appellant's  character  (see  paragraph  28).   If  the
    Appellant had disclosed the caution on the application  form,  but  the
    Respondent Secretary of State  had  then  refused  the  application  on
    grounds of character or  conduct,  then  the  appeal  would  have  been
    allowed by the judge, on the basis that all  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met,  and  that  there  were  no  public  policy
    considerations requiring the Appellant's removal.   The  difficulty  in
    this case, submitted Mr O'Ryan, was that the judge felt  bound  by  the
    constraints of S-LTR.1.7, which  implied  that  in  the  absence  of  a
    reasonable excuse for failure to disclose the caution, the  application
    must fail under the Immigration  Rules.   This  did  not  follow.   The
    provisions of S-LTR.1.7 did not apply to the present application.   The
    judge was not obliged to find  that  the  Immigration  Rules  were  not
    satisfied (see paragraph 31).  The judge could have found that,  taking
    all the circumstances into consideration (paragraph 33) the appeal fell
    to be allowed.

19. In reply, Mrs Petersen submitted that there were  two  points.   First,
    even if what Mr O'Ryan suggested was correct, and this was not  a  case
    of her "mandatory" refusal but of a "discretionary" refusal, so that it
    fell under S-LTR.2.7, it  could  still  be  argued  that  this  was  an
    application which should "normally" be refused.  This is because of the
    failure to disclose material facts, which the judge found had been  for
    reasons of the Appellant's negligence and recklessness, which  was  not
    justifiable.  Second, even  when  the  judge  proceeded  to  apply  the
    balance sheet approach, and took into account the fact that on the  one
    hand the Appellant had failed to disclose the existence of the caution,
    and on the other hand there were no "insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    family life of the Appellant and answered continuing if  the  Appellant
    had  to  leave  the  UK"  (paragraph  32),  then   as   a   matter   of
    proportionality the appeal still fell  to  be  refused.   That  is  the
    conclusion that the judge should properly have come to.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).   The  reason  for  this  is  a
    failure to apply the correct provisions.  I  accept  entirely  what  Mr
    O'Ryan submits, namely, that the appropriate Rule in this case was  not
    S-LTR.1.7, requiring an applicant  to  attend  for  interview,  provide
    information, or undergo medical examination, the failure  of  which  to
    do, would lead, without reasonable explanation, to a mandatory refusal.
      The  appropriate  provision  was   S-LTR.2.2   which   requires   the
    consideration of "whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge",  there
    has been  the  disclosure  of  false  information,  representations  or
    documents".

21. Although Mrs Petersen is equally correct, in her incisive and  succinct
    submission, that whichever way one looks this, the fact  remained  that
    the judge's own findings were that  the  Appellant  had  no  reasonable
    excuse in his failure to disclose material facts and that, adopting the
    balance sheet approach, the Appellant  and  his  wife  would  not  face
    insurmountable obstacles to life in Pakistan, the fact remains  that  a
    party  before  a  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  have  the  correct  legal
    provisions applied.  There is a world of difference between a provision
    that leads to a mandatory refusal and the provision  that  leads  to  a
    discretionary refusal.  If the  argument  is  framed  on  an  incorrect
    basis, as has been the case here,  where  the  judge  appears  to  have
    proceeded on the basis that the mandatory Grounds of  Refusal  applied,
    then it is a short step  to  a  decision  maker  coming  to  the  wrong
    conclusion.

22. For this reason, the judge erred in-law, and the appropriate course  of
    action now is that this matter  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined again, on the basis  of  the  correct  legal
    provisions by another judge.  The  findings  made  by  Judge  Buchanan,
    insofar as they are in the Appellant's favour, remain intact and should
    not be revisited.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making or an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  I remake  the  decision
    by remitting this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other  than  Judge  A  M  Buchanan,  pursuant  to
    Practice Statement 7.2.(a) of the Practice Directions.

24. No anonymity order is made.

25. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019







