
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/08022/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 22nd January 2018                 |                On: 19th February    |
|                                      |2018                                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          ALLAHBAKSH FAKRUSAB NADAF
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           In person
For the Respondent:    No appearance[1]


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on  the  4th  June  1985.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Hemborough) to dismiss his appeal, on human rights grounds,  against  a
    decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.


 2. In respect of the decision to deport the salient facts are  these.  The
    Appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the 14th October 2009. On the 25th July  2016  at  Aberdeen  Sheriff
    Court he received an 'extended'  sentence  of  5  years  and  3  months
    imprisonment, having been  convicted  after  trial  of  three  offences
    against children. These were one offence of sexual assault on a 12 year-
    old girl by making sexual remarks and touching her vagina  through  her
    clothing, and two further separate offences  of  indecent  exposure  to
    children aged 8 and 10, the last offence  being  committed  whilst  the
    Appellant was on bail.  The convictions were upheld on  appeal  in  May
    2017 but the Scottish Appeal Court did quash the 'extended' element  of
    the sentence.

 3. The  Respondent  served  the  Appellant  with  a  notification  of  her
    intention to deport him on the 25th May 2017 and the Order  itself  was
    signed on the 5th June 2017.

 4. The Appellant can only succeed in challenging that decision if  he  can
    demonstrate that one of the 'exceptions'  to  deportation  set  out  in
    s33(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies in his case.  He is therefore
    required to show that he either requires  international  protection  or
    that his deportation would place the United Kingdom in violation of its
    obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.  Before  the
    First-tier Tribunal the Appellant sought only to rely  on  the  latter,
    arguing that his deportation would be  a  breach  of  Article  8.   The
    factual basis for that assertion is the fact that the Appellant is  the
    natural father of a British child, born in August 2013.

 5. The Appellant's son, whom I shall refer to as K, lives with his  mother
    in Scotland. Although the Appellant and K's mother  are  now  estranged
    she had supported him throughout the trial and had brought K  to  visit
    his father in prison. Initially these visits were  fairly  regular  but
    they started to dwindle in November 2016 and by the time of the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing had stopped altogether. The last visit took place
    in January or February 2017 but the Appellant has  continued  to  speak
    with him on the telephone. K's mother is now living with a new partner.
     The Appellant told the First-tier Tribunal that before he had gone  to
    prison he had developed a particularly strong bond with his son,  whose
    mother had worked full time.

 6. In order to succeed in his appeal the Appellant needed to show that  he
    had a family life with his son, and that any interference with it would
    be disproportionate. In order to do the latter he had to prove that  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for his son to have to leave the United Kingdom
    with him, and that it would be "unduly harsh" for his son to remain  in
    the United Kingdom whilst the Appellant was deported to India.   If  he
    could not meet both of those tests he would have  to  demonstrate  that
    there  were  otherwise  'exceptional  circumstances'  such   that   his
    deportation would be in violation of the terms of the Convention.

 7.  The  Appellant  attended  his  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing   without
    representation. The determination records that at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing "it emerged" that the Appellant had not seen  the  Respondent's
    bundle. One had apparently been sent to the solicitors who at one  time
    had been representing him, and many of the documents therein  had  been
    submitted by the Appellant himself, but the Judge acknowledged that the
    Appellant may not have had an opportunity to consider the  "social  and
    pre-sentence" reports (I take this  to  be  a  reference  to  the  Pre-
    Sentence Report, in Scotland prepared by social services as opposed  to
    a probation officer).  The Tribunal therefore  provided  the  Appellant
    with a short adjournment  so  that  he  could  read  the  bundle.  Upon
    resumption of the hearing the Appellant indicated that he  was  content
    to proceed.   He gave evidence and was questioned by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer (HOPO). At the close of evidence the HOPO  made  her
    submissions which were summarised, for the benefit of the Appellant, by
    the Tribunal.  The Appellant made "observations" on the  points  raised
    by the HOPO and the Tribunal reserved its decision.

 8. The determination was promulgated on the 24th August 2017. The Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal. Although it accepted that there was a family life
    between the Appellant and his son, and that it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for him to live in India (and thereby be separated from his mother  and
    extended maternal family  in  Scotland),  the  Tribunal  could  not  be
    satisfied in respect of the final test, namely that it would be "unduly
    harsh" to expect K to remain with his mother in the United Kingdom.

 9. The Appellant drafted his own grounds of appeal. They  are  in  essence
    that the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was unfair.  He submits
    that the Tribunal should, of its  own  motion,  considered  whether  to
    adjourn the proceedings  so  that  the  Appellant  could  obtain  legal
    advice. He now realises  that  he  should  have  applied  for  such  an
    adjournment himself. He did not understand that this was an option open
    to him, or how the court process works.   He was not  given  sufficient
    time to read and understand the Respondent's bundle.

10. Permission was  granted  on  the  15th  September  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge EM Simpson  who  was  satisfied  that  the  decision  to
    proceed with the appeal was arguably contrary to Rule 2 of the Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014 which provides that the  overriding  objective  is
    for the case to be determined fairly and justly.    Judge  Simpson  was
    particularly concerned because the case involved the fundamental  human
    rights of a young child: she  considered  it  arguable  that  in  those
    circumstances the importance of the objective was "heightened".



    Discussion and Findings

11. The grounds raise two related issues relating to fairness. The first is
    whether the Appellant was properly equipped  to  represent  himself  in
    such a case  and  whether  consideration  should  have  been  given  to
    adjourning to enable him to get legal advice  and  representation.  The
    second was whether, in its conduct of the hearing, the  Tribunal  acted
    fairly in giving the Appellant an appropriate level  of  assistance  so
    that he could properly present his case;  the  specific  issue  arising
    being whether the Appellant was  given  sufficient  time  to  read  and
    understand the documents in the Respondent's bundle.  As I explained to
    the Appellant, in these proceedings the burden lies on him to establish
    not just that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach,  but  that
    any error is such that the decision should be set aside.


12. As is customary in appeals involving allegations of unfair  trial,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in question has been  invited  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to comment on the allegations made in  the  grounds.  In  this
    case Judge Hemborough has done so. His response was as follows:

         "I have a good recall of this appeal and you will see that there is
         a full note of what transpired at the hearing in my record of
         proceedings which I ask you to read.


         This was a detained case.  The Appellant  was  unrepresented.    At
         the outset I undertook the usual introductions  and  explained  the
         purpose of the proceedings, my independence etc.


         Although the Appellant is an Indian national he had been in the  UK
         for 10 years and spoke English fluently  with  a  Scottish  accent.
         He said that had been legally represented whilst living in Scotland
         and that on  being  transferred  to  Harmondsworth,  presumably  in
         anticipation of his removal, he had  consulted  2  different  firms
         both of whom had told him that legal aid was not available and that
         he had no means to pay for representation.    I  explained  to  him
         that legal aid was subject to a merits test and  that  it  was  not
         unusual for unrepresented Appellants to appear in this jurisdiction
         and I that I would assist him in bringing out  the  merits  of  his
         appeal.  I refer to page 2 of my record "We will explore".


         In accordance with my usual practice  I  went  through  the  papers
         explaining what documents I had considered and asked him whether he
         wished to submit anything else.   It then emerged that he  had  not
         seen the Respondent's bundle.   It had been sent  to  his  Scottish
         solicitors.   As you will see from my record and  my  decision  the
         Respondent's bundle essentially comprised  documents  submitted  by
         the Appellant and his representatives many of which were duplicated
         in the Appellant's own bundle, the main exceptions being the  trial
         judge's sentencing remarks and the pre-sentence report.   Whilst  I
         was of the view that he would have been aware  of  the  content  of
         both documents I adjourned for 15 minutes in order that he could re-
         familiarise himself with these documents in  order  that  we  could
         engage in a meaningful discussion about what was said in them.    I
         see that page 1 of my note says "has seen everything else."


         On the resumption he said that he had read the  documents  and  was
         ready to proceed.    He did not ask for an adjournment  and  I  did
         not offer one.  Frankly I did not see any point an adjourning given
         that he had been unable to procure  legal  representation  hitherto
         and was unlikely to be able to do so if the case was adjourned.  In
         reality this was a  submissions  case  where  I  considered  I  was
         perfectly capable of exploring all of the  points  which  might  be
         taken in the Appellant's favour which is what I did in  the  course
         of the hearing which lasted an hour and a half minus the 15  minute
         break.  The duration is recorded in my note.


         Permission to appeal has been granted and you have asked me not  to
         comment upon the merits of the challenge being presented.    All  I
         will say is that I considered at the time that I  acted  fairly  in
         conducting the hearing in the manner described and I remain of that
         view."


13. Prior to calling the appeal on I ensured that a copy of these  comments
    was made available to the Appellant, and informed him that I would  not
    begin the hearing until he had time to read them.  I  received  a  call
    from the cells approximately half an hour after the  papers  were  sent
    down informing me that the Appellant was ready to proceed.




    Representation


14. As can be  seen  from  the  foregoing  the  Appellant  was  not  always
    unrepresented. At the date that the Respondent first  notified  him  of
    her intention to deport the Appellant was  represented  by  a  firm  of
    solicitors in Aberdeen called George Mathers & Co.   This firm  had  in
    fact  made  some  submissions  on  his  behalf  in  response  to   that
    notification, but had ceased to act sometime in 2017 when the Appellant
    had been transferred to immigration detention in England.    I can  see
    from the Record of Proceedings, and  indeed  Judge  Hemborough's  note,
    that the Appellant told  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  had  made
    attempts to get new representatives after that move. As he explained to
    me, he had wanted to get specialist  immigration  solicitors  -  George
    Mathers & Co were criminal practitioners.


15. The determination is silent as to why the matter was not  adjourned  to
    enable the Appellant to try and  instruct  new  solicitors.  Since  the
    Appellant  did  not  apply  for  an   adjournment   that   is   perhaps
    unsurprising.  Judge  Hemborough's  reasoning  in  not  adjourning  the
    matter of his own motion is set out in his response above. He  did  not
    see the point, since it did not appear on the facts that there was  any
    realistic  prospect   of   the   Appellant   managing   to   find   new
    representatives. He had already been turned down by two firms  at  that
    point.  At the hearing before me the Appellant confirmed that to be the
    case, and produced a list of firms that he had contacted, all  of  whom
    had declined to take the case on. The list  comprised  five  well-known
    specialist immigration practices and 'BID'.      The  Appellant  states
    that he has also called other firms but these are the ones that he  can
    remember speaking to.

16. I share Judge EM  Simpson's  concern  that  in  a  case  involving  the
    separation of a British child from his father it  would  be  preferable
    for the Tribunal to have the benefit of specialist legal submissions. I
    am unable to conclude on the facts of this case, however, that the lack
    of representation was a matter which should  have  led  to  the  matter
    being adjourned, or that the  Tribunal  could  have  done  anything  to
    influence the Appellant's ability to find new solicitors.  The  reasons
    that he was not represented is because,  as  he  candidly  acknowledged
    before me, twofold. He is without funds and  lacks  the  means  to  get
    funds; he has been told that his case does not qualify for  legal  aid.
    As  the  Appellant's  latest  list  of  rejections  illustrates,  Judge
    Hemborough was quite right when he concluded that there was no point in
    adjourning. The Appellant was very unlikely  to  be  able  to  persuade
    anyone to take on his case.   Adjourning  the  matter  would  not  have
    progressed his position at all;  it would simply  have  meant  that  he
    spent even longer in detention before appearing  unrepresented  in  his
    appeal.




    Assistance


17. In general terms I am  quite  satisfied  that  Judge  Hemborough  acted
    appropriately towards this unrepresented Appellant.   As his note makes
    clear, he was plainly aware that the Appellant might face  difficulties
    in presenting his case and he accordingly made allowances for that, for
    instance explaining matters  to  the  Appellant  and,  as  he  puts  it
    "exploring all of the points which might be taken  in  the  Appellant's
    favour".  Before me the Appellant did not contend otherwise.


18. Dealing with the specific issue of the  belatedly  served  Respondent's
    bundle I note that the Appellant was given approximately 15 minutes  to
    read the bundle.  This is referred to in the determination as follows:

         "It emerged that he had not seen a copy of the Respondent's bundle.
          Although [HOPO] Ms Hunjan confirmed that a copy had been  sent  to
         the solicitors who had been advising him in Scotland.   I  observed
         that the key documents in the bundle had either been  submitted  by
         the Appellant and he would thus have knowledge of their content, or
         when mirrored by documentation in his own bundle.  I noted  however
         that he may not have seen, or at  least  considered  recently,  the
         social and pre-sentence reports.  I therefore provided him  with  a
         copy of the bundle and adjourned the hearing  for  a  short  period
         whilst  he  re-familiarised  himself  with  the  content  of  those
         documents".

19. Before me the Appellant acknowledged that this was correct.  The  Judge
    had given him a copy and given him some time to  read  it.  The  bundle
    contains:


              i) Copy of the Appellant's Indian passport


             ii) The Pre-Sentence report


            iii) The Judge's sentencing remarks


             iv) Notice of liability to deportation dated 10th August 2016


              v)  Representations  dated  12th  August  2016  sent  on   the
                 Appellant's instructions by George Mathers & Co Solicitors,
                 and a further  letter  from  the  same  firm  with  various
                 enclosures, dated the 19th August 2016


             vi) Various items of  documentary  evidence  establishing  that
                 prior to his sentencing the  Appellant  had  lived  in  the
                 family   home,   including   council   tax   bills,    HMRC
                 correspondence and utility bills


            vii) The certificate of marriage between the Appellant  and  K's
                 mother


           viii) A letter dated 13th August 2016 said to be from K's mother,
                 in which she confirmed that prior to going  to  prison  the
                 Appellant was the main carer. She wrote that the  Appellant
                 continues to have regular contact with his son and that  it
                 would be  "detrimental  to  us  as  a  family"  should  the
                 Appellant be deported. She states that it is their hope  to
                 be reunited as a family once he is released from prison.


             ix) K's birth certificate


              x) Various education certificates relating to the Appellant


             xi) The Judgement of Lord Carloway, Lord Justice General in the
                 Appeal Court in Edinburgh on the 25th May 2017  in  respect
                 of  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  his  conviction  and
                 sentence


            xii) The Respondent's reasoned decision on deportation


20. The Appellant confirmed to me that of these  documents  the  only  ones
    with which he  was  not  entirely  familiar  prior  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing were items (ii) and  (iii),  those  being  the  social
    worker's (probation) report and the sentencing remarks.   Obviously  he
    had seen the social worker's report before, but had  not  read  it  for
    some time. He had directly heard the sentencing remarks from the  trial
    judge but had not had time to read and  process  them.    He  was  very
    familiar with items (i), (vi), (vii) (ix) and (x),  because  they  were
    all documents that he had sent to the  Home  Office  himself,  and  had
    indeed replicated in his own bundle.  Items (iv), (xi) and  (xii)  were
    also known to him.  His difficulty, as he put it, is that he was  given
    the bundle and time to read but he did not know  what  documents  might
    have been relevant and which ones were not. It ended up  with  him  not
    reading anything because he did not know where to start.

21. I have considerable sympathy for the Appellant. I accept what  he  told
    me about his confusion and inability to mentally process the  documents
    in the Respondent's bundle.   I have considered carefully whether those
    matters put him at such a disadvantage in presenting  his  case  as  to
    render this determination unsafe. I have to conclude that they did not.
    The fact that the Appellant had been convicted was not in  issue.  That
    was the factual basis for the decision to deport.  To that  extent  the
    sentencing  remarks  and  pre-sentence  report  were  of  very  limited
    significance. The only way that the  Appellant  could  succeed  in  his
    appeal was by showing that it would be "unduly harsh" for  his  son  to
    remain in this country without him. Neither of those documents were  of
    any assistance to him in that regard and there is nothing  sensible  he
    could have said about those documents that  might  have  affected  that
    outcome.  I am quite satisfied that  in  approaching  this  appeal  the
    First-tier Tribunal kept in  mind  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented and that it took care to focus  on  any  aspects  of  the
    evidence that might have assisted the Appellant.


22. Unrepresented litigants and appellants now appear with daily  frequency
    in courts and tribunals all over the  country.  There  will  be  cases,
    perhaps many cases, where their  lack  of  professional  representation
    puts them at such a profound disadvantage that it will be necessary  to
    adjourn. This however was not one of those cases.  There was, first, no
    realistic prospect of the Appellant managing to secure the services  of
    a solicitor.  Second,  and  more  importantly,  this  was  not  a  case
    involving complex legal argument. The Tribunal was faced with a  simple
    question of fact: what would the impact of the Appellant's  removal  be
    on his son?  As the Appellant candidly explained, he had not  seen  his
    son for some time. His former partner, the  child's  mother,  had  been
    bringing him to prison but  these  visits  had  dwindled  and,  as  the
    Appellant acknowledges,  she  does  not  appear  to  be  interested  in
    maintaining K's relationship with his father. Before me  the  Appellant
    said  that  even  telephone  contact,  facilitated  by   K's   maternal
    grandmother, was now intermittent. The boy was living with  his  mother
    and her new partner and it is difficult to foresee that any  meaningful
    contact will be resumed.    Those were the facts that the Tribunal  was
    required to weigh in the balance against the strong public interest  in
    deportation.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  a  professional  immigration
    practitioner could have persuaded the Tribunal to take any  view  other
    than the one that it very fairly reached. Whilst it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" to expect K to go to India with his father, it was not,  in  all
    the circumstances, unduly harsh for him to remain in Scotland with  his
    mother.



    Decisions and Directions


23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not flawed for  legal  error
    and is upheld.

24. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                      8.2.18




                           -----------------------
[1] Mr Mills, the Senior Presenting Officer instructed to appear for the
Secretary of State for the Home Department fell ill over the weekend
preceding this Monday morning hearing and was unable to attend. He
requested that the matter be adjourned and in the alternative made
submissions in writing.

