
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08888/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/08889/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Field House via   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Skype                                |                                     |
|On 5th February 2021                 |On 09th March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     CB
                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Mavrantonis, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants, with permission, appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Griffith promulgated on 6th March 2020.  The hearing was conducted at
Taylor House on 20th February 2020 relating to this Iranian husband and
wife born on 27th September 1950 and 29th December 1951 respectively and
who have two adult children living in the UK who hold dual British-Iranian
nationality.

Both appellants last entered the United Kingdom on a five year multi-entry
visit visa on 2nd August 2018.  Prior to that they had been visiting the
country lawfully as visitors for approximately twenty years.  On 10th
October 2018 they made an application to the Secretary of State for leave
to remain on compassionate grounds.  That application was refused on 2nd
May 2019 with an in country right of appeal, which was dismissed by the
First-tier Tribunal in March 2020.

The grounds for permission to appeal were made as follows.

Ground 1. The judge's finding was perverse; family life and real obstacles
for dual British-Iranians.  Miss SB (S) was a dual British-Iranian national
who had lived in the United Kingdom for the last 24 years and Miss FB (F)
was also a dual British-Iranian who had lived in the country for the last
fifteen years.

Nonetheless, the Tribunal found that there was something more than normal
emotional ties at paragraph 87 and that there was family life between CB,
SM, SB and FB in accordance with Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

It was pleaded that there would be very significant obstacles to the
appellants integration in Iran further to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and/or
exceptional circumstances with reference to GEN.3.2 because at present
their two daughters could not visit them in Iran.  The appellants relied on
the most up-to-date guidance published by the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office (FCO) which was last updated one day before the hearing on 19th
February 2020.  This guidance was clear that in the case of dual British-
Iranian nationals even without any political profile the advice is against
all travel to Iran.

The judge appears to have had regard to the FCO guidance at paragraph 87
and in a synoptic assessment at paragraph 100 recognised "that there are
risks for dual nationals" but referred to FB's return to Iran in 2018 as
one of the reasons why visits could continue.  The judge appeared to imply
that because FB visited Iran in 2018 the FCO advice was less authoritative
or that FB was willing to take the risk.

It was submitted that the judge misdirected herself.  It was never disputed
that both daughters had in the past visited their parents in Iran but the
authoritative evidence of the FCO published on 19th February 2020 was that
if they were a dual national in Iran they should "consider leaving".  On
the contrary, the judge found that SB and FB could visit Iran.  That
finding was perverse.

The judge had arguably erred in law by placing little or no weight on the
authoritative guidance of the FCO.

Ground 2. The judge erred in law because COVID-19 was evident by the date
of promulgation.  The FCO guidance was updated on 19th February 2020 and
was the first to introduce advice on coronavirus in broader terms,
referring to the "first confirmed cases in Iran".  The matter was
promulgated on 6th March.  The appellants did not rely on any submissions
regarding COVID-19 at the hearing as it had not evolved into the
extraordinary disease.  However, a short general reference by the FCO to
the then endemic COVID-19 was found at AB 658 and 660 and a reasonably
informed First-tier Tribunal Judge could have taken judicial notice of the
pandemic.  The judge had ability to consider reasonable evidence relating
to the circumstances of the case until she promulgated the decision on 6th
March 2020.  The Tribunal was referred to Secretary of State for the Home
Department v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 where at paragraph 25 LJ
Wilson held: "There has to come a time, however, at which the opportunity
for judicial survey of up-to-date evidence stops.  Under our system, and
save in exceptional circumstances, it stops upon promulgation of the
Tribunal's determination."

The Tribunal ought to accept that any change to the FCO's guidance between
20th February and 6th March 2020 could reasonably have been admitted and
could have been reflected in the judge's final determination.  The guidance
was a source as already relied on in the bundle.  On 1st March the FCO
updated its advice, suggesting that:

"... cases have been confirmed in several other countries, including Iran,
where there have been a number of fatalities"

"As of 1 March [2020], dependants and some staff from the British Embassy
are being withdrawn from Iran due to the ongoing coronavirus outbreak"

"A large number of airlines, including Emirates and Oman Airlines, have
announced a suspension to and from Iran".

The pandemic had made the circumstances of this case special and unusual.
Both appellants had a compromised immune system, CB is a diabetic and has a
pacemaker installed and was diagnosed with breast cancer.

With reference to RK (Algeria) it was arguable that the judge materially
erred in law by not taking into account the extraordinary developments of
COVID.  Reliance was placed on paragraph 34 of TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India)
v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109,
which confirmed that what is relevant for assessing removal was the date of
the hearing and RK (Algeria) principles arguably extended this to the date
of promulgation.  It was submitted that whether the Secretary of State was
generally removing migrants due to coronavirus or not was of secondary
importance.  The real legal question for the Tribunal was whether at the
time of promulgation the appellants' obstacles in returning to Iran met the
threshold so as to render the Secretary of State's decision
disproportionate under Article 8.

At the hearing before me, which was conducted remotely by Skype, the
daughter Miss S attended on behalf of her parents and stated that her
parents were not with her but with her sister because, four weeks ago her
sister had given birth to a baby and they were helping her.  An interpreter
was present.

Mr Mavrantonis submitted that the crucial section of the judge's
determination centred on paragraph 106 where the judge accepted that there
was family life.  At paragraph 86 the judge recognised that there were
risks but also noted that there was a trip taken to Iran in 2018 by one of
the adult daughters. The situation had now changed.

I refused to admit evidence of facts which had taken place subsequent to
the determination being promulgated on 6th March 2020. The focus was on
whether there was an error of law which was material in the determination
before me.  There was no misunderstanding by the judge of the underlying
facts existing at the time of the hearing or the determination E and R v
SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

Mr Mavrantonis submitted that the determination did not properly address
the difficulties outlined by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on the
risks to dual nationals visiting Iran.  He pointed to the Foreign and
Commonwealth advice published on 19th February 2020 which highlighted the
risk even to dual nationals without a political profile.  Further, the
judge relied on daughter FB visiting Iran to see her parents in 2018 but
that assumption was problematic because the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
had changed its advice since 2019.  There were reasons why people were
unlawfully detained in Iran.  He accepted that the archive in relation to
the Foreign and Commonwealth Reports had not been submitted from 2018 and
that it was not clear as to the nature of the change of advice, but Mr
Mavrantonis submitted that there indeed had been a change of advice because
of the experiences of current British dual nationals in Iran.  The judge
had stated at paragraph 107 that family life may continue and the daughter
could visit but there was no explicit analysis as highlighted by Judge
Sheridan on granting permission as to how they could visit or whether it
was proportionate in the absence of such visits.

The advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office was weighty advice
against visits and this would have an impact on the family life which had
not been assessed.

Mr Mavrantonis took issue with paragraph 21 of Mr Melvin's written
submissions where he had stated that the assessment in relation to the
visit was a tiny part of the proportionality assessment.  There was no
clear finding on the Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice and as a result
the assessment on proportionality must be flawed.

Mr Mavrantonis also submitted that there was a perversity in the judge's
findings.  I did point out to Mr Mavrantonis that the threshold for
perversity was very high, which he acknowledged although he submitted that
it was impossible for the appellants' daughters to continue to visit under
the present circumstances.

In relation to his second ground, which he acknowledged was less forceful,
he relied on RK (Algeria).  Both appellants had health difficulties and the
first appellant had diabetes and a pacemaker and the second appellant had
breast cancer.  The COVID pandemic had initiated prior to the promulgation
of the decision and it was an error of law for the judge to fail to
consider this.  It was accepted that Article 3 was not argued but, and this
was not the strongest ground but nonetheless the pandemic had commenced
prior to the promulgation.

Mr Melvin relied on his written submissions and agreed that there was a
"not" missing from the final paragraph 24.  It was submitted that whether
or not the family were available to visit was not a prominent issue before
the judge.  The judge found that family life could continue as it had done
hitherto, by normal means of communication and the proportionality
assessment in the decision was open to the judge.  Mr Melvin submitted that
he was "amazed" that Judge Sheridan had granted permission.  The
representatives had not submitted any previous advice to show that there
had been any significant change in the Foreign and Commonwealth advice.

In relation to ground 2 the solicitors should have written posthearing to
raise the point in relation to the pandemic if that was their wish.

Analysis

Mr Melvin's submissions, relying on his Rule 24 reply, noted that the
appellants were both citizens of Iran who both arrived on visit visas on
2nd August 2018 and subsequently on 27th September 2018, made an
application to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules as adult
dependants of their immediate family in the UK.  These were refused by the
Secretary of State on 2nd May 2019 as they did not meet the requirements of
the Immigration Rules and it was not accepted there were serious obstacles
to their integration or return to Iran or that there were exceptional
circumstances that would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences on them
or their family members on return.

He submitted that the determination and reasons given by the judge were
clear and sustainable.  She treated the appellants as vulnerable witnesses
in the light of the medical evidence.  She also considered the evidence of
the two daughters and the psychological report of Dr Saddik.  The judge,
although making no specific finding, was concerned about the intention of
the visit given in the visit visa applications as the subsequent settlement
visa applications were made two months after their arrival in the UK.  The
judge considered the adult dependent relative Immigration Rules, noting
that there were no in country provisions within the Rules.

The judge properly directed herself in accordance with paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) and the case law of Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2016] 4 WLR 152 and R (Parveen) [2018] EWCA Civ 932 [2018]
there is an exacting standard and threshold to show very significant
obstacles to return, and a bare assertion that there is no one to support
will not meet the evidential standard.

Both appellants held down jobs in Iran and were in receipt of their own
pensions and both had medical treatment in the United Kingdom although
their conditions were not life-threatening, and they had both been able to
access medical care in Iran.

At paragraphs 99 to 100 of the determination, on the evidence, there was a
finding that the level of dependency was a gross exaggeration.  At
paragraph 100 the judge acknowledged the risk to dual nationals but noted
that the daughter F returned as recently as 2018 and there was no evidence
she came to the adverse attention of the authorities.

The appellants' medical conditions were not so severe that they needed
nursing care or round the clock supervision and at 103 the judge rejected
the argument on significant obstacles within the Rules, going on to
consider the circumstances outside the Rules found that return was
proportionate.

There was significant confusion over where the appellants lived but the
judge gave them the benefit of the doubt that they were living with
daughter F in London despite being registered with a GP in Portsmouth.

The judge accepted that both daughters S and F provided financial and
emotional support and that family life did exist and accepted that they
were a close family but crucially stated that: "Even if their removal would
be sufficient an interference to engage Article 8, I am not, however,
satisfied that the interference would be disproportionate."

The judge repeated her findings at paragraphs 90 to 106 at paragraph 107,
specifically addressing the PTSD findings, attaching little weight to it
for the reasons given and as part of her summing up the judge stated: "The
family can continue to keep in touch by telephone and messaging and S and F
can visit."  It was submitted that the "can visit" remark was made as a
"tiny part of an assessment of proportionality that is overwhelmingly one
way".  The decision was complete and thoughtful and legally sustainable.

It was a matter for the two daughters if they visited their parents in Iran
but what was crystal-clear from the decision was whether they visited or
not was not, in any way, a prominent issue in the decision dismissing the
appeal.

Analysis

Turning to the second ground first in relation to the onset of the COVID
pandemic, the decision was promulgated on 6th March 2020 following a
hearing date on 20th February 2020.  Although there were concerns in
relation to COVID-19 on 20th February 2020, by 6th March 2020 the
seriousness of the pandemic was not abundantly evident and the national
lockdown did not occur until 23rd March 2020, a fact of which I take
judicial notice because it is so obvious.

I am not persuaded that the judge can be criticised in any way for failing
to factor into her determination a pandemic that had not been declared and
indeed, as Mr Mavrantonis rightly conceded, that evidence was not before
the judge. The second ground is unsustainable.

I turn to a consideration of the proportionality assessment.

The focus of the criticism was that the judge failed to factor into the
determination an assessment of the risk to the daughters should they return
to see their parents in Iran should the parents be removed.

It is important to read the decision as a whole.  Lowe v SSHD [2021] EWCA
Civ 62 reminds the Upper Tribunal to be cautious about interfering with the
judgments of the First-tier Tribunal and merely because the Upper Tribunal
may decide an appeal differently does not necessarily justify an
interference where there is no error of law.

It is right to observe that the judge did find that there was family life
but noted that the parents, given their extensive medical histories, were
registered with a GP in Southsea near Portsmouth, although they claimed to
live with their daughter in London.  The judge gave the benefit of the
doubt to the appellants that they were visiting/living with their daughter
in London.  I do note from the medical records that both appellants had
regular examinations at their GP practice until immediately before the
First-tier Tribunal hearing or at least the conclusion of the medical notes
provided, and the judge noted that the first appellant gave evidence that
he had a hospital appointment at a hospital in Portsmouth on 7th February
2020 [32].

The judge did address the central tenets of the appeals which were that the
appellants relied on the assistance of their daughters.  At paragraph 60
the judge also noted that during the day the parents were on their own as
both daughters worked; she found that the level of dependency was not as
claimed and at [99] stated

         'The written evidence of the appellants and their daughters was
         that the appellants need the help and support of their daughter to
         carry out their ay-to-day activities. The oral evidence of the
         first appellant, however, was that he was able to undertake his own
         personal hygiene tasks such as bathing and that he helps his wife
         prepare meals.  There is no evidence that either suffers from any
         or any serious mobility issues such that they cannot wash or dress
         themselves or prepare meals or feed themselves.  They are left
         alone during the day in S' house when she is at work.  There is no
         evidence that they have suffered any accidents or any incident
         there to raise concerns about their ability to look after
         themselves.  I therefore find the description of the level of
         dependency described in the written evidence to be a gross
         exaggeration'.

The judge addressed the medical issues, noting that healthcare was
available in Iran, and that the appellants had their own sources of income
from occupational pensions [100] and found that the appellants had had the
benefit in Iran of home helps to assist them with housework and domestic
chores [101].  She also noted that their medical conditions "are not so
severe that they require nursing care or round the clock supervision".

It was found the appellants could not comply with the Immigration Rules for
adult dependent relatives but in relation to paragraph 276ADE, having
directed herself legally appropriately, the judge, when considering very
significant obstacles, found appellants had not shown any hardship or
difficulty

"or anything else which reaches the threshold.  They will be returning to
their home country where they have lived all their lives, where they have
their own home, family and friends, they can access funds and medical
treatment and from which they have been absent for a relatively brief
period".  [103].

The judge proceeded to find no unjustifiably harsh consequences to their
return at paragraph 104 and that is the backdrop to the assessment on
proportionality.

The judge was aware of the length of time the daughters had lived in the UK
, and apart from their parents, and the circumstances of their returns to
Iran.  The second appellant gave evidence which was recorded at [37] that
her daughters 'both escaped from Iran as a result of persecution' and again
at [38] that 'Her children cannot relocate because they escaped from Iran'.
  The judge noted that daughter S had lived in the UK for more than 24
years and there was oral evidence that during that period she had not
contacted her parents for a period of ten years [45].    The second
daughter, F,  had arrived in the UK in 2005 and has been here for fifteen
years and the appellants did not live with her.  The first appellant stated
on one occasion F had been detained and prevented from returning to the UK
for four months, [17].  The judge was fully aware that S gave evidence that
she had been advised not to return to Iran,  [57].  The judge also noted at
 [62] that S had travelled to Iran in 2013 when she had her passport
confiscated. Nonetheless it would seem she had returned. Indeed, S said she
was last in Iran five years ago and her sister was there about three years
ago [57].

The judge clearly knew that the parents were visiting their daughters and
their residence was supposedly temporary.

At paragraph 107 the judge accepted that the family

"is a close and loving one and it is not surprising that the second
appellant in particular falls into a depression when she returns to Iran
and is separated from her children, nor is it surprising that the children
worry about their parents.  The pain of separation is natural and to be
expected, but there is nothing exceptional about it.  The family can
continue to keep in touch by telephone and messaging and S and F can visit.
 It is also open to the appellants to make applications for entry clearance
in the appropriate category."

The judge thus found family life, but the strength of the family life was
in the context that the family had lived apart and the daughters had formed
their lives in the UK and the parents had each other in Iran.

Against that background the judge factored in the travel information in
relation to Iran.  The judge was aware of the Foreign and Commonwealth
advice before her and was aware of the difficulties.  The judge
specifically referenced the guidance at [86].

The advice states:

         "However, for British-Iranian dual nationals the FCDO continue to
         advise against all travel to Iran.  If you are in Iran, you should
         consider carefully your need to remain, and your presence is not
         essential, you should consider leaving."

    The advice goes on:

"If you decide your presence in Iran is essential, you should maintain a
low profile and keep up-to-date with developments, including via this
travel advice. ...  Avoid any rallies, marches and processions, keep away
from military sites and follow the instructions of the local authorities at
all times."

The advice proceeds: "There is a risk that British nationals, and a
significantly higher risk that British-Iranian dual nationals, could be
arbitrarily detained or arrested in Iran."

The guidance included the phrase "FCO continue to advise against all travel
to Iran".

There was no indication of the previous travel guidance that was before the
judge and therefore I consider that it was open to the judge to conclude
that the daughters had travelled to Iran previously and one of them had
indeed travelled in 2018.  Bearing in mind the oral evidence given was that
the daughters had escaped from Iran because of persecution and yet had
visited Iran the judge was entitled to give the weight she did to the FCO
guidance. The FCO guidance is just that - guidance.

Even if that were not the case, the judge found that the family could
continue to keep in touch by telephone and messaging.  In view of the
nature of the family life over time and between adults and which had been
described in detail, that conclusion was open to the judge.  The family had
lived apart for many years, the parents moved between sisters and both of
the daughters worked during the day.   Further the parents had each other,
their own income and were self sufficient in terms of care.

Additionally, the judge found the appellants could make applications for
entry clearance in the appropriate category. The judge was careful not to
prejudge the success or otherwise of any future applications.

The judge thus was fully aware of the risks to British-Iranian dual
nationals as cited at paragraph 100 but also factored in and carefully
weighed the strength of the family life.  All of the parties involved are
adults and it is quite clear that the judge must have taken into account
that they were separated for many years.  I repeat, the second appellant's
evidence was that the daughters had 'escaped' from Iran but in fact they
had nonetheless returned.

Particularly, at paragraph 109 the judge finds:

"The appellants came here as visitors with no expectation of being allowed
to remain.  I have been unable to identify any exceptional circumstances,
whether individual or cumulative, sufficient to outweigh the public
interest in their removal or circumstances that result in unjustifiably
harsh consequences to them or their family members in the UK.  Accordingly,
I do not find the decision of the respondent to be disproportionate."

Against the background of the judge's findings the judgment displays no
material error of law.  The submission before the Tribunal referred to the
Foreign and Commonwealth advice was that the FCO's ability to provide
consular support was extremely limited and the risk applied to all dual
British-Iranian nationals irrespective of profile.  There was no indication
that the judge failed to acknowledge this submission but merely balancing
the strength of the family life against the requirements of immigration
control, having noted that the appellants could not comply with the
immigration rules,  the removal was found not to be disproportionate.
Perversity has a high threshold which is not made out here and there is no
misdirection in law.  At paragraph 109 the judge refers, in terms, to the
correct legal test of 'unjustifiably harsh consequences' to the appellants
or their family members in the UK.

There is no material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision before the First-tier  Tribunal  will  stand  and  the  appeals
remain dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 3rd March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





