
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08471/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2018                          |On 08 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               Mr shebul miah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mustafa, Solicitor, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge D. Ross sitting at Taylor House on 21 March 2018) dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    leave to remain on the grounds of family and private  life  established
    in the UK since his illegal entry in 2004.  Judge Ross found  that  the
    appellant could not meet the substantive requirements of Appendix FM as
    his wife did not earn enough.  The Judge also found that the  appellant
    did not meet the terms of paragraph 276ADE and that EX.1 did not  apply
    as family  life  could  continue  in  Bangladesh,  and  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances which would justify a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on five grounds.   On  9
    October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  gave  his  reasons  for
    granting the appellant permission to appeal on Grounds  1  and  2,  but
    refusing the appellant permission to appeal on the remaining grounds:

         "The grounds argue that the Judge did not  adequately  engage  with
         the sponsor's medical evidence. Having referred to the evidence, no
         findings were made. The Appellant had also  applied  under  the  10
         year route and relied on insurmountable obstacles to the  sponsor's
         living elsewhere which had  not  been  approached  in  a  practical
         manner.  It is also argued that the  Judge  had  not  engaged  with
         paragraph 276ADE, article 8 and misapplied the reasonableness test.

         Grounds 3, 5 and 6 (there is no Ground 4) have  no  merit.  If  the
         Appellant's circumstances do not meet the insurmountable  obstacles
         test then there would be no basis for  going  further  and  finding
         compelling circumstances not addressed in the Rules.  Grounds 1 and
         2 amount to the same thing - the Sponsor's medical  conditions  are
         insurmountable obstacles to relocation.  With  hesitation  I  grant
         leave on these 2 grounds only, as it is arguable that the Judge did
         not adequately engage with the evidence, but it is not  clear  that
         her medical needs cannot be met adequately in Bangladesh -  if  the
         evidence does not show that, then  the  Appellant  will  still  not
         succeed."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Mustafa developed Grounds 1 and 2.  He characterised the appeal
    as raising a narrow issue.  He submitted that the Judge had  failed  to
    engage with relevant documentary evidence - in  particular,  a  serious
    incident report relating to the  loss  of  the  partner's  baby  on  26
    January 2016 due to foetal abnormalities, and  the  partner  having  to
    undergo  a  total  abdominal  hysterectomy.  The  Judge  had  also  not
    addressed a recent letter from the partner's GP dated 11 April 2018, in
    which the GP stated that the partner suffered from  low  mood  and  was
    taking anti-depressant medication for this.  Mr Mustafa submitted  that
    the Judge had not addressed the issue of the  partner's  depression  in
    the context of EX.1.  He submitted that, if the Judge had engaged  with
    the fact that the appellant's partner  was  traumatised  and  suffering
    depression,  he  could  have  found  that  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple's relocation to Bangladesh.

 4. Mr Clarke submitted that no error was made out.  In order for the Judge
    to find that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  relocation  on
    medical grounds, he would also have needed  to  find  that  appropriate
    treatment and medication would not  be  available  to  the  partner  in
    Bangladesh.  The serious incident report was completely irrelevant,  as
    it concerned an  internal  investigation  by  the  NHS  into  what  had
    happened to the partner and the child,  with  a  view  to  establishing
    whether their care and treatment by the NHS had been in accordance with
    best practice.  The Judge had clearly  taken  account  of  the  medical
    evidence, and the Judge had  clearly  accepted  that  the  partner  was
    depressed.

 5. In reply, Mr Mustafa conceded that treatment would be available to  the
    partner in Bangladesh. However, he submitted that  this  was  only  one
    factor in assessing whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    relocation.

Discussion

 6. Ground 1, as pleaded, is  that  the  Judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    extensive documentary evidence that was submitted,  including  evidence
    of the sponsor's "medical report and history".

 7. At paragraph [6] of his decision,  Judge  Ross  acknowledged  that  the
    evidence presented at the hearing included the fact that the couple had
    had a child from their relationship who died  after  approximately  one
    month, and that this had left both of them traumatised,  and  they  had
    been suffering from depression since the loss of their  baby:  "Because
    of his wife's poor medical condition he helps her with  her  day-to-day
    activities such as cooking, cleaning, and also comforts her.  She  does
    not have anyone to care for her except him.  He said that,  because  of
    her condition, his wife is unable to leave the UK."

 8. At paragraph [8], the Judge recorded the appellant's oral evidence that
    his wife  was  taking  some  painkillers  and  that  she  was  mentally
    stressed.  At paragraph [9], the  Judge  recorded  the  partner's  oral
    evidence that she had been suffering from low mood, poor  concentration
    and poor appetite since she had lost their baby.

 9. At paragraph [11], the Judge recorded the partner's  answer  in  cross-
    examination as to why she could not relocate  to  Bangladesh  with  her
    husband: "She did not want to go to Bangladesh.  She said she needs her
    husband.  She also stated that she does not like Bangladesh.  When  she
    went there she got food poisoning."

10. The Judge addressed the issue  of  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to married life being carried on in Bangladesh at  paragraphs
    [15]-[18].  The Judge reached  the  following  conclusion:  "I  do  not
    consider in this case that the appellant has proved  that  he  and  his
    wife would face very serious hardship if returned to Bangladesh.  I  do
    appreciate that his wife has lived in effect her whole life in the  UK,
    but she is of Bangladeshi ethnicity, she has relatives in Bangladesh as
    does the appellant, and the rules do not require the Secretary of State
    to take into account the preferences of applicants in  connection  with
    the issue of where they wish  to  live.  ...   I  appreciate  that  the
    appellants do not want to  live  in  Bangladesh,  and  that  moving  to
    Bangladesh will cause  difficulties  for  them,  however  they  married
    knowing that the appellant had no right to live in the UK.  I take into
    account the tragic loss  of  their  baby,  but  nonetheless  I  do  not
    consider that the appellant has been able to satisfy  the  requirements
    of paragraph EX.1 and EX.2 for the reasons that I have given."

11. The Judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  refusal  decision  was
    proportionate. At paragraph [24], the Judge directed  himself  that  he
    had to consider, "the arguments on both sides of  the  balance  sheet",
    following Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60; and, on the Article 8(1)  side  of
    the balance sheet, he  took  into  account  that  the  appellant,  "has
    suffered a tragedy of a baby dying, and his  wife  is  still  depressed
    about the loss of the child".

12. When addressing EX.1, the Judge did not make a specific finding on  the
    up to date medical evidence concerning the partner's mental state.  But
    he expressly accepted that "the tragic loss" of the baby was a relevant
    consideration in evaluating whether the requirements of EX,1 were  met;
    and, albeit in the context of a later discussion of proportionality, he
    expressly found that the partner was depressed, thereby indicating  his
    acceptance of the latest evidence from the partner's GP.

13. It was not incumbent on the Judge to make a  specific  finding  on  the
    serious incident report. The matters canvassed in this report were  not
    a matter of dispute as between the appellant and  the  respondent,  and
    they did not have a bearing on EX.1. The appellant was  the  person  to
    whom the partner was primarily looking to  for  emotional  support  and
    consolation following the tragic loss of  their  baby.  His  comforting
    presence was going to continue in Bangladesh if she accompanied him  to
    Bangladesh. There was no reason to suppose that she would be unable  to
    access in Bangladesh the same or similar medication that she was  being
    prescribed by her GP in the UK.

14. Ground 2 is that the Judge acted unfairly in  interpreting  EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM in "a purely literal way" as opposed to in a  sensible  and
    practical manner.  It is pleaded that the partner's presence in the  UK
    and her medical condition;  the  appellant's  fear  of  persecution  in
    Bangladesh; his and his partner's family and private lives in  the  UK;
    his partner's lack of any meaningful ties to Bangladesh; his  partner's
    language barrier in Bangladesh; and his partner's tragic  circumstances
    in the UK, meant that it was "practically impossible" for  his  partner
    to relocate with him to  Bangladesh,  with  the  consequence  that  the
    Judge's consideration of  EX.1(b)  was  "tainted  with  illegality  and
    unfairness" as the Judge had used a misconceived interpretation of  the
    law to arrive at his decision.

15. I consider that Ground 2 is wholly unmeritorious.  The Judge  correctly
    directed himself as to the law  at  paragraphs  [15]  to  [17]  of  his
    decision by express reference to the definition  contained  in  EX.2  -
    which defines "insurmountable obstacles" as not being  obstacles  which
    are literally insurmountable but as being very significant difficulties
    which cannot be overcome or which will entail very serious hardship for
    the applicant or their partner - and by reference to Agyarko  -v-  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11.  Ground 2 is manifestly no more than an  expression  of
    disagreement with findings that were reasonably open to  the  Judge  on
    the evidence for the reasons which he gave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 2 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

