
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08378/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2021                               |On 8 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                             LIVINGSTONE DANIELS
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Liberia who was born  on  31  December
    1978, appealed on human  rights  grounds  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Foudy) against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    his application to remain under Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended). The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  3  September  2019,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the  appellant  complains  that
    the judge erred in law when applying the suitability provisions  of  S-
    LTR-1.6:

    S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not  fall   within   paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3.   to   1.5.),   character,
    associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them  to
    remain in the UK.

    The appellant asserts that the judge [7]  failed  to  make  a  holistic
    assessment of the appellant's circumstances and instead  relied  solely
    upon  the  appellant's  criminal  convictions  in  2008  and  2017   in
    exercising the discretion to refuse leave to  remain  under  S-LTR-1.6.
    The appellant was not a persistent offender and  the  convictions  were
    not per se enough to justify the exercise  of  discretion  against  the
    appellant.

 3. It is true that at [7] the judge cites only the appellant's convictions
    when referring to S-LTR-1.6. However, the decision  needs  to  read  as
    whole. In particular, paragraph [6] and [7] need to read  together.  At
    [6], the  judge  sets  out  some  of  the  'notable  instances  of  the
    [appellant's] dishonesty remarking that these are 'too numerous to  set
    out in full.' She records that the appellant has made two false  asylum
    claims, has relied on several  false  documents  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and to work here, had absconded after  a  second  Tribunal  had
    found him to be dishonest. She notes that the appellant's  partner,  Ms
    Eze, had undermined her own credibility by assisting the  appellant  in
    the latter deceit. The judge's analysis at [6] is comprehensive;  there
    was no need for her to repeat what she had just said when applying  the
    specific  components  of  the  rule  concerning  suitability   (S-LTR).
    Further, at [7] the judge also  finds  that  the  appellant  should  be
    refused leave to remain  by  reference  to  sub-paragraphs  4.2  (false
    representations) and 4.4 (failure to pay litigation  costs  awarded  to
    the Home Office). As with conduct, including  convictions,  refusal  of
    leave to remain under 4.2 and 4.4 are  discretionary  ('S-LTR.4.1.  The
    applicant may be refused on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs
    S-LTR.4.2. to S-LTR.4.5. apply.') However, when the decision is read as
    whole, the fact that the appellant may be refused leave not just  under
    one, but under three separate provisions is, frankly, pretty damning on
    any analysis. In my opinion, the judge has, across her entire decision,
    given  ample  reasons  for  agreeing  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment that the appellant should be refused leave to remain on  the
    grounds of suitability. She has not fallen into error  for  the  reason
    advanced in the grounds.

 4. The  second  ground  concerns  the  judge's  application  of  EX1.  The
    appellant asserts that the judge erred  by  failing  to  apply  EX1  in
    terms,  failing  in  particular  to   determine   whether   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and Ms Eze living together in
    Liberia.

 5. I  do  not  find  that  the  judge  has  erred  in  law.  I  note  that
    insurmountable obstacles is defined in EX1  as  'the  very  significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in
    continuing their family life together outside the UK  and  which  could
    not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
    or their partner.' Although the judge has not referred in terms to EX1,
    she has (i)  at [11] clearly found, by reference  to  paragraph  276ADE
    (Private Life), that there exist no very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integrating into Liberia or Nigeria and (ii) has  discussed
    in detail the circumstances of the appellant's relationship with Ms Eze
    at [12-13]. It is abundantly clear from the judge's findings  that  she
    considered that neither the circumstances she would encounter with  the
    appellant in Liberia or Nigeria nor her own ties to the United  Kingdom
    would prevent Ms Eze leaving with the appellant should she choose to do
    so. The judge did not find that the appellant  and  his  partner  would
    face circumstances which would come close to meeting the definition  of
    insurmountable obstacles in EX1 which I have quoted above.  In  is  not
    conceivable, in the light of her  findings,  that,  had  she  expressly
    considered whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the
    couple enjoying family life outside the United Kingdom, the judge would
    have concluded there such obstacles exist. It would have  been  helpful
    if the judge had applied the test in terms but any error which she  may
    have perpetrated is insufficient to justify setting aside her decision.
    If I were to remake the decision, applying the EX1 test  to  the  facts
    found by the judge, the outcome of the appeal would be the same.

 6. For the reasons I have given, the appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 7 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

