
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08544/2015
                                                               HU/08550/2015
                                                               HU/08557/2015
                                                               HU/08562/2015
                                                               HU/08564/2015


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th July 2017                  |On 14th July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MO, SO, SOO, ARO & ATO
                         (AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Symes, Counsel instructed by AJO Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all citizens of Nigeria.  The  proceedings  concern
    the status and interests of children. In order to protect the interests
    of the children I make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill  promulgated
    on 22 November 2016 whereby  the  judge  allowed  the  appeals  of  the
    respondents on the basis that the decisions of the Secretary of  State,
    to refuse the respondents  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    breached the respondents' Article 8 rights to family and  private  life
    in the United Kingdom.

 3. By a decision of 16th May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The permission is  granted
    in the following terms: -

         "2.       I  first  set  out  the  immigration  history  of   these
         appellants summary. The first appellant arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
         visitor on 22 September 2007 and overstayed. The 2nd appellant  had
         been issued with a visit Visa on 2 March 2005 and  overstayed.  The
         3rd and 4th appellants had leave,  again  as  visitors,  up  to  29
         February 2009 and they overstayed. The 5th appellant  was  born  in
         this country on the [ ] 2008 and she has never  left  the  UK.  The
         judge allowed the appeals of all 5 appellants. The appeals  of  the
         first, 2nd and 5th appellants were allowed under Article 8  outside
         the rules and  the  3rd  and  4th  appellants  were  allowed  under
         paragraph 276 ADE 1(iv). The 3rd and 4th appellants, on  the  basis
         of whom the 3 other appellants were allowed were primarily  allowed
         on the basis that they were being educated in the  United  Kingdom.
         The respondent complains that nowhere in the decision of the judges
         it evident that the judge has taken account of the decision of  the
         Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 874 which address the issues that arose in a  similar  case  to
         the one before him. In EV it was  held  that  the  desirability  of
         being educated at  public  expense  in  the  UK  did  not,  in  the
         circumstances of that case, outweigh the benefit to the children of
         remaining with their parents. The Court of Appeal  noted  that  'is
         just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the  world,  so  we
         cannot educate the world". The respondent has set out the ratio  of
         the Court of Appeal in EV and said that none of the  appellants  in
         this appeal is a British  citizen's  and  the  children  are  being
         educated at public expense. Put shortly, it is complained that  the
         judge has given too much weight to the details of  the  appellant's
         education and their desire  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
         respondent complains that the  judge  has  failed  to  apply  wider
         public interest issues and in particular to give weight to the poor
         immigration history of the first and 2nd appellants. These  grounds
         of appeal are clearly arguable so permission is granted.

 4. Permission to appeal having been granted, the appeals  appeared  before
    me to decide whether  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  original
    decision.

 5. As set out in the permission to  appeal  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd  and  4th
    respondents have entered the  United  Kingdom's  at  various  times  as
    visitors and overstayed. The first respondent, as indicated, entered on
    22 September 2007 and overstayed. The 3rd and 4th  respondents  entered
    with the first respondent on 22 September 2007 and overstayed.  At  the
    time of entry the 3rd respondent would have been 6 years of age and the
    4th respondent would have been 4 years of age.

 6. The 2nd respondent entered on 2 March 2005 and overstayed.

 7. The 5th and youngest respondent was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    August 2008 but appears never to have had any leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. There is no reference anywhere to any attempt by any of the respondents
    to regularise their status or contact the Home Office in any way  until
    the present application made on 15 May 2015. By that time the  3rd  and
    4th respondents had been in the United Kingdom for over 7 years.

 9. In approaching the issues the judge had identified that the 3rd and 4th
     respondents fell for consideration under paragraph 276ADE  (iv)  which
    provides:-

         '276 ADE Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
         on the grounds of private life

         276ADE (1) the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3 and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM ; and

         ...

         iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in  the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK.'

10. It is suggested in respect of  the  3rd  and  4th  appellants  that  in
    considering that criteria consideration has only been given to the fact
    that they are in education and accordingly no  consideration  has  been
    given to the guidance given in the case of EV (Philippines) & others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

11. The following paragraphs from the judgement of EV are  relied  upon  in
    the grounds of appeal: -

         "58.     in my judgement, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

         59.      On the facts of ZH it was not  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because  the
         family would be separated and the children would be deprived of the
         right to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60.      That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in  the  best  interest  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

12. There was much within the facts as outlined which are relevant  to  the
    present proceedings. The only factor that was of significance  was  the
    fact that the children may  have  had  a  right  to  remain  but  their
    commitment appeared to be to the education system and nothing else.

13. In the present case besides the various school reports  that  had  been
    submitted on behalf of the 3rd and 4th  appellants  there  was  also  a
    report from a social worker, Mr Livingston McKoy, a social worker  with
    25 years experience in dealing with children's  cases.  The  judge  had
    noted that Mr McKoy's report  had  commented  professionally  upon  the
    interests  of  the  children  highlighting  that  the  children  needed
    permanency  and  long-term  security.  Mr  McKoy   had   assessed   the
    circumstances that would face the  family  if  they  were  returned  to
    Nigeria in assessing the best interests of the children and  assessment
    had been made not only on the basis of what the children had  said  but
    also on the basis of information provided by teachers and  others  that
    were in contact with the children. Of significance in Mr McKoy's report
    were the references to the depth of  connections  and  roots  that  the
    children had in the community in which they lived, educational,  social
    and otherwise. Mr McKoy also attended and gave  live  evidence  at  the
    hearing.

14. Besides the evidence of Mr McKoy  there  were  also  reports  from  the
    children school but also  letters  from  the  children  themselves.  In
    respect of the 3rd appellant, the eldest child, it was  noted  that  he
    had reached an age where he was taking AS level  examinations;  he  had
    significant achievements in school including being selected for a maths
    challenge at national level; playing  for  the  school  football  team;
    representing  the  school  in  athletics.  The   3rd   respondent   had
    aspirations  to  continue  his  education  and  to   qualify   in   the
    professions. While clearly education was a significant  aspect  of  the
    child's life it was not the only connection or root that the child  had
    developed and was of significance in the child's life.

15. To claim that the judge has merely assessed the education opportunities
    and facilities available to the 3rd respondent seems to ignore the rest
    of the evidence  that  was  considered  by  the  judge  especially  the
    evidence from Mr McKoy.

16. Similarly with regard to the 4th respondent the judge not only consider
    the report by Mr McKoy but  also  the  child's  involvement  in  cross-
    country running football  his  involvement  in  school  at  the  school
    leadership  team,  his  aspirations  and  desires.  Again   there   was
    significant evidence from Mr McKoy that was  considered  by  the  judge
    detailing the depth of connection and roots  that  the  respondent  had
    developed

17. Whilst not falling within  paragraph  276  ADE(iv)  the  judge  further
    considered the position of the 5th child.

18. The judge then considered the test of reasonableness and  in  so  doing
    started by considering the guidance  given  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Azimi-Moayed &  others  (decisions  affecting  children:
    onward appeal) Iran [2013] UKUT 00197 and MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
    705. I would note that the last case post dates the  case  of  EV.  The
    emphasis being in the case law but this is an assessment of  article  8
    and whether or not it is reasonable for the child or children to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

19. In argument before  me  the  respondent's  representative  submitted  a
    bundle of case law which besides the cases cited includes MM  (Lebanon)
    [2017] UKSC 10 and Butt [2017] EWCA Civ 184. In relying upon  the  last
    case  attention  was  drawn  to  paragraph  30  of  the  judgement   as
    highlighted, in which the following guidance is given :-

         "I  consider  that  the  court's  reluctance  to  attempt  to  give
         prescriptive guidance as to the weight to be  given  to  particular
         factors and the need for a careful and informed evaluation  of  the
         facts of the particular case and the role  of  an  appellant  court
         when considering an assessment of proportionality by a lower  court
         to which I  referred  at  [19]and  [20]  above  suggests  that  the
         assessment of the specialist Tribunal as to proportionality  should
         also be respected unless it is clear it has misdirected  itself  in
         law."

20. To categorise the assessment of the judge as  only  concentrating  upon
    the educational advantages that are available clearly ignores the other
    evidence that the judge considered in assessing the best  interests  of
    the 2 minor appellants that  qualified  under  paragraph  276  ADE  and
    whether it was reasonable for them to return to Nigeria.

21. It cannot be said having assessed that that the judge  failed  to  take
    into account the immigration history of the parents.  In  paragraph  35
    the judge was clearly mindful of the adverse  immigration  history  and
    gave it  significant  weight  in  commenting  that  theirs  was  not  a
    particularly attractive basis of being allowed to remain in the  United
    Kingdom. Even taking that into account the judge approached the  issues
    correctly by indicating that he was not going to  punish  the  children
    for the misdemeanours of the parents.

22. Having considered all of that evidence the judge was satisfied that the
    best interests of the children were to remain in the UK. In  coming  to
    that conclusion the judge commented that he placed  significant  weight
    upon the reports and evidence given by Mr McKoy. He  was  mindful  that
    this was not condoning the actions of the 1st and 2nd respondents as is
    evident from paragraph 49 of the decision.  However  having  taken  all
    that into account the conclusion that he came to was that  it  was  not
    reasonable for the 3rd and 4th appellants to be removed from the United
    Kingdom. Having come to that conclusion an assessment had  to  be  made
    with regard to the remaining respondents.

23. The conclusions with regard to the 3rd and  4th  appellants  have  been
    fully justified. The judge has  properly  approached  the  issues  with
    regard to the remaining respondents and has  given  valid  reasons  why
    they should be allowed to remain in light of the findings  with  regard
    to the 3rd and 4th appellants.

24. The judge has given valid reasons for the conclusions reached.  On  the
    basis of the evidence presented the judge was entitled to come to those
    conclusions. Accordingly there is no error of law in the decision.

Notice of Decision


25. I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal and uphold the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



