
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08349/2018
                                                               HU/08367/2018
                                                               HU/08373/2018
                                                               HU/08378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 6 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                 husain [n]
                                 shabnam [n]
                                    [a n]
                                    [s n]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Solanki of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  They  entered  as  visitors  and
    applied for further leave to remain on the basis of family and  private
    life which was refused in decisions dated 24 March 2018.

 2.  Judge  Kimnell  (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeals  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 January 2018.  He found that neither parent  had  the
    right to remain here and should be expected to return to their  country
    of nationality, that is, India.  The judge considered it was reasonable
    to expect their children to accompany them.

 3. There are four grounds:

      i) Inadequate finding as to the best interests of the children;

     ii) Failure to consider submissions,  case  law,  policy  guidance  and
         evidence;

    iii) Parents' misconduct the primary consideration;

     iv) Incorrectly summarising evidence and assessing rights.

 4. Judge Povey granted permission on 13  December  2018.   He  said  inter
    alia:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge failed to  undertake  proper
             assessment of the  children's  best  interests  and  erred  in
             assessing whether it was reasonable for the children to return
             to India.

         3.   It was not in dispute the third and fourth appellants had been
             in the UK for over seven years  or  that  their  parents  (the
             first and second appellants) were in  the  UK  without  leave.
             Although reference was made to the primacy of  the  children's
             best interests,  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  provided
             inadequate  reasons  for  the  factors  which   informed   her
             assessment of the same and the conclusions  she  reached.   It
             was also arguable that the judge, contrary to  her  own  self-
             direction, allowed  the  parents'  conduct  to  influence  her
             assessment of whether it was reasonable for  the  children  to
             return to India."

 5. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Ms Solanki relied upon her grounds.  The judge erred in his approach to
    the best interests of the children and  in  particular  as  regards  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 the judge's decision was predicated  upon  the
    parents' conduct.  See the judge's decision at [29] - [32].

Conclusion on Error of Law

 7. KO was authority for the principle that where immigration law sets  out
    a discretionary assessment of the impact of removal on a child using  a
    "reasonableness" or "undue harshness" test,  the  parents'  conduct  is
    irrelevant to that assessment of the impact on the child.  That  is,  a
    child must not be blamed for  matters  for  which  he  or  she  is  not
    responsible, such as  the  parents'  conduct.   That  is  because  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) contains no requirement to  consider  the  conduct  of  a
    parent as a balancing factor and such requirement cannot be read in  by
    implication.  See KO at [16].  S117B of the 2002 Act does  not  include
    conduct of a parent as a consideration in the event that the person has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.
      See 117B(6) and KO at [17].  It is however relevant to consider where
    the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to  be  as
    it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them such  that
    to that extent only, the record of the parents  may  become  indirectly
    material if it leads them to having to leave the UK.  It is only if  it
    would not be reasonable for the child to leave with  the  parent,  that
    the provision may give the parent a right to remain.  See KO at [18].

 8. I must consider the interaction of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  S.117B
    in terms of KO.  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  provides  that  a  child  be
    permitted to remain if the child has lived  here  continuously  for  at
    least seven years and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave.  Lord Carnwath  was  of  the  view  that  that  requirement  was
    irrelevant of any misconduct on the part of  the  parent  although  the
    immigration status  of  the  parent  was  indirectly  relevant  to  the
    consideration of whether it was reasonable for a child to leave the UK.
     Put simply, a parent's poor immigration history does not  justify  the
    removal of a child which would represent a gloss on the test.

 9. Because of the effect of S.117B, the status of the parent  will  follow
    that of the child.  Unlike paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) S.117B applies  only
    to courts and Tribunals and not officials of the Home Office.  Further,
    it is  directed  to  the  parent  whereas  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  is
    directed to the child.  Lord Carnwath was of the  view  that  the  same
    approach applied to S.117B as to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  That is, the
    conduct of the parents is not relevant to the assessment of whether  it
    is reasonable for the child to leave the UK although having said  that,
    given that in most cases one or both parents will not have status,  the
    question will then be whether it is reasonable for the  child  also  to
    leave the UK with the parent.

10. There was considerable evidence before the judge regarding the question
    of whether it was reasonable for the children aged 12 and  9  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  The youngest child  was  born  here.   The  oldest
    child has been here since the age of 1.  Effectively, they  have  known
    no other life than in the United Kingdom.  The family  have  been  here
    for eleven years.

11. At [29] - [34] the judge made wholesale  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the parents describing the first appellant as "... a mendacious
    and manipulative individual who has very little credibility", who  came
    here with the intention of staying without leave and  settling  without
    any regard to our laws.  Within three weeks  of  arriving,  the  family
    registered with the NHS and gave spurious reasons for remaining  whilst
    working in the black  economy,  earning  a  reasonable  income,  taking
    advantage of the  National  Health  Service  and  free  education  here
    without contributing a penny by way of taxation.

12. It was against the above background that the judge considered the  best
    interests of the children.  He said that the  children  should  not  be
    blamed for matters for which they were not responsible but in my  view,
    he did not adequately engage with the evidence as  to  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the children to remain.  The judge said  the  children's
    school reports testified to their character and  to  their  popularity.
    He said that the children would face difficulties  in  terms  of  their
    education in India as compared with here.   He  accepted  the  children
    were "clearly integrated in  school."  Given  they  were  used  to  the
    culture of their parents and immersed in it, he  did  not  accept  that
    they did not understand much Hindi bearing in mind  that  both  parents
    were fluent in that language.  Nevertheless, the judge found that given
    the length of time the children had been here, which  he  accepted  was
    significant, that they would have formed friendships  and  associations
    and begun some kind of social life outside the family, the judge  found
    the respondent's decision to be proportionate.

13. I do find that the judge, whilst reminding himself of the  requirements
    in KO that the misconduct of the parents should not be held against the
    children, fell into that very trap.  My reading of KO is that  [18]  is
    dependent upon [16] - [17].  I find that [18] is clearly not  a  stand-
    alone principle as it depends upon the foundation in  [16]  -  [17]  to
    give it meaning.

Notice of Decision

The judge materially erred.  I set aside his decision and remit  the  appeal
to the First-tier for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
