
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08858/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2018                               |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                         TEMITOPE ELIZABETH SORINALA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alexander, Counsel instructed by Visa Inn
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17 April 1988. She is
    appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy
    promulgated on 18 October 2017 whereby her appeal against the
    respondent's decision dated 14 March 2016 to refuse her application for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her family and private life
    was dismissed.



Background

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 23 September 2010 as a Tier 4 student.
    She was subsequently granted further leave until 17 October 2016. Her
    leave was curtailed, expiring on 13 April 2015, because she had ceased
    studying and the University of Kent withdrew its sponsorship of her.
    The appellant claims the curtailment notice was not sent to her and is
    not valid.

 3. On 10 October 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of her relationship with her partner. On 14 March 2016 the
    respondent refused the application. It was not accepted that the
    appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her claimed
    partner.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge found that the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with her partner.

 5. The judge considered whether the requirements of Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules, under the partner route, were satisfied, and found
    that they were not as the application was made whilst the appellant did
    not have lawful leave and the financial requirements under the Rules
    were not met.

 6. In addition, the judge, applying section EX.1(b) of Appendix FM,
    considered whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the
    relationship continuing in Nigeria. The judge gave several reasons for
    finding that there were no such obstacles. Firstly, although the
    appellant's partner has two British children, the judge found that the
    evidence did not show he has a subsisting relationship with them or
    even sees them. Secondly, the judge noted that the appellant and her
    partner are both Nigerian citizens with strong cultural and family ties
    to the country. Thirdly, the judge observed that the appellant had
    spent her formative years in Nigeria and has a continuing relationship
    with her parents who reside there.

 7. The judge assessed the appellant's human rights claim outside the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR. In refusing the appeal, the
    judge, applying section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), gave substantial weight to his finding that
    the appellant's family and private life developed at a time when her
    immigration status was precarious. The judge also found that the
    appellant has been in the UK unlawfully since April 2015 when her leave
    was curtailed.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. The grounds of appeal submit that the purported curtailment of the
    appellant's leave in April 2015 was not valid because notice was not
    given to the appellant. On this basis, the argument is made that the
    judge erred in finding that the appellant's application was made at a
    time when she did not have leave to remain.

 9. Before me, Mr Alexander argued that the judge erred by failing to deal
    with the issue of curtailment. He maintained it was an important issue
    which, if it had been addressed, would have affected the outcome.

10. Ms Willocks-Briscoe's response was that even if the appellant had leave
    when the application was made, her immigration status was precarious
    and therefore the relationship would in any event have been given
    little weight.

Analysis

11. One of the contentions made by the appellant before the First-tier
    Tribunal was that her leave was not lawfully curtailed and therefore
    she had valid leave when her human rights application was made. I agree
    with Mr Alexander that the judge did not address the curtailment issue
    at all and that the judge found that the appellant has been in the UK
    unlawfully since April 2015 without giving any reasons why the
    appellant's argument to the contrary was rejected. However, whilst I
    accept that the judge fell into error in respect of the curtailment
    issue I do not accept that the error was material.

12. The issue that was before the judge in respect of the Immigration Rules
    was whether, in accordance with paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM, there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant and
    her partner continuing in Nigeria. The judge gave several reasons, none
    of which have been challenged, for finding there would not be
    insurmountable obstacles. For the reasons given by the judge (which are
    summarised above at paragraph 6) this conclusion was undoubtedly open
    to him. The appellant's immigration status did not form part of the
    judge's reasoning about the absence of insurmountable obstacles and
    therefore, even if the judge was incorrect to find that the appellant
    has been in the UK unlawfully since April 2015, this was not material
    to whether EX.1(b) was met.

13. I turn now to Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. One of the
    main reasons the judge did not allow the appeal was that the
    appellant's immigration status was precarious in 2012 when she
    commenced the relationship with her partner and there were no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant allowing the appeal outside the
    Rules.

14. The difficulty for the appellant is that even if she is correct that
    her immigration status did not became unlawful in 2015 this would have
    made no difference to the judge's conclusion about Article 8, which is
    based on the appellant's immigration status being precarious when the
    relationship was entered into (which it undoubtedly was). It was the
    precariousness of the status when the relationship commenced that the
    judge placed weight on, not that several years later the appellant's
    status changed from being precarious to unlawful.

15. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge, for the reasons he gave,
    reached a decision that was open to him and the same decision would
    have been reached irrespective of whether the judge considered that the
    appellant's status since April 2015 had been precarious or unlawful.

Decision

16. The appeal is dismissed.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  22 April 2018        |

