
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 08164 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M P W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Jaufurally, Solicitor from Callistes Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent
    or his child. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
    court. I make this order because the case touches on the welfare  of  a
    child whose interests would not be served by his identity being in  the
    public domain and I see no legitimate public interest in  the  identity
    of the Respondent rather than the facts of the case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of  State  on  18
    July 2017 to refuse him leave to remain on human rights  grounds.   The
    claimant is subject to a deportation order signed on 20  February  2017
    which was made because the Secretary of State "deems it to be conducive
    to the public good to deport from the United Kingdom  [the  claimant]".
    It is plain from paragraph 14 of the "Decision to Refuse  Human  Rights
    Claim"  that  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the  claimant's
    "deportation is conducive to the public good and in the public interest
    because you are a persistent offender".

 3. There is a summary of the claimant's offending which is said to justify
    the decision.  According to  the  letter  the  claimant  has  "thirteen
    convictions for 22 offences in the UK for serious  offences  including;
    offences against the persons, five sexual offences, five drug  offences
    and one firearm/shotguns/offensive weapons."

 4. Before going  any  further  I  wish  to  look  more  carefully  at  the
    claimant's  offending  history  which,   on   anyone's   analysis,   is
    discreditable.

 5. The claimant was born in April 1974. He  was  first  brought  before  a
    court in March 2001 when he  was  25  years  old.   He  was  fined  for
    possessing a Class B drug.  In August 2002 he was sent  to  prison  for
    ten months for being concerned in supplying Class  A  drugs.   In  July
    2003 he was convicted of dangerous driving, driving  a  vehicle  whilst
    uninsured and driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence.   He
    was ordered to a serve a community  rehabilitation  order  over  twelve
    months and a community punishment order of 50  hours  and  disqualified
    from driving for two years and ordered to retake a  test  before  being
    allowed a full driving licence.  Later the same year, in December 2003,
    he was sent to prison for three months for driving whilst disqualified.
     He was also further disqualified.  He was then in  trouble  in  August
    2006 when he was given an absolute discharge for driving  otherwise  in
    accordance with a licence.

 6. In August 2008, again for driving otherwise than in accordance  with  a
    licence, and he was fined.  The next court appearance was  in  February
    2012 when he was fined for resisting or obstructing a person  assisting
    a constable.  In August 2012 he was fined for possessing  a  controlled
    drug of Class B.  In October 2012 he was again fined for  possessing  a
    controlled drug of Class B.  In  March  2013  for  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm he was  ordered  to  serve  a  community  order  the
    requirement of unpaid work.

 7. In May 2014 he was fined for possessing a controlled drug.

 8. In March 2015 for possessing an offensive weapon and taking part in  an
    affray he was sentenced to a  suspended  sentence  of  imprisonment  of
    eighteen months was an unpaid work requirement.

 9. In July 2015 for five offences of exposure he was made the subject of a
    suspended  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  eight  months   with   other
    requirements.  He was  also  guilty  of  failing  to  comply  with  the
    community requirements of an earlier suspended sentence  but  no  order
    was made in respect of that conviction.

10. It has also been the subject of a  police  caution  and  a  conditional
    caution.

11. The offences of exposure for which he was sentenced  on  31  July  2015
    were committed on 7 May 2015, 8 May 2015 and 11 May 2015,  that  is  in
    each  case  after  he  was  sentenced  to  a  suspended   sentence   of
    imprisonment on 31 March 2015 for possessing an  offensive  weapon  and
    affray.

12. The sentencing judge on 31  July  2015  noted  that  the  claimant  was
    initially denying his offences.  The sentencing judge said:

         "When it comes to sentencing you today, the most significant factor
         is that you have expressed your guilt and that  you  have  had  the
         courage to confess to your wife and indeed to allow your wife to be
         present during the pre-sentence report interview.   The  fact  that
         you accept your culpability and have said that you will  work  with
         probation means that I can suspend the sentence.  I  also  bear  in
         mind the progress that has been made under the  existing  suspended
         sentence order.  The sentence which  I  will  impose  currently  in
         respect of all offences will be a suspended sentence order of eight
         months suspended for two years ...".

13. The claimant also relied on a letter from the probation  officer  dated
    18 May 2016.  Although not strictly a  matter  for  her  the  probation
    officer expressed her wish that the decision to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom will be reconsidered because of his  family  life.  More
    significantly she described  the  claimant  as  "currently  classed  as
    medium risk of harm by the National Probation Service" but  added  that
    it was her assessment that  "the  risk  he  potentially  poses  is  not
    imminent and can be managed in the community". She noted  that  he  had
    never missed an appointment and never  been  reprimanded  for  negative
    behaviour and it was to her "a complete surprise" when he was convicted
    in July 2015.  When he was eventually able to admit his  behaviour  she
    was able to explore with him the reasons for his offending and was able
    to "recommend community intervention".  She concluded by saying how his
    "last appearance at Court made him  realise  how  much  damage  he  had
    caused his family by his behaviour, and how fortunate he  was  to  have
    their forgiveness and support".

14. It was the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  primary  conclusion  that  the
    claimant is not a persistent offender and that therefore the  basis  of
    the decision to deport him falls away.

15. It is not  always  clear  if  a  person  is  described  properly  as  a
    "persistent offender" for the purposes of deportation.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge reminded himself of the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in SC (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 929 and the approval it gave to
    the decision of this Tribunal in Chege  ("is  a  persistent  offender")
    Kenya [2016] UKUT 187.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  careful  to
    analyse the evidence about the reasons for  the  claimant's  offending.
    He said at paragraph 19:

         "His offending does not tend towards acquisitive offences  although
         it is of dishonesty such as theft  or  robbery.   As  shall  become
         clear, his offending is entirely connected  to  drug  use  and  the
         behavioural consequences that arise."

16. The judge also considered an email from  a  detective  constable  based
    within the claimant's local police  station's  Public  Protection  Unit
    from the officer responsible for  managing  in  the  community  persons
    subject to the requirements of the Sexual Offences Act  2003.   Persons
    subject to such restrictions have to disclose a great deal of  personal
    information and accept visits from the police at any time.  The officer
    told the judge that the claimant was identified as  "high  risk"  under
    the statistical model but "medium risk" on the basis of  behaviour  and
    engagement.  The officer then spoke appreciatively  of  the  claimant's
    attitude towards the police and to the officer  doing  his  duties  and
    confirmed that the claimant had not come to the attention of the police
    for the almost three years between the  conviction  and  the  reference
    being written.

17. At paragraphs 37 and 38 of his decision the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    summarised the arguments for and against finding the claimant to  be  a
    persistent offender. Mr Jaufurally drew attention to the remarks of the
    sentencing judge and his decision  to  suspend  the  sentence  and  the
    evidence that "his family was now his focus and the reason why he would
    not reuse drugs or reoffend".

18. The Secretary  of  State's  representative,  predictably  and  entirely
    properly, had pointed out that the claimant had previously been  warned
    about his behaviour and had gone on  to  reoffend.   The  claimant  had
    offended because he had continued to take cannabis  and  that  was  his
    downfall.  The claimant's wife had given evidence that she trusted  the
    claimant to have given up taking cannabis.

19.  The  Judge  reviewed  the  offending  pattern  and  noted  there  were
    significant gaps in the offending history.  There were periods when the
    claimant did not get into trouble.  At paragraph 47 the Judge said:

         "In this appeal the  question  posed  by  Chege  can  therefore  be
         reduced to whether the current period of  non-offending  since  May
         2015 is  another  fallow  period  or  represents  the  end  of  the
         [claimant's] criminal history.  If his  offending  has  truly  been
         over since May 2015, rather than paused, then in my  assessment  he
         has succeeded in losing the badge of 'persistent  offender'.   This
         is because there is a passage of time without conviction is  longer
         than at any point for many  years,  and  can  strongly  indicate  a
         recognition of the root cause of his  offending  and  steps  having
         been taken to avoid it."

20. The Judge then concluded that the claimant's "offending  is  over".  He
    regarded the gap in offending as telling evidence of a change of  heart
    and the  ability  to  give  effect  to  the  new  intention.   He  then
    considered the position in the event of the decision that the  claimant
    was not a persistent offender being wrong and  found  that  the  appeal
    should nevertheless be allowed for other reasons.

21. The Secretary of State, commendably, has not set out  overly  extensive
    grounds and his case is all the clearer as a result. The main complaint
    is at point 2 where it is said that the  Judge  "fails  to  give  clear
    reasons as to why it is  accepted  the  [claimant]  has  addressed  the
    source of his offending". It was said the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    explanation the claimant had given for  the  sexual  offences  and  the
    Judge did not give sufficient weight to the warning letter sent in July
    2013.

22. I have given considerable thought to this case both  before  and  after
    the hearing.  Certainly it is hard to think that the Judge  could  have
    been criticised if he had reached a different conclusion  but  that  is
    not at all the same as saying that the  decision  that  he  reached  is
    wrong or otherwise unlawful.  There is no  precise  formula  to  follow
    when making decisions of this kind.  The judge has  given  reasons  for
    his finding. That the claimant was a drug user and  drug  use  got  him
    into trouble. The last episode of criminal behaviour, which  must  have
    been deeply embarrassing to the claimant and shocking  to  his  family,
    (as well as quite horrible for those who saw it) was an event that  had
    caused him to rethink his position and to understand the importance  of
    behaving and he had given effect to that intention by  keeping  out  of
    trouble for three years.  Accepting evidence that the last  episode  of
    criminal behaviour was a turning point is not perverse.  It might  have
    been more pleasing to the Secretary of State if the Judge had explained
    why the warning letter was  not  heeded  but  the  claimant  was  still
    believed when he said that he was no longer going to offend. The  Judge
    clearly did not ignore the significance of previous offending.  It  was
    very much in his mind.

23. Mr Duffy expanded the grounds appropriately.  He accepted that  he  had
    to show that the decision was simply not open  to  the  judge  for  the
    reasons given.  It was effectively a challenge on grounds of perversity
    although the word "perverse" was not actually used.  He said, given the
    long history of reoffending and the absence of some  particular  reason
    for accepting the evidence of a change of heart, the decision  was  not
    open to the judge.

24. The Judge heard evidence from the claimant's  wife.   She  believed  he
    would not offend again.  The claimant said the  same.   It  is  not  an
    error of law to believe a witness.  Further  the  "good  side"  of  the
    claimant's character was something that has  been  apparent  throughout
    this case.  This is not an entirely straightforward point.  There  have
    always been good things to say about the claimant even when he has been
    behaving  very  badly  indeed   because   of   his   cannabis   misuse.
    Nevertheless I am satisfied that the judge's reasons for finding  there
    has been a genuine rather than convenient change of heart were open  to
    him and that the claimant is not a persistent offender when  the  judge
    made his decision.  It follows that the appeal was allowed properly.

25. There may have been difficulties with the other parts of the  decision.
    The grounds have merit when they point out that the Judge did not  seem
    to consider most likely the result of deportation  which  is  that  the
    claimant's wife and son would remain in the United Kingdom and preserve
    a relationship in any way they  could  with  the  claimant.   Certainly
    there was evidence that the claimant's removal would have  considerable
    adverse impact on the claimant's wife and son.   That  is  the  way  of
    deportation.  I see no point in resolving these matters further because
    the decision that I have already made is sufficient to dispose  of  the
    appeal.

26. I am not persuaded there has been a material error and  I  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 January 2019                |



