
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08184/2017 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Parties appeared remotely by Skype   |                                     |
|On 2nd February 2021                 |On 23rd February 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   S J C M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

 1. The hearing before me on 2nd February 2021 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected. I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.  At the outset, I was informed by Mr
    Shah that the appellant's sponsor (the appellant's mother) had been
    advised that she did not need to attend the remote hearing.  I reminded
    Mr Shah that although the hearing is being conducted remotely, the
    hearing will proceed, and I will be addressed by the representatives in
    exactly the same way as I would have been, if the parties had attended
    the hearing together.  I also reminded him of the direction made by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Norton Taylor on 20th March 2020 that if an error
    of law is found, the appellant's representatives should be prepared to
    make submissions so that the decision can be remade in the Upper
    Tribunal with the proviso that the precise manner in which proceedings
    are dealt with, will be a matter for the particular judge with conduct
    of the case.


 2. As requested by Mr Shah, I permitted him an opportunity to contact the
    appellant's sponsor to give her an opportunity to join the hearing
    remotely.  The appellant's mother did join the hearing at 10:45am, but
    I was unable to establish whether she could see and hear me, or the
    representatives. Mr Shah confirmed that he had spoken to the
    appellant's mother the previous day and had discussed the appeal with
    her. He confirmed that no Rule 15(2A) application has been made to
    adduce further evidence, and in the event that I find there to be an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, he was
    prepared to make submissions so that the decision can be remade in the
    Upper Tribunal.


 3. At the outset of the hearing, Mrs Aboni also confirmed that the
    respondent had failed to file and serve a Rule 24 response, as
    directed.  She was unable to provide any, let alone any reasonable
    explanation for the respondent's failure to do so. She simply confirmed
    that the respondent opposes the appeal.


 4. In proceeding with a remote hearing I was satisfied: no party has been
    prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
    right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
    issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied the parties had
    been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 5. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  Her appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 3rd July 2017 refusing her application for
    indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent
    present and settled in the UK was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Lodge for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 11th July
    2019.


The grounds of appeal and the appeal before me


 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on
    5th September 2019.  The matter comes before me to determine whether
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge is vitiated by a
    material error of law.


 7. The appellant claims Judge Lodge made multiple errors in the
    application of the law.  At paragraph [4] of the grounds of appeal the
    appellant claims Judge Lodge erred in finding that the appellant's
    sponsor does not have sole financial and emotional responsibility for
    the appellant.  The appellant refers to the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): 'sole responsibility') Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 and submits that having found that the sponsor is
    the mother of the appellant, the judge erred in his analysis of the
    evidence and his approach to the question of sole responsibility.  The
    appellant claims that at paragraph [45], Judge Lodge refers to an
    absence of objective documentary evidence with regard to such matters
    as healthcare, out-of-school activities and religious education, but
    his remarks all go beyond the requirement of the rules.  The appellant
    also claims Judge Lodge erroneously referred to the delay in making the
    application for entry clearance, because the rules do not provide that
    an application must be made within a certain timeframe.  It is said
    that the fact that the appellant's sponsor decided to leave the
    appellant with relatives and make the application after she had
    obtained ILR was, "her prerogative", and should not be counted against
    the appellant. The appellant claims the judge assumed that [HK's]
    responsibility for the appellant went beyond day-to-day responsibility
    for the appellant's welfare and is not supported by the evidence of
    [HK] or the letters from the school attended by the appellant.


 8. Before me, Mr Shah adopted the grounds of appeal and submits there was
    sufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to establish,
    applying the guidance set out in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): 'sole
    responsibility') Yemen, that the sponsor has maintained sole
    responsibility for the appellant. He submits Judge Lodge failed to give
    adequate weight to the letters from the Israb Ali High School in which
    the principal confirms that the school maintains full contact with the
    sponsor and has her listed as the appellant's parental contact.  Mr
    Shah submits the observation made by the school principal that the
    appellant suffers due to her distance from her mother, was a perfectly
    reasonable observation for the principal to make and did not undermine
    what was said in the letter.   Mr Shah submits that having accepted, at
    [46], that the letter from the school confirms the sponsor pays the
    fees, Judge Lodge expected too much when he went on to say that the
    sponsor has not provided any official receipts.  He submits that with
    the evidence from the school, nothing further was required.


 9. Mr Shah submits that although Judge Lodge appears to have been
    concerned about the evidence of the sponsor's husband, he does not
    identify any inconsistency in the evidence between the sponsor and her
    husband, and in any event, the focus of the decision should have been
    upon whether the sponsor has had sole responsibility for her daughter's
    upbringing.  He submits the evidence of the sponsor's husband was not
    relevant, and it is entirely reasonable that he had not wished to be
    involved in the day-to-day arrangements concerning his stepdaughter.
    Mr Shah submits that Judge Lodge failed to have proper regard to the
    fact that geographical separation does not prevent the sponsor having
    sole responsibility for the appellant.


10. Mr Shah submits that insofar as the judge's reasons for concluding that
    there are no serious and compelling family or other considerations
    which make exclusion of the appellant undesirable and suitable
    arrangements have been made for her care are concerned, Judge Lodge
    failed to consider the position the appellant would find herself in, if
    [HK] were not around.  The evidence before the Tribunal was such that
    the appellant would have no one to look after her. He referred me to
    the witness statement of [HK] that is to be found at page [48] of the
    appellant's bundle and paragraph [14] of the sponsors witness
    statement.  The sponsor confirmed that she had been reluctant to leave
    the appellant with her mother (i.e. the appellant's maternal
    grandmother) because of her age and health, and because she did not
    wish to burden her brother and sister-in-law with having to look after
    the appellant, in addition to her mother.  Mr Shah submits that the
    health of [HK] is such that she is unable to continue caring for the
    appellant and if [HK] were not around, there would be no suitable
    arrangements for her care.


11. Finally, Mr Shah submits that having found the requirements of the
    immigration rules are not met, at paragraph [60] of his decision, Judge
    Lodge erred in his consideration of the Article 8 claim outside the
    rules.  He erred in concluding that his analysis under the rules was
    sufficient for the purposes of Article 8 and that there are no
    exceptional circumstances which required him to look outside the rules.


12. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits there is no material error of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  She submits Judge Lodge directed
    himself correctly and reached conclusions open to him on the evidence
    before the Tribunal.  She submits that although the Judge makes no
    express reference to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e): 'sole responsibility') Yemen, Judge Lodge
    directed himself correctly as to the relevant test at paragraph [44] of
    his decision.  Mrs Aboni submits Judge Lodge engaged with the evidence
    before the Tribunal.  Having considered the sponsor's involvement in
    the life of the appellant, including the evidence of money transfers,
    regular telephone contact, the written evidence from the school, and
    the fact that the appellant's father plays no role in her life, it was
    open to the judge to conclude that he was not satisfied that that is
    sufficient to establish sole responsibility.  She referred to the
    appellant's application for entry clearance in which the appellant had
    referred, in answer to question 89, to [HK] as her legal guardian.  Mrs
    Aboni acknowledged that that was not referred to by Judge Lodge in his
    reasons, but submitted it was referred to in the respondent's decision.
     Mrs Aboni submits Judge Lodge was entitled to find there was a lack of
    satisfactory evidence to establish sole responsibility, and, in
    reaching his decision, was entitled to have regard to the delay in
    making the application and his concerns regarding the evidence of the
    sponsor's partner.


13. Mrs Aboni submits Judge Lodge was entitled to conclude that the
    requirements for indefinite leave to enter the UK set out in paragraph
    297(i)(f) are not met for the reasons given in paragraphs [55] to [58]
    of the decision.  She submits there was no evidence that HK is unable
    to care for the appellant and no evidence of neglect or abuse or of any
    unmet needs. It was, she submits, open to Judge Lodge to conclude that
    everything indicates there are stable arrangements in place for the
    physical care of the appellant.  Mrs Aboni submits that having found
    that the requirements of the immigration rules are not met, it was open
    to Judge Lodge to conclude that there are no other exceptional
    circumstances which required him to look outside the rules.


Discussion


14. Judge Lodge noted, at paragraph [32], that there is no dispute that the
    appellant is the daughter of the sponsor.


15. Mr Shah submits Judge Lodge did not adequately consider the judgement
    of the Upper Tribunal in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole
    responsibility").  In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility"),
    the Upper Tribunal noted, at paragraph [10] of its decision, that a
    parent who has settled in the UK may retain "sole responsibility" for a
    child where the day-to-day care or responsibility for that child is
    necessarily undertaken by a relative abroad. That day-to-day
    responsibility may include seeing that the child attends school, is fed
    and clothed and receives medical attention when needed.  The appellant
    claims that in reaching his decision, Judge Lodge did not consider the
    fact that it is quite possible that the sponsor has sole responsibility
    for the appellant, but the day-to-day implementation of decisions made
    have been carried out by [HK] because of the geographical separation.




16. I reject the claim that Judge Lodge erred in finding that the appellant
    sponsor does not have sole responsibility for the appellant.  Judge
    Lodge had the benefit of hearing evidence from the appellant's mother
    and her partner (i.e. the appellant's stepfather).  Their evidence is
    set out at paragraphs [6] to [27] of the decision.  Judge Lodge sets
    out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs [30] to [61] of the
    decision.   Drawing together the threads, in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility") the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph [52],
    summarised the issue in this way:


         Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:


             i.   Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and
             whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to
             be decided upon all the evidence.


             ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should
             not be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact is exercising responsibility for the child. That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.


             iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be shared between different individuals: which may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own country
             whilst the only parent involved in its life travels to and
             lives in the UK.


             iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in
             the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that one
             of them will have sole responsibility.


             v.   If it is said that both are not involved in the child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be that the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility. In such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that that parent no
             longer has responsibility for the child.


             vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a
             matter between the parents. So even if there is only one
             parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may not
             have sole responsibility.


             vii. In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for the child's welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such as relatives or
             friends) because of the geographical separation between the
             parent and child.


             viii.    That, however, does not prevent the parent having
             sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.


             ix.  The test is, not whether anyone else has day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including making all
             the important decisions in the child's life. If not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole".


17. At paragraphs [30] to [53] of his decision, Judge Lodge considered
    whether the requirement set out in paragraph 297(i)(e) of the
    immigration rules is met.  At paragraph [36], Judge Lodge refers to the
    evidence before the Tribunal regarding money transfers sent to a
    paternal cousin of the sponsor's ex-husband, and the explanation
    provided by the sponsor that money was sent to him, as a proxy, because
    he had previously been a support to her.  At paragraph [37], the judge
    refers to the appellant's evidence regarding the important decisions in
    the appellant's life, noting the appellant appeared to deflect a
    question when she was asked to identify the telephone number of the
    school that she claimed to be in regular contact with.  Judge Lodge
    refers to the letters from the school attended by the appellant at
    paragraphs [38] and [39] of his decision.  At paragraph [41], Judge
    Lodge states there is no evidence that the appellant's father plays or
    has played any part in the appellant's upbringing.  He refers to the
    evidence regarding the limited time spent by the appellant with her
    maternal uncle and the explanation provided as to why the appellant is
    unable to remain with him, on a long-term basis.  He noted, at
    paragraph [43], that there is voluminous evidence of telephone/WhatsApp
    contact between the appellant and her mother.  Judge Lodge went on to
    consider the evidence before the Tribunal including the documentary
    evidence relied upon, and the oral evidence given by the appellant's
    mother and her step-father.  For reasons set out at paragraphs [45] to
    [51], Judge Lodge concluded, at [52]:


         "I have given this matter anxious consideration. At its highest I
         have evidence of money transfers, evidence of regular telephonic
         contact, and written evidence from the school of contact. I also
         have the fact that the father plays no role in the appellant's
         life. I am not satisfied that that is sufficient to establish sole
         responsibility. At the most it might establish joint responsibility
         with [HK] who, given the lack of evidence with regard to the
         sponsor, is responsible, I find, not simply for day-to-day care but
         moral guidance and religious activity, healthcare, monitoring
         school progress and out-of-school activities."


18. The issue of "sole responsibility" must depend upon the facts of each
    case. A central part of the notion of "sole responsibility" was the
    sponsor's continuing interest and involvement in the appellant's life,
    including making or being consulted about and approving important
    decisions about her upbringing. Judge Lodge was in my judgement
    entitled to have regard to the evidence of the sponsor's husband and
    make the observation that his evidence was "extraordinary", for the
    reasons he gave at paragraph [51].  I reject the submission made by Mr
    Shah that Judge Lodge failed to give adequate weight to the letters
    from the Israb Ali High School and that having accepted, at [46], that
    the letter from the school confirms the sponsor pays the fees, Judge
    Lodge expected too much when he went on to say that the sponsor has not
    provided any official receipts.


19. The decision must be read as a whole and in my judgement, it was open
    to Judge Lodge to conclude that the sponsor does not have sole
    responsibility for the appellant for the reasons set out at paragraphs
    [45] to [52] of his decision.  In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole
    responsibility"), the Upper Tribunal highlighted that financial support
    is clearly relevant since it may be an indicator of the obligations
    stemming from an exercise of responsibility by a parent. At paragraph
    [16] of its decision, the Upper Tribunal said:


         "Financial support, particularly sole financial support, of a child
         is relevant since it may be an indicator of obligation stemming
         from an exercise of "responsibility" by a parent but it cannot be
         conclusive. [my emphasis] There may be other reasons why an
         individual financially supports a child and so it can only be a
         factor to be taken into account along with all the other facts.
         Rudolph v ECO, Colombo [1984] Imm AR 84 illustrates this."


20. The provision of financial support is therefore clearly a factor that
    is relevant and must be considered but is not conclusive. Financial
    support, even exclusive financial support, will not necessarily mean
    that the person providing it has "sole responsibility" for the child.
    It is a factor but no more than that.


21. As the Upper Tribunal noted in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole
    responsibility"), the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
    between the parents.  Even if there is only one parent involved in the
    child's upbringing, that parent may not have sole responsibility.  The
    findings and conclusions reached by Judge Lodge followed a careful
    consideration of all the evidence before the Tribunal and a fact
    specific analysis.  It was in the end open to Judge Lodge to conclude,
    as he did at paragraph [52] of the decision, that at the most, the
    evidence might establish the sponsor has joint responsibility with
    [HK]. The findings and conclusions reached by Judge Lodge were neither
    irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings and
    conclusions that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.


22. At paragraphs [54] to [58], Judge Lodge went on to consider whether the
    requirement for indefinite leave to enter the UK set out in paragraph
    297(i)(f) is met. That is, whether there are serious and compelling
    family or other considerations which make exclusion of the child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's
    care.  He noted, at [55], the claim made that [HK] is too ill to
    continue to look after the appellant but noted there was no solid
    evidence to support that claim. He noted the medical evidence to
    support the claim that [HK] has a number of health issues, but also
    noted that the GP has not specifically related those health issues, to
    an inability to care for the appellant.  Judge Lodge also considered
    the evidence from the appellant's maternal uncle but found it is highly
    unlikely he would abandon his sister's daughter after seven years of
    having some input into her welfare.  At paragraph [57] of his decision,
    Judge Lodge addresses the evidence of [TM] and his claim that his
    personal and financial business mean he cannot continue to be available
    to receive financial payments from the sponsor.  At paragraph [58],
    Judge Lodge noted there is no evidence of neglect or abuse and no
    evidence of unmet needs that should be catered for. Judge Lodge noted
    that everything indicates there are stable arrangements in place for
    the physical care of the appellant, and he concluded that the
    requirement set out in paragraph 297(1)(f) of the immigration rules is
    not met.


23. The difficulty with the submission made by Mr Shah that in reaching his
    decision, Judge Lodge failed to have regard to the circumstances the
    appellant would find herself in, if [HK] were not available to provide
    the care that she requires, is that the submission is wholly divorced
    from the facts and circumstances of this case. The fact is, [HK] is
    available, and has been providing care for the appellant for a lengthy
    period.  At paragraph [55], Judge Lodge referred to the claim that [HK]
    is too ill to continue to look after the appellant but noted there was
    no solid evidence to support that claim. He clearly had regard to the
    medical evidence that was before the Tribunal. I have carefully read
    the witness statements of [HK] and the letter from Dr Hussain Ahmad
    dated 22nd March 2018 that is to be found at page [65] of the
    appellant's bundle. Dr Ahmad states [HK] does not take care of her
    nephew (sic), [SJCM] "...because her health condition is not good. She
    wants to send [SJCM] to her mother...[HK] was suffering by diabetes,
    Ischemic heart disease (IHD), liver diseases and arthritis...".  Quite
    apart from the reference by Dr Ahmad to [HK] not taking care of "her
    nephew" (her nephew attends a Boarding School, and the appellant is her
    niece), as Judge Lodge said at paragraph [55] of his decision, [HK] has
    a number of health issues but the GP has not specifically related those
    health issues to any inability to care for the appellant.


24. In Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f)) UKUT 00088 (IAC), the Upper
    Tribunal said:


         "34. In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than
         the parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.
         'Compelling' in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that
         considerations that are persuasive and powerful. 'Serious' read
         with 'compelling' together indicate that the family or other
         considerations render the exclusion of the child from the United
         Kingdom undesirable. The analysis is one of degree and kind.  Such
         an interpretation sets a high threshold that excludes cases where,
         without more, it is simply the wish of parties to be together
         however natural that ambition that may be.


         ...


         37. Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's
         welfare including emotional needs. 'Other considerations' come into
         play where there are other aspects of a child's life that are
         serious and compelling - for example where an applicant is living
         in an unacceptable social and economic environment. The focus needs
         to be on the circumstances of the child in the light of his or her
         age, social background and developmental history and will involve
         inquiry as to whether:-


               i) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;


              ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;


             iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical
                  care.


         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances sufficiently serious and compelling to require
         admission.


         38. As a starting point the best interests of a child are usually
         best served by being with both or at least one of their parents.
         Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the place of
         residence where a child has grown up for a number of years when
         socially aware is important: see also SG (child of a polygamous
         marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 939."


25. Having carefully considered all the evidence before the Tribunal, it
    was in my judgment open to Judge Lodge to conclude that the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) are not met for the reasons given.


26. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    412, it is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as
    errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the
    weight to be given to different factors, particularly if the judge who
    decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral evidence.  Judge
    Lodge was required to consider the evidence as a whole and in my
    judgment, he plainly did so when he considered whether the requirements
    set out in paragraph 297 of the immigration rules are met, giving
    adequate reasons for his decision.


27. Having found the requirements of the immigration rules are not met,
    Judge Lodge said, at [60]:


         "I am satisfied that my analysis is sufficient for the purposes of
         Article 8, I am satisfied there are no exceptional circumstances
         which require me to look outside the rules. I am equally satisfied
         that the best interests of the appellant are served by her
         remaining with her extended family in Bangladesh, remaining with
         her school friends and continuing her education. All the evidence
         indicates she is an accomplished student who is meeting her
         expected goals."


28. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC
    11 confirms that the fact that the immigration rules cannot be met,
    does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between the individual and
    public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.
    That was plainly not the approach adopted by Judge Lodge at paragraph
    [60] of his decision.


29. In the circumstances I am satisfied the decision of Judge Lodge is
    vitiated by a material error of law and the decision is set aside.





Re-making the decision


30. I informed the parties at the hearing before me, that in my judgment it
    was open to Judge Lodge to conclude that the requirements for
    indefinite leave to enter as the child of a parent settled in the
    United Kingdom, as set out in paragraph 297 of the immigration rules
    are not met for the reasons given by Judge Lodge.  Those findings were
    preserved.  I informed the parties that in my judgement Judge Lodge had
    failed to adequately address the Article 8 claim outside the
    immigration rules and that having set aside the decision of Judge
    Lodge, the appropriate course is for the decision to be remade in the
    Upper Tribunal.  Neither party objected.


31. As I have already set out, the only ground of appeal available to the
    appellant pursuant to s84(2) of the 2002 Act is that the respondent's
    decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   The
    burden of proof is upon the appellant to show, on the balance of
    probabilities, that she has established a family and/or private life,
    and that the refusal of leave to enter would interfere with that right.
    It is then for the respondent to justify any interference caused. The
    respondent's decision must be in accordance with the law and must be a
    proportionate response in all the circumstances.


32. There is no Notice provided by the appellant or her representatives
    under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    inviting the Tribunal to admit further evidence that was not before the
    First-tier Tribunal. As no further evidence has been filed I have no up-
    to-date evidence from the appellant, her sponsor or [HK] as to the
    appellant's current circumstances, or identifying the factors relied
    upon to support her claim that the refusal of leave to enter is
    disproportionate.


The submissions


33. Mr Shah submits the appellant has plainly established a family life
    with her mother. He submits the decision to refuse the application for
    indefinite leave to enter the UK is entirely disproportionate because
    the sponsor cannot regularly travel to Bangladesh.  She last travelled
    to Bangladesh in 2014 and is unable to do so now, because she has three
    children, the youngest of whom is only 4 months old.  The appellant's
    mother confirms in her witness statement that she has not travelled to
    Bangladesh since 2014.


34. I invited Mr Shah to draw my attention to the evidence that is before
    the Tribunal to establish that the sponsor is unable to travel to
    Bangladesh to visit her daughter, and indeed, her son, who remains in
    Bangladesh and has not made any application to join his mother in the
    UK.  Mr Shah drew my attention to paragraphs [21] and [22] of the
    witness statement of the appellant's sponsor that is to be found at
    page [19] of the appellant's bundle.  In those paragraphs the sponsor
    confirms that she travelled to Bangladesh between April and June 2014
    to see her daughter and spend time with her.  She also confirms that
    she is now married to a British citizen and she has had two children
    with her husband.  She confirms that her eldest child in the UK, was
    enrolled at nursery towards the end of 2015 and so it has not been
    simple to frequently visit the appellant.  She confirms her husband has
    been working full-time and she has been a housewife taking care of the
    family home and children.


35. Mr Shah submits that it would be very difficult for the sponsor to
    travel to Bangladesh because she has three young children and the cost
    of the family visiting Bangladesh would be prohibitive.  He submits
    that in all the circumstances, the decision to exclude the appellant is
    disproportionate.


36. Mrs Aboni submits the appellant cannot meet the immigration rules.
    She accepts the appellant has a relationship with her mother and did
    not seek to persuade me that the appellant has not established a family
    life with her mother for the purposes of Article 8.  Mrs Aboni submits
    the appellant and her mother have been able to maintain their
    relationship despite the fact that they have now lived apart for a
    number of years.  Mrs Aboni submits the appellant is now 19 old and
    although she is separated from her step-siblings in the UK, she has a
    younger brother who remains in Bangladesh.  Mrs Aboni submits that in
    all the circumstances the relationships can continue as they are at
    present, and the refusal of leave to enter is not disproportionate.


Decision


37. The findings by Judge Lodge that the appellant cannot meet the
    requirements for indefinite leave to enter under paragraph 297 of the
    immigration rules are preserved. The appellant is now 19 years old.


38. I am however prepared to accept that it is reasonably likely that there
    is regular contact between the appellant and the sponsor and that the
    sponsor continues to provide some financial support to the appellant,
    although it is impossible to identify the extent of that financial
    support.  I find that the appellant enjoys family life with her mother.
     I also find that the decision to refuse the appellant leave to enter,
    may have consequences of such gravity as to engage the operation of
    Article 8, and I accept that the interference is in accordance with the
    law, and that the interference is necessary to protect the economic
    well-being of the country.


39. The issue in this appeal, as is often the case, is whether the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  The ability to satisfy the immigration rules is not the
    question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a
    weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether such
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration
    control.


40. I remind myself that section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 requires that in considering the public interest
    question, I must (in particular) have regard to the considerations
    listed in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  I acknowledge that the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.


41. In balancing the competing interests I have had regard to the evidence
    before the Tribunal and the submissions made by Mr Shah.  Beyond
    submitting that the sponsor would find it difficult to travel to
    Bangladesh to maintain her relationship with her daughter because of
    her marriage to a British citizen, her partner's work commitments, and
    the prohibitive costs of travel to Bangladesh, Mr Shah was unable to
    point to the evidence to support the claim that there are exceptional
    circumstances such that the refusal of entry clearance would be
    disproportionate.


42. The finding that the appellant has failed to establish that there are
    serious and compelling family circumstances or other considerations
    which make exclusion of the appellant undesirable and that suitable
    arrangements have been made for the appellant's care, has been
    preserved.  In my search for the exceptional circumstances here, I have
    had regard to the relationship between the appellant and her sponsor
    and the impact of the refusal of entry clearance, upon the appellant's
    ability to establish a meaningful relationship with her young step-
    siblings in the UK.


43. I have carefully considered the matters referred to in the witness
    statements of the appellant's sponsor, and [HK], and others whose
    statements appear in the appellant's bundle.  There is no up to date
    evidence before the Tribunal regarding the appellant's living
    arrangements or the impact of the refusal of entry clearance upon the
    appellant's relationship with her mother, stepfather and stepsiblings.




44. It is clear from the evidence that is before the Tribunal, and I find,
    that the appellant maintains family and personal connections with
    Bangladesh. She has lived in Bangladesh with her extended family for
    all of her formative years.


45. Although entry to the UK would promote the appellant's ability to
    establish a meaningful relationship with her stepsiblings, that must be
    weighed against the loss of the appellant's ability to maintain a
    meaningful relationship with her brother, who would remain in
    Bangladesh, albeit I acknowledge, that he appears to attend a Boarding
    School.


46. I have had regard to the fact that the appellant's mother left
    Bangladesh in 2011 leaving the appellant in the care of [HK].  I
    acknowledge that the appellant was only 10 at the time.  I have had
    regard to the social and cultural connections that the appellant has
    with Bangladesh, and the contact that she has with her mother.  I have
    no doubt the appellant misses her mother, and ideally, would like to be
    living in the UK with her, but that does not equate to a right to do so
    in law.  There is a lack of evidence before me to establish that the
    sponsor is, as Mr Shah submits, unable to travel to Bangladesh to visit
    the appellant.


47. On the evidence before me, in my judgment there are no exceptional
    circumstances capable of establishing that the refusal of entry
    clearance amounts to a disproportionate interference with the
    appellant's right to enjoyment of family life with her mother,
    stepfather or stepsiblings. Having carefully considered the evidence
    before me, I find that the decision to refuse the application for leave
    to enter is not disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration
    control. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


48. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I remake the
    decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.





DECISION


49. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge promulgated
    on 11th July 2019.


50. I remake the decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article 8
    grounds.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date; 3rd February 2021
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
