
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 October 2017                       |On 7 November 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STTE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mamata Yakha
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum of Counsel, Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 18 January 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C Greasley allowed the appellant's appeal under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  and
    the respondent is Ms Yakha but for the  purposes  of  this  decision  I
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where
    Ms Yakha was the appellant.  Ms Yakha is a 22 year old citizen of Nepal
    and appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her entry for the purposes of settlement as
    the adult dependent relative of her mother, the widow  of  a  late  ex-
    Gurkha soldier.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission, granted on 7 May  2017.
    Mr Wilding confirmed that the grounds relied on were as follows:

    Ground 1.  It was asserted that the judge had  failed  to  address  the
    elements of dependency that go  beyond  normal  ties  in  finding  that
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR was engaged;

    Ground 2.  It was submitted that given the long passage of time between
    the appellant's father being discharged from service as  a  Ghurkha  in
    1972 it was argued that  the  judge's  findings  that  the  appellant's
    father  would  have  settled  in  the  UK,  and  presumably  have  been
    financially secure, were unsustainable and noted that the appellant was
    born in 1995, 23 years after her father was discharged.

Decision on Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that any error of  law
    was made out and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.  Mr Wilding
    referred to the judge's findings at [29] of the  decision  and  reasons
    where several factors were noted  including  how  often  the  appellant
    spoke to the sponsor,  her  mother,  noting  financial  dependency  and
    noting the  difficulties  the  sponsor  has  in  the  UK.   Mr  Wilding
    submitted it was not clear how that assists the appellant  in  engaging
    Article 8(1).  It was submitted that realistically the judge had failed
    to engage properly with all the issues that might be  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether Article 8 is engaged including what the appellant
    is doing in Nepal and that the sponsor left the appellant in  Nepal  to
    travel to the UK.  Mr Wilding considered that these cases are  narrowly
    focused as to what the historic injustice means in  a  particular  case
    but that Article 8(1) was always important in terms of whether  or  not
    it was engaged.

 4. Mr Wilding submitted that the second error (set out in paragraph  5  of
    the Secretary of State's grounds of permission to  appeal)  related  to
    the finding of a direct correlation between  the  father's  intentions,
    his adult life after service and  the  current  situation  and  it  was
    submitted  that  the  injustice  was  somewhat  dampened  between   the
    sponsor's husband, who is now deceased, being discharged  in  1972  and
    now.  With regards to Section 117B, where it had  been  argued  in  the
    grounds of permission to appeal that the judge had failed to apply  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Mr Wilding accepted that this would not take him anywhere  in
    itself in that the provision provides  that  little  weight  should  be
    attached, not must be attached, to private life.  However  he  did  not
    concede the point.

 5. The background to this case is that the appellant's father was  an  ex-
    Ghurkha solder who passed away on 2  February  2010.   The  appellant's
    sponsor, her  mother  Mrs  Gurung  Nir  Kumari  is  the  widow  of  the
    appellant's father and was issued with a settlement visa on 22 November
    2013, arriving in the UK on 16 December 2013.  The  respondent  in  the
    refusal letter dated 22 September  2015  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph EC-DR.1.1. of Appendix  FM.
    It was conceded at the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant could not
    meet the existing Immigration Rules.  However it  was  the  appellant's
    case before the First-tier Tribunal that she would already  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and be British had the Secretary of State not  committed
    the historic injustice in relation to Nepalese soldiers serving in  the
    British Army.  The judge at [23] accepted that  this  was  an  historic
    injustice case.

 6. In terms of the first  ground  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  made
    adequate findings, (it was not argued that they were perverse) that the
    appellant was still dependent on the sponsor.  The judge found at  [24]
    that a period of separation does not necessarily split  a  family  unit
    and that the key question is whether an adult child  has  formed  their
    own independent life and whether  they  remain  part  of  the  parents'
    family  unit,  together  with  practical,   emotional   and   financial
    dependency.

 7. The judge  properly  directed  himself  in  relation  to  the  relevant
    jurisprudence including Ghising (family life - adults - Ghurkha policy)
    Nepal [2012] UKUT 160.  It was not disputed and it was accepted by  the
    judge, that the appellant in this case continued  to  reside  with  the
    sponsor until the sponsor travelled to the UK to  take  up  settlement.
    The appellant has no family of her own.  There was also no  dispute  to
    the judge's findings that the appellant  continues  to  depend  on  the
    sponsor for accommodation purposes and that  the  appellant  was  still
    studying in Nepal at the time.

 8. Although Mr Wilding submitted that the sponsor leaving the appellant in
    Nepal to move to the UK was relevant to the question of whether Article
    8 is engaged, the judge addressed this at  [28]  of  the  decision  and
    reasons.  The judge properly reminded himself that both the appellant's
    rights and those of the sponsor were to be considered and accepted that
    sponsor then faced a choice of either taking up settlement or losing it
    after two years.  The judge was correct to take into consideration  the
    reasons for the separation.  The judge also found  that  the  appellant
    remains financially dependent on the  sponsor  through  remittances  as
    were shown in the appeal bundle.  Again there was no challenge to  that
    finding.  I accept that the real issue in  this  case,  in  determining
    dependency, was whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that she had a family life  with  her  mother,  which  had
    existed at the time of her departure to settle in the UK and which  had
    endured beyond it notwithstanding her having left Nepal.  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and  Gurung  [2013}  EWCA  Civ  8
    applied  the issue of support (

 9. A proper reading of the decision indicates that the judge  found  there
    to be continuing mutual support and dependency  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor, including in his findings of the sponsor's  continuing
    difficulties with her  health  and  that  the  appellant  continues  to
    support her through sometimes  daily  phone  calls.   This  assists  in
    maintaining what the judge described as the  important  emotional  ties
    (it was accepted by both parties that the first reference to  appellant
    in the final sentence of paragraph [29] should have been  to  sponsor).
    The judge made no error in taking all these  factors  into  account  in
    finding that the ties between the appellant and her sponsor went beyond
    normal adult ties and that in this case family life was engaged for all
    the reasons given from [24] through to [29].

10. Mr Wilding was in error in  his  submission  that  the  judge  did  not
    address the issue of what the appellant  is  doing  currently,  as  the
    judge accepted she was studying in Nepal  but  in  so  doing  that  she
    remains financially and emotionally dependent on her mother as well  as
    being dependent for accommodation purposes.  The judge also had in mind
    the relatively young age of the appellant who  was  born  in  September
    1995.  I also note that Mr Wilding quite properly did not rely  on  his
    first ground of appeal which was that the judge was incorrect  to  rely
    on Ghising (family life - adults - Ghurkha policy)  Nepal  [2012]  UKUT
    160 when the respondent  had  introduced  a  more  generous  policy  in
    January 2015 and the Ghising approach was of limited  relevance.   That
    cannot be the case and the approach in Ghising and Gurung was  endorsed
    by the Court of Appeal in Rai.

11. The judge gave more than adequate reasons as to why in this  particular
    case Article 8 was engaged and the ties between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant went beyond normal  emotional  ties.   No  error  of  law  is
    disclosed under ground one.

12. In relation to the second ground, although Mr  Wilding  submitted  that
    the judge's finding was perverse, I am not satisfied that the very high
    bar to establish irrationality has been reached.  As I indicated,  this
    is all the more the  case,  given  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  has
    already been admitted to the UK, despite the fact that the Ghurkha (her
    husband) was discharged from service in 1972.

13. The appellant's  father  and  the  sponsor  married  in  1970  and  the
    appellant's father, the Ghurkha was discharged from the British Army in
    1972.  In order to qualify for settlement under Home Office policy,  in
    relation to Ghurkha families, the Home Office needed  to  be  satisfied
    that the former Ghurkha would have applied to settle  in  the  UK  upon
    discharge with the dependent child if they had been born by  then,  but
    otherwise the child would have been born here.  The judge did  not  err
    in  taking  into  account  the  evidence  which  included  the  witness
    statement of the sponsor that the appellant's father used to talk about
    the United Kingdom and repeated on several occasions that he hoped that
    the family would be able to settle in the United Kingdom following  his
    discharge.  In 2009 when the new policy was announced  the  appellant's
    father was bedridden and too old to take advantage  of  it.   Again  no
    dispute was made in relation to those facts which the judge set out  at
    [15].

14. The judge also took  into  account  that  the  separation  between  the
    appellant and her sponsor was less than two  years,  which  is  another
    factor considered in the Ghurkha policy.  I am of  the  view  therefore
    that the judge gave adequate reasons and made no error in his  approach
    to the proportionality balance in Article 8 and it is incorrect to  say
    that he did not consider the provisions of Section 117B and as  already
    noted, Mr Wilding conceded that he could not  succeed  on  this  ground
    alone.   The  judge  conceded  that  there  was  no  evidence  of   the
    appellant's proficiency in English.  However I am not  satisfied  there
    was any error in the  weight  that  the  judge  gave  to  the  historic
    injustice.  It is not the case, as argued in the grounds of  permission
    to appeal although not maintained by Mr Wilding,  that  in  effect  the
    Tribunal has considered only the  injustice  argument  as  the  primary
    issue, when in reality there are many factors.   The  judge  considered
    all of the relevant factors including Section 117B.   However, he  made
    no error in treating the historic injustice as a matter of  significant
    weight.  It is a strong factor to be taken into consideration and based
    on the judge's findings of fact the  conclusion  he  came  to  and  the
    weight he attributed to the relevant factors could not be  said  to  be
    irrational.

 Notice of Decision

15. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.  The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 11 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  11 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

