
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08055/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2020                     |On 14 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M J M
                         (ANONYMITY order in force)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Osadebe, Solicitor from Zurial Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent  (also  "the
claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I
make this order because the case turns on the welfare of the claimant's  son
and there is no legitimate public interest in  his  identity  and  publicity
would not be in his interests.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter  "the
claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of  State  on  10  July  2017
refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

The claimant was sent to prison for four years on 21 May 2010 for  supplying
class A drugs.  The sentencing judge found that  the  claimant  was  not  an
addict but was dealing solely for financial gain.  He  was  clearly  subject
to "automatic deportation" but his appeal against  deportation  was  allowed
by the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration Judge Rothwell and Mr P  Bombas)  on
human rights grounds on 28 November 2011.  The decision to allow the appeal
was not challenged by the  Secretary  of  State  who  granted  the  claimant
periods of limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Most recently  he
was given further leave on 4 March 2014 for  six  months.   On  3  September
2014 he applied for still further leave during the currency of his  existing
leave.  That application led to the decision complained of in July 2017.

I find it both regrettable and surprising that the Secretary of State  does
not seem to have considered the substance  of  Judge  Rothwell's  Tribunal's
decision in making the decision leading to the present appeal.   I  have  to
say that if that Determination and Reasons had been considered it  seems  to
me that the decision to refuse the application could have been reached  more
securely than proved to be the case. When Judge Rothwell's Tribunal  decided
the appeal the claimant was living with  his  wife  and  son  in  a  nuclear
family and the claimant was providing much of  the  childcare  as  his  wife
worked. The child was born in November 2005 and so was then 6 years old  but
when the Secretary  of  State  made  her  decision  in  September  2016  the
claimant and his wife had divorced and his former wife planned to  take  the
child with her to Jamaica.

There are parts of the Determination and Reasons  that  are  revealing.   It
must be remembered that part 5A of the 2002 Act was not in force when  Judge
Rothwell's Tribunal made  its  decision  and  so  there  were  no  statutory
impediments in the way of allowing the appeals of  people  sentenced  to  at
least four years' imprisonment.  Even so Judge Rothwell's Tribunal was  very
aware of the seriousness of the offence.  The  Tribunal  said  at  paragraph
61:

  "we find that if the [claimant] was not married to Mrs F and he  did  not
  have a son, then we would find there would be no  breach  of  Article  8.
  However we have to consider the lives of his wife and son.  ...".

It was clear beyond any possible argument that the appeal succeeded  in  the
First-tier Tribunal  not  because  of  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
claimant but  because  of  the  impact  on  deportation  on  the  claimant's
immediate family.  I realise that I have to decide the case  before  me  and
not engage in some  homily  on  deportation  appeals  generally  but  in  my
experience  appeals  against  deportation  (in  whatever   form   they   are
presented) are almost never successful because of the impact on  the  person
to be removed.   When  they  succeed  because  of  impact  on  close  family
members. It  is  therefore  slightly  surprising  to  read  in  the  opening
paragraph of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  that  the  claimant  was
"granted limited leave to remain because at the time your right  to  respect
for private and/or  family  life  was  considered  to  outweigh  the  public
interest in deporting you".  The comment may be  strictly  accurate  but  it
really does miss the point.

Nevertheless the letter, correctly, refers  to  paragraph  399C  of  HC  395
which confirms that  the  public  interest  in  deporting  somebody  is  not
extinguished by reason of his being permitted  to  remain  on  human  rights
grounds, but rather his deportation remains conducive  to  the  public  good
and in the public interest.  I am not sure that the Rules are necessary,  in
the sense that it is  plain  from  the  statute  that  although  the  public
interest in a person's  deportation  can,  occasionally,  be  outweighed  by
other considerations there is nothing there  to  suggest  that  it  is  ever
extinguished.  Nevertheless the Rule makes the position entirely clear.

The letter then rehearsed the claimant's personal history.   It  shows  that
he entered the United Kingdom in  December  2000  with  leave  and  that  he
served in the British Army.  He appears to have been in the  army  for  only
about a year.  There was a period when he had no permission  to  be  in  the
United Kingdom but that was a result of his leave expiring while he  was  in
custody and the police having his passport.   Whilst  the  reasons  for  not
being able to make an application in the usual  way  are  discreditable  the
fact that he did not in those circumstances was not and should not  be  held
against him.

When the Secretary of State made the July 2017  decision  the  claimant  was
not living with his wife.  Their relationship had broken  down  but  it  was
his case that he was in frequent contact with his child  R  and  in  October
2016 he was preparing to make an application  in  the  High  Court  for  the
child to reside with him.

The Secretary of State also considered supporting evidence from friends  and
associates tending to show that the claimant was established  and  respected
in the community.  He had not reoffended.  At  that  time  his  former  wife
intended to return to Jamaica with their son.  Clearly that rather  weakened
his claim that he would be separated from  his  son  by  being  deported  to
Jamaica.

By the time the case came before the First-tier Tribunal the  basis  of  the
case had changed.  The claimant's former wife no longer  planned  to  return
to Jamaica because of a change in circumstances there and  she  intended  to
remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  claimant's  son.   Broadly  she
supported the claimant's appeal.  The claimant's removal  would  affect  the
stability of the family.  She was glad that the claimant provided their  son
with a home for much of  the  time.   It  would  be  difficult  for  her  to
establish her new family with her new partner if their son  lived  with  her
permanently.

The First-tier Tribunal's crucial findings are at  paragraph  15  where  the
judge said:

  "He has a business and plays a full role in R's life.  It  is  a  genuine
  and  subsisting  relationship.   R  is  British.   R   has   lived   here
  continuously for at least seven years prior to the  deportation  decision
  as I accept that he only in fact spent four weeks in Jamaica in 2016 when
  [his mother] took him, and other holiday periods.   It  is  in  R's  best
  interest to remain here as he is now 14, at an  important  stage  of  his
  education, has almost always lived and been educated here, and has a full
  and active life outside school.  I am satisfied it would be unduly  harsh
  for R to have to leave everything he has here  to  live  in  Jamaica,  as
  while he can go to school there, speak the language used, and has  family
  there, his whole life and many family members are here.  It would plainly
  be more difficult for [the claimant] and  R  to  maintain  their  current
  relationship  if  MJM  was  deported  as  contact  by  means  of   modern
  communication is no substitute for the daily  hands  on  involvement  and
  support MJM provides.  The lack of 2019  documentary  evidence  does  not
  undermine the oral evidences as I have no reason to disbelieve RM or [the
  claimant].  I consequently accept that he has  another  relationship  and
  child in whose life he plays a full part.  I am satisfied  that,  despite
  MJM's imprisonment, his subsequent behaviour indicates he is socially and
  culturally integrated and that he never lost it during his  imprisonment.
  His ability to speak English and  lack  of  reliance  on  the  state  are
  neutral factors."

However the judge also rejected any contention that the claimant  could  not
get work  in  Jamaica  and  provide  for  himself  there.   He  clearly  had
transferable skills and energy.  The judge finished by saying:

  "This case  is  very  unusual,  and  the  factors  identified  above  are
  exceptional and compelling reasons over and above those considered in the
  Rules and are reasons which tip the balance in  [the  claimant's]  favour
  and means it would be a breach of his Article 8 rights to deport him."

I mean no disrespect to the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  by
summarising them as follows:

  1  the fact that an earlier appeal has succeeded does not extinguish  the
  public interest in deportation;

  2  when a person has been sentenced to at least four years'  imprisonment
  in order to avoid deportation that person must show that there are  "very
  compelling circumstances" "over and above" those set out as exceptions  1
  and 2 in part 5A of the 2002 Act;

  3  the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that there are  "exceptional  and
  compelling circumstances over and above those considered in the Rules and
  are reasons which tip the balance in the [claimant's] favour" is reasoned
  wholly inadequately;

  4  the facts do not support such a conclusion.

There is  reference  in  the  grounds  to  well-known  cases.   There  is  a
quotation from the very short supporting  judgment  of  Hickinbottom  LJ  in
SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 where he said at paragraph 46:

  "When a parent is deported, one can only  have  great  sympathy  for  the
  entirely innocent children involved.  Even in circumstances in which they
  can remain in the United Kingdom  with  their  other  parent,  they  will
  inevitably be distressed.  However, in Section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act,
  Parliament has made clear its will that, for foreign  offenders  who  are
  sentenced to one to four years,  only  where  the  consequences  for  the
  children are 'unduly harsh' will deportation  be  constrained.   That  is
  entirely consistent with Article 8 of the ECHR.   It  is  important  that
  decision makers and, when their decisions are challenged,  Tribunals  and
  courts honour that expression of Parliamentary will.  In  this  case,  in
  agreement with Holroyde LJ, I consider the  evidence  only  admitted  one
  conclusion  that,  unfortunate  as  PG's  deportation  will  be  for  his
  children, for none of them will it result in undue harshness."

With respect to Hickinbottom LJ that is a timely reminder of the  importance
of  giving  the  weight  Parliament  requires  to  the  public  interest  in
deporting  foreign  offenders  when  conducting  an  Article   8   balancing
exercise.  There the Court of Appeal was concerned with  people  subject  to
less than four years' imprisonment.   This  claimant  is  in  a  still  more
serious category. Section 117C(6) provides that:

  "In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period  of
  imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the  public  interest  requires
  deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
  above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

I pressed Mr Osadebe to identify the  "very  compelling  circumstances  over
and above" that could possibly justify the decision to allow the  claimant's
appeal.  It was not his fault that he could not do that.

There is no basis for challenging the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  findings
about the claimant's present circumstances and  his  relationship  with  his
children. Any deficiency in the details of the  younger  child  reflect  the
very limited information that was before Tribunal.

However the First-tier Tribunal Judge lost sight  of  section  117C(6).  The
plain fact is that the provisions of the statute have  either  been  ignored
completely or applied wrongly.  Notwithstanding the length of his  residence
in the United Kingdom and the ten years or  so  that  has  lapsed  since  he
committed the offence that led him into this trouble the claimant  is  in  a
very difficult position and I have no hesitation in  saying  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge did not explain at all adequately how the  claimant  met  the
statutory requirements necessary to avoid deportation now.

I reject as well any lingering suggestion that it  is  somehow  improper  to
reconsider deportation after the appeal  has  succeeded.   Judge  Rothwell's
decision was right when it was made.  It dealt with the law as it  then  was
and the facts as they then were.  As was surely apparent from the grants  of
limited leave the claimant's position remained precarious  and  was  subject
to review. The facts have certainly changed and  the  law,  if  it  has  not
changed, has certainly been clarified and made prescriptive in  a  way  that
was not when her tribunal made its decision.

Certainly there is evidence that the claimant plays a big part in  the  life
of his son and that arrangement is beneficial to the child and both  parents
but they do not live in a nuclear family so his removal will not create  the
jolt of family separation. I must however emphasise that  I  do  accept  the
evidence that the claimant's son spends roughly half of his  time  with  him
and that the claimant supports him in his  sports,  particularly  athletics.
This involves a big commitment that cannot be replicated.  It  is  important
"father and son" time and undoubtedly in the child's best interest that  his
father remains in the United Kingdom so that it can continue.

The clear fact that the claimant is important in  the  life  of  the  child,
indeed both children, does not assist him much in the appeal.  This  is  the
sort of case which would have been  difficult  to  allow  if  the  test  was
"undue harshness" but it is not, it is an "over and above" test.   There  is
nothing in the judge's decision that justifies it.  I  therefore  set  aside
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I must now consider  how  to  dispose  of  this  appeal.   In  my  judgment,
although  I  think  the  claimant  would  have  liked  it,   there   is   no
justification in returning the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  know
very little about the claimant's present circumstances. There  has  been  no
request to admit new evidence although I think there was a  suggestion  that
some was going  to  be  obtained.   Certainly  a  signed  witness  statement
dealing  the  claimant's  present  domestic  arrangements  would  have  been
interesting but that should have been done for the appeal in the  First-tier
Tribunal. If there are better points to be made on  new  evidence  then  the
remedy lies in a new claim.

The skeleton argument provided by the claimant makes some reference  to  the
"Devaseelan principle" but I have already indicated that there  are  obvious
significant changes and I have  rejected  the  contention  that  the  public
interest in his deportation is somehow diminished by reason of  his  earlier
appeal having been allowed.

I have considered the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.   I
see no point in setting it out in detail.

 I could only repeat as I have indicated, that there is nothing  I  can  see
which comes near to establishing the "over and above" consequences that  are
necessary.  There are perfectly proper reasons to accept that  the  claimant
plays an important part  in  the  life  of  the  older  child  and  although
particularised much less clearly like the First-tier Tribunal I  can  accept
that he plays an important part in the life of the other  child.   I  accept
too the evidence in the bundles about his being settled and having  contacts
in the community.  The evidence is  believable  and  not  controversial.   I
also accept  that  the  claimant  facilitates  developing  the  relationship
between his son and Mrs PR (page 83 in  the  bundle)  who  is  an  "honorary
grandmother".  These relationships  are  important.   Interrupting  them  is
unlikely to be unduly harsh there is nothing  to  support  such  a  finding.
Interruption is clearly not "over and above".  I decline to remit the  case.
 There has been no application to adduce new evidence and there  is  nothing
in the evidence here which would justify a decision to allow the  claimant's
appeal, even if everything was taken at its highest.

I respectfully  echo  the  observations  of  Hickinbottom  LJ.   Deportation
appeals  have  unpleasant  consequences  for  children  and  other   people.
Parliament has decided that  these  consequences  do  not  normally  attract
sufficient weight to  counterbalance  the  public  interest  in  removing  a
foreign criminal and they are insufficient on their own  when  that  foreign
criminal has been sentenced to  at  least  four  years'  imprisonment.   The
flexible nature  in  Article  8  balancing  exercises  means  that  decision
makers, perhaps especially judges, should be alert to the possibility  of  a
truly exceptional case.  There is nothing before me to suggest that this  is
such a case.

The claimant's appeal cannot succeed on the evidence provided if the law  is
applied properly.

It follows that as well as setting aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal  I  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  against   the
Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

I allow the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 May 2020                     |



