
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 10th July 2017                      |On 17 July 2017               |
|Prepared on 11th of July 2017                |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MRS AQEELA SHABIR
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd of June 1987. She
       appeals against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Parkes sitting at Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 26th of October  2016
       in  which  he  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       Respondent dated 11th of September 2015. That decision was to refuse
       the Appellant's application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse.  The
       Appellant wished to join her husband Mr Shabir  Hussain,  a  British
       citizen ("the Sponsor") whom she married on 7th of April  2015.  The
       Sponsor had divorced his first wife by decree absolute  on  24th  of
       October 2013.


    2. The application was refused on the basis that the Respondent was not
       satisfied that the couple intended to live together as  husband  and
       wife. The Respondent  was  concerned  that  there  was  no  evidence
       presented to show how the couple had met or  what  sort  of  contact
       they had enjoyed  both  prior  to  and  since  their  marriage.  The
       Appellant had visited the United Kingdom for 5 months  in  2014  but
       there was no indication  that  she  had  met  the  Sponsor  on  that
       occasion or how the wedding came to be arranged.

The Decision at First Instance

    3. The Appellant appealed and the Judge indicated in his  determination
       that if the relationship was indeed not genuine and subsisting  then
       the appeal must fail.  Having  considered  the  matter  however,  he
       stated at paragraph 6 of his determination:  "the  evidence  is  now
       significantly greater than it was before the ECO. There is  more  of
       visits by the Sponsor and they now have a daughter and  it  was  the
       Sponsor who registered her birth.  Given  the  evidence  of  contact
       between them, including the phone and other records  in  the  papers
       the Appellant has shown the relationship is genuine and subsisting."




    4. The Judge found that Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention  was
       engaged and directed himself in accordance with the Razgar  step-by-
       step  approach.  The  3rd  question  in  Razgar  was   whether   the
       interference with the couple's married life was in  accordance  with
       the law. The Judge commented at paragraph 8 that  at  the  time  the
       decision was made the evidence before the Respondent was limited and
       did not contain much of the information that had now been  provided.
       The decision thus taken by the Respondent was open to  him  at  that
       time and so could not be said to be unlawful. A decision maker could
       only proceed on the basis of the documentation  and  other  evidence
       supplied and they would not be acting  unlawfully  if  they  made  a
       decision on that basis. The fact that the  evidence  showed  that  a
       different conclusion would now be appropriate did not undermine  the
       earlier decision made on more limited information.  The  Appellant's
       remedy was to reapply for entry clearance but this time putting  all
       relevant information before the Respondent. The Judge addressed  the
       question whether it was disproportionate to require the Appellant to
       make a renewed application in  Pakistan.  The  Appellant's  daughter
       might be able to obtain a British passport but would take some time.
       Neither the Appellant nor her daughter would be  travelling  in  the
       near future and  therefore  could  apply  again.  He  dismissed  the
       appeal.




The Onward Appeal

    5. The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing that the  Judge
       had failed to refer to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  had
       erred in dismissing the Appellant's appeal on  the  basis  that  she
       should make a renewed application to the Respondent. The application
       had been refused  under  the  rules  but  the  rules  had  been  met
       according to the Judge who should therefore have allowed the appeal.




    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Keane on 9th of May 2017 who found it incumbent upon  the  Judge  to
       arrive at a finding in respect of the Immigration Rules in the light
       of the finding that the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  party  to  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship.


    7. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission  by  letter  dated
       25th of May 2017 opposing the  Appellant's  appeal.  The  Respondent
       argued that under the new appeal  regime  an  Appellant  could  only
       challenge the human rights  element  of  an  application  for  entry
       clearance. As such, a finding that the Appellant met the Immigration
       Rules would not necessarily lead to the appeal being allowed and was
       not determinative of the issue in the  appeal,  see  Mostafa  [2015]
       UKUT 00112. The Judge found that the Appellant had not submitted  to
       the Respondent the wealth of information which had been presented to
       the Tribunal. There would be no adverse impact upon the Appellant to
       require her to submit a new application and as such the decision  to
       dismiss the appeal was not disproportionate.

The Hearing Before Me

    8. In oral submissions  counsel  for  the  Appellant  argued  that  the
       documentary evidence which was before the Judge had  been  contained
       in a letter dated 14th of October 2015 written  by  the  Appellant's
       solicitors to the Respondent a month after the decision  to  refuse.
       The entry clearance manager had reviewed the appeal on  4th  of  May
       2016 but noted that no new supporting documents had  been  submitted
       with  the  appeal  papers.  Nevertheless  the  documentation   which
       persuaded the Judge that the marriage was genuine and subsisting had
       been before the Respondent even if the entry clearance  manager  had
       not engaged with those representations.


    9.  The issue the Judge had to  decide  was  whether  the  Respondent's
       decision was in accordance with the law if  the  Appellant  met  the
       requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  rules  incorporated
       Article 8 within them and the relevant date for consideration of the
       facts  was,  as  the  Judge  pointed  out  at  paragraph  2  of  the
       determination, the date of hearing. The case cited by the Respondent
       in  the  reply  to  the  grant  of  permission,  Mostafa,  could  be
       distinguished from the facts in this case. In Mostafa the  Appellant
       was a visitor and there was no right of appeal under the rules.  The
       Judge nevertheless had allowed the appeal under the rules  when  the
       Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  do  so.  If  the  decision  in  the
       instant case was wrong the only conclusion would  be  to  allow  the
       appeal. If the Appellant met the Immigration  Rules  a  decision  to
       refuse entry clearance could not be  in  accordance  with  the  law.
       Since April 2015 the only relevant ground  of  appeal  was  a  human
       rights appeal. This was a human  rights  appeal  as  it  involved  a
       marriage application.


   10. In response the Presenting Officer accepted that since 6th of  April
       2015 the only right of appeal was on  human  rights  grounds.  There
       were no reported cases on the point that counsel for  the  Appellant
       was raising. One way to read the new right of appeal provisions  was
       indeed as submitted by counsel for the Appellant but the  issue  had
       not been clarified in the courts. Whether the ratio  in  AS  Somalia
       (that Article 8 in an out of country case was to be decided  at  the
       date of decision) still stood was also  to  be  clarified.  For  the
       Appellant counsel argued that the new appeal provisions contained in
       the 2002 Act had changed that position.

Findings

   11.  This  appeal  raises  a  short  point,  although  not  one  without
       difficulty, on the issue of proportionality in  Article  8  appeals.
       The application for entry clearance was refused  by  the  Respondent
       because the Respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and
       Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting marriage. On the  basis  of
       the evidence  before  the  Respondent  that  was  an  understandable
       decision and the Judge at first instance found no error  in  it.  On
       the basis of further evidence  which  post-dated  the  decision  the
       Judge found that the Appellant and Sponsor were  in  a  genuine  and
       subsisting  marriage.  The  Appellant  argues  that  her  solicitors
       supplied this further evidence after the date of decision but before
       the entry clearance manager reviewed the papers. It does not  appear
       that the further evidence which proved the marriage was genuine  and
       subsisting was before the entry clearance manager when  he  reviewed
       the matter some months later.


   12. That was unfortunate because had the evidence been before the  entry
       clearance manager it may not have been necessary to have  had  these
       proceedings at all. The Judge did  not  deal  with  that  point  but
       proceeded on the assumption that he was seeing  evidence  which  the
       Respondent had not  seen.  The  appeal  had  been  accepted  by  the
       Tribunal as a valid human rights appeal. The issue was  whether  the
       appeal had to be considered outside the Immigration Rules as a human
       rights only appeal because there was  no  appeal  under  the  rules.
       Alternatively, as counsel sought  to  argue  before  me,  the  rules
       themselves were a statement of human rights and therefore if a wrong
       decision had been taken (in this case to find that the marriage  was
       not genuine and subsisting when it was), then the decision could not
       be in accordance with the law.


   13. This argument  begs  the  question  whether  the  Immigration  Rules
       incorporate Article 8 or whether they are a  statement  of  how  the
       Respondent proposes to discharge her functions in the light  of  her
       obligations under Article 8. If counsel for the Appellant is correct
       then any attempt to restrict  appeal  rights  arising  from  adverse
       decisions taken under the Immigration Rules will fail  because  such
       decisions will always have a right of appeal.  This  would  severely
       affect legislative attempts to control appeal  rights.  Counsel  did
       not submit a skeleton argument to support his oral  submissions  and
       both parties agreed there is no decided case law on  this  point.  I
       would be very reluctant to be drawn into allowing this appeal on the
       basis of  a  potentially  floodgates  decision  that  overturns  the
       legislative intention.


   14. Section 85 (4) of the 2002 Act provides that on an appeal against  a
       decision to refuse a human rights claim the  Tribunal  may  consider
       any matter which it thinks relevant to the substance of the decision
       including a matter arising after the  date  of  the  decision.  This
       suggests that the Tribunal may consider the situation at the date of
       hearing. At that date in this  case  it  was  established  that  the
       Appellant and Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting marriage.


   15. Rather than finding  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law, the better course in my  view  is  to  find
       that the decision was not proportionate to the human rights  engaged
       since the effect of the decision  was  to  keep  the  Appellant  and
       Sponsor apart when they were in a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage
       and had a child who was potentially a British citizen. I  would  not
       be prepared to find that a decision taken by  the  Respondent  at  a
       time when only limited information had been made  available  to  him
       was not in accordance with the law because subsequently it was shown
       on further evidence that the decision was incorrect. To that  extent
       I agree with the Judge at first instance.


   16.  I also take the point raised by the First-tier Judge when  granting
       permission that it was incumbent upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       make a decision based on  the  finding  that  there  was  a  genuine
       marriage. The Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  admission  to  the
       Appellant interfered with the Appellant and  Sponsor's  family  life
       and in all the circumstances was disproportionate to the  legitimate
       aim pursued. I do not accept that there was  no  legitimate  aim  in
       this case. The entry clearance manager  had  not  seen  the  further
       representations made but Islamabad is a busy post and there may be a
       number of reasons for that not all of which would reflect  badly  on
       the Respondent.


   17. Since the Appellant could meet the rules the provisions as  to  very
       compelling circumstances that need to be shown when applying outside
       the Rules would not apply thus the Judge might well have been  right
       in saying that it was not particularly onerous for the Appellant  to
       reapply. She would have to pay  a  further  fee  but  the  delay  in
       waiting for a further decision from the Respondent might well be  no
       greater than the delay in processing an appeal through the Tribunal.
       However,  the  Appellant  did  not  have  to  show  very  compelling
       circumstances, she merely had to show that she could comply with the
       rules and that the decision was disproportionate  under  Article  8.
       This she could do. I find that the decision was disproportionate  in
       all the circumstances and therefore allow the appeal  under  Article
       8.
Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I set it aside. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

Appellant's appeal allowed


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 11th of July 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge at first instance made no fee order. Given  that  the  information
which led to the appeal being ultimately allowed before me  was  not  before
the Entry Clearance Officer at the date of decision, I too would not make  a
fee order in this case.

Signed this 11th of July 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


