
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/08279/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|                                           |On Tuesday, 22 September 2020   |
|On Tuesday 15 September 2020               |                                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR O'NEILL [F]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Yacoobali, Legal Representative, North
                    Kensington Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.          This is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
      reference I refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of  the  First-
      tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  promulgated  on  2  January  2020  ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 24  April  2017  refusing  his
      human rights claims, made in the context of the Respondent's  decision
      to deport the Appellant to Jamaica.  The Appellant's claim is based on
      his relationship with his partner and children/stepchild  as  well  as
      his private life formed in the UK.

2.          The Respondent accepted that the  Appellant's  stepchild,  [JOS]
      could not be expected to go with the Appellant to Jamaica,  presumably
      on the basis that he remains in a  relationship  with  his  biological
      parent or at least may wish to have contact  with  that  parent.   The
      Respondent also accepted  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      Appellant's partner [F] to go to live in Jamaica as [F] had lived  her
      entire life in the  UK.   The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
      Appellant's children (currently aged five and six years) could not  go
      to Jamaica given their young age and ability to adapt.  The Respondent
      did  not  accept  either  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      Appellant's partner and children/stepchild to remain  without  him  in
      the UK.  The Respondent also did not accept that the  Appellant  meets
      the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in relation to his  private  life.
      The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  are  very   compelling
      circumstances over and above  the  exceptions  within  the  Rules  and
      Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section
      117C") which would render deportation unjustifiably harsh.

3.          The Judge concluded that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      Appellant's partner and children/stepchild to go with the Appellant to
      Jamaica or remain without him in the UK.  He also concluded  that  the
      decision to deport was disproportionate when  looked  at  outside  the
      Rules.  He allowed the appeal on that basis.

4.          The Respondent appeals the Judge's  conclusions  essentially  on
      the basis that the Judge has failed to identify what  it  is  in  this
      case that satisfies the threshold of being "unduly harsh".  It is said
      that the Judge fails to point to evidence showing that the  effect  of
      deportation on the partner and children would be beyond the norm which
      is to be expected in a deportation case.

5.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Shimmin on 11 February 2020 on the basis that "[i]t is  arguable  that
      the judge  has  erred  in  making  a  finding  that  the  criteria  in
      paragraphs 399(a) and (b) are met without giving  sufficient  evidence
      and reasoning".  Permission is granted on  all  grounds  although,  in
      truth, the grounds are simply an expansion  of  one  ground  namely  a
      failure to give reasons or explain by reference to  the  evidence  why
      the Appellant should succeed.

6.          On 23 April 2020, the President  gave  directions  inviting  the
      parties to consider whether the error of law issue could be determined
      on the papers and to make  written  submissions  on  that  course  and
      expanding upon the  substance  of  the  grounds  and  the  Appellant's
      response to them. Those directions were given in light of the Covid-19
      pandemic and the effect on the  Tribunal's  ability  to  convene  oral
      hearings as normal.

7.          On  16  June  2020,  the  Appellant's  representatives  filed  a
      response to the appeal in reply to the directions  but  which  I  have
      also treated as the  Appellant's  Rule  24  response.   The  Appellant
      identifies as the crucial issue whether the separation of the children
      and mother from their  father  would  be  unduly  harsh  or  otherwise
      disproportionate  in  the  context  of  the  public  interest.     The
      Appellant said that the Judge had  placed  particular  weight  on  the
      reports of two independent social  workers  and  the  role  which  the
      Appellant plays in the family as well as the fact that the family  had
      preserved the family relationship via contact whilst the Appellant was
      in prison.

8.          The Respondent filed a skeleton argument  on  24  June  2020  to
      stand as her case.  That had been previously filed in May 2020 with  a
      wrong reference.  The Respondent relied in particular on a decision of
      the Tribunal in Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh) [2020]
      UKUT 83 (IAC) and KF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2051.  It is said that the Judge failed  to
      have regard to the guidance given in those cases and in other case law
      and the Respondent repeats  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  provide
      adequate reasons for his conclusions that deportation  would  have  an
      unduly harsh effect.

9.          A response to the Respondent's skeleton argument  was  filed  in
      relation to the case-law cited therein.  The Appellant drew  attention
      to the cases  cited  by  the  Judge,  in  particular  PG  (Jamaica)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 and KO
      (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53
      ("KO (Nigeria)") (see [12] of the Decision).

10.         By a Note and Directions sent on 6 July 2020, the  parties  were
      informed that the hearing would take place by remote means absent  any
      objection.    Neither party objected to that course.  The parties were
      therefore given notice that the hearing would be conducted  via  Skype
      for Business. The hearing proceeded without any technical problems and
      both parties confirmed that they  were  able  to  follow  the  hearing
      throughout.  I had before me the written submissions as aforesaid, the
      Appellant's bundle and skeleton argument which were before Judge Davey
      and other sundry documents.

11.         The matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  Decision
      contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the
      decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

12.          Although  I  did  not  follow  at  first  reading  the  Judge's
      reasoning at [7] of the Decision as to why it would  be  unduly  harsh
      for the Appellant's children to go to Jamaica, I accept Mr Yacoobali's
      submission that this was a conclusion open to the Judge based  on  [5]
      of the Decision  where  the  Judge  points  out  that  the  Respondent
      considered it unduly harsh for [JOS]  to  leave.   Although  the  same
      reasoning does not necessarily translate directly to  the  Appellant's
      biological  children,  in  circumstances  where  the  Respondent  also
      accepted that [F] could not go to Jamaica, it is difficult to see  how
      the young children could be expected  to  leave  as  to  do  so  would
      involve separation not only from  their  half-sibling  but  also  from
      their mother.  Mr Melvin did not challenge this part of  the  Decision
      in his submissions. The focus is therefore on  the  Judge's  reasoning
      and conclusions whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  Appellant's
      family to remain without him in the UK.

13.         In order to consider the grounds and submissions in context,  it
      is necessary to set  out  the  Judge's  reasoning  and  conclusion  in
      relation to paragraph 399 of the Rules.  The Judge's  conclusion  that
      the appeal should be allowed focusses only on the  Appellant's  family
      life and I do not therefore need to deal with paragraph  399A  of  the
      Rules.  I did not understand it to  be  disputed  that  the  Appellant
      cannot meet that paragraph or the exception in Section 117C  based  on
      his private life.  The Judge found that paragraph 399A was not met and
      that conclusion has not been challenged.   The  Judge  did  not  place
      reliance  on  the  Appellant's  private  life  when  concluding   that
      deportation would also be disproportionate outside the Rules.

14.         The Judge's reasoning appears at [15] and [20] to  [25]  of  the
      Decision as follows:

            "15. The issue therefore remains to what extent  the  impact  of
           removing the Appellant or the children  would  be  unduly  harsh
           upon them; Similarly raised under the rules as  in  Paragraph  7
           herein.
                 ...
            20.  Whilst health issue of the Appellant's partner and  of  one
           of the children were raised, it did not seem to me,  other  than
           as a fact that they  have  occurred,  they  added  much  to  the
           factors I took into account in particular that  the  child  BNFF
           has asthma and certain health problems that may be aged  related
           and the Appellant's partner has  undoubtedly  been  feeling  the
           effects of depression and anxiety over the uncertain  status  of
           the Appellant.  I concluded that those  health  issues  are  not
           immaterial but of no particular weight.
             21.   In  respect  of  the  social  workers'   reports,   whose
           qualifications and experience are set out in  their  reports,  I
           take them into account in the  context  of  the  best  interests
           assessment with reference to Section 55 BCIA 2007.  It seemed to
           me material factors were that, first,  the  Appellant  had  been
           living in the family home  since  his  release  from  prison  in
           January 2018.  Secondly, that the Appellant's  partner  and  the
           children had visited the Appellant every week/fortnight when  he
           was in custody (AB96).  Thirdly, separating  the  children  from
           the Appellant would not be  in  their  best  interests,  in  the
           reports paragraphs 20.8, 23.3, 23.4, 25.2, 26.3, 24.6  and  26.6
           (AB99, 101-103, 105 and 106).  Fourthly, that  communication  by
           modern technology which the Secretary of State advanced as a way
           of maintaining family  relations  did  not  I  find  replace  or
           replicate the emotional and  direct  physical  contact  benefits
           (AB104).  Fifthly, that the eldest son JOS's wishes and feelings
           need to be taken into account, bearing in mind his age  (AB108).
           There was  no  doubt  that  the  social  workers  observing  the
           Appellant's family have  seen  them  at  various  times  and  on
           various occasions and been able to observe both their  behaviour
           at home and in one case attending at a  prison  visit  with  the
           impact of seeing the Appellant and the effects of separation  at
           the end of the prison visit.
            22.  I found the social workers' evidence compelling as  to  the
           bond between the Appellant with his family and the positive role
           he plays in their lives and in the family home generally (AB109-
           122).
            23.  Ms  Mwape  considered  the  implications  of  removing  the
           Appellant from the children's lives and she  also  reported  the
           strong bond and positive relationship between the Appellant  and
           the children and the significant part he  plays  in  the  family
           home (AB96-107).  The report therefore descends into particulars
           as to the nature of the relationships with the Appellant and the
           children and I simply cite the conclusion she found to  be  read
           at AB86-91, in terms of the positive contribution the  Appellant
           makes to the children's lives and the benefits to  them  of  his
           presence continuing.  Further, it is the view of Ms  Mwape  that
           the Appellant is the cornerstone of  his  family  and  that  the
           effects of his removal would be very  significant  in  terms  of
           both the Appellant's partner and the two children JOS and  BNFF.
           The issue of the child DIVF is not be ignored but those  reports
           particularly  refer  to  particular  impacts  on   those   older
           children.
            24.  Ms Mwape also interviewed the Appellant's brother  and  her
           report provided a clear picture  of  the  family  bond  and  the
           consistency of opinion as to the  positive  part  the  Appellant
           plays in their lives.  I remind myself  that  the  Secretary  of
           State did not have  the  advantage  of  seeing  the  independent
           social workers'  reports  and  Mr  Main  did  not  identify  any
           particular flaws in the assessments that those persons had  made
           or that there were matters which appeared to  be  ignored  which
           might have affected the conclusions reached.   I  also  had  the
           letter of Mr D Mills supporting the Appellant  and  that  of  Ms
           Rojow.  The school at which the child JOS attends also  had  the
           report from the assistant head teacher,  Ms  Goodyear,  dated  5
           June 2019 for JOS which spoke to her assessment of the impact of
           deportation and as she put it 'the forced removal of a key  care
           giver would have detrimental effect for any child'.
            25.  In  the  light  of  the  social  workers'  report  and  the
           evidence as a  whole,  I  concluded  that  the  children's  best
           interests lie, as British nationals, to enjoy  the  benefits  of
           being British nationals in the UK with  their  British  national
           mother and that it  was  not  in  their  best  interests  to  be
           separated from their father, the Appellant I concluded that  the
           impact of removing the Appellant on both [F]  and  the  children
           would be unduly harsh and could not be  satisfactorily  replaced
           or replicated by modern means of communication.  The removal  of
           the Appellant would be unduly harsh upon [F] who it was accepted
           to be in an ongoing and loving relationship, and would not be in
           the best interests of the emotional development of the children.
            I therefore take the conclusions and those set out in Paragraph
           7 above as relevant to  consideration  of  the  public  interest
           question and the proportionality of the Respondent's decision."

15.         In light of [15] of the Decision and what is said in  the  final
      sentence of [25], in order to consider the reasoning as a whole, it is
      necessary to import what is said at [7] of the Decision as follows:

            "Whether the Appellant arrived  in  the  UK  in  2009  or  2011,
           ultimately it does not seem to me the Appellant would  have  met
           sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 399A, nor are there obviously any
           very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Jamaica.
           Life might be hard there but that did not indicate that he could
           not reintegrate.  In view of what the Respondent  did  accept  I
           find the Paragraph 399(a)(i), (b)(i) were met and that it  would
           be unduly harsh for the children to live in Jamaica or remain in
           the UK  without  the  Appellant  Paragraph  399  sub  paragraphs
           (a)(ii), (a) and (b).  It is accepted that  sub  paragraphs  (b)
           and (b)(i) apply.  In the light of the acceptance that it  would
           be unduly harsh for [F]  or  [JOS]  to  relocate  to  Jamaica  I
           conclude the same factors would engage sub-paragraph (b)(ii).  I
           therefore will consider if sub-paragraph (a)(ii)(b) and (b)(iii)
           are met i.e. it would be unduly harsh for the children BNFF  and
           DIVF or [F] to remain in  the  UK  without  the  Appellant:  the
           Secretary of State did not accept that it would be so".

16.         Although it might not be helpful to set out what is and  is  not
      accepted by reference to the paragraphs of the Rules which have become
      quite complicated in their  numbering  (and  which  has  led  to  some
      potential ambiguity in relation to the position of the children midway
      through the passage), it is clear from the  final  sentence  that  the
      Judge understood that what he needed to  consider  namely  whether  it
      would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's  partner  and  children  to
      remain in the UK without him.  I have already noted that there  is  no
      challenge to the Judge's findings as to the Appellant's  private  life
      nor as to the conclusion  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      Appellant's partner and children to go to Jamaica with him.   What  is
      said at [7] of the Decision  read  with  [15]  of  the  Decision  does
      identify the issue which the Judge needed to decide.

17.         Nor do I accept the Respondent's  grounds  in  relation  to  the
      consideration of the evidence.  The Judge has set out in  the  passage
      which I have cited at [14] above and the paragraphs between  [15]  and
      [20] of the Decision the evidence to which he had regard and  what  he
      made of that evidence.

18.         That leaves only the question whether the Judge  has  adequately
      explained why it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  be
      deported leaving his family in the UK.  It is on  this  point  that  I
      consider the Respondent's grounds to have  some  potential  merit  for
      reasons which I now explain.

19.         I begin by noting the Appellant's reliance on the  recent  Court
      of Appeal judgment in HA (Iraq) and RA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  I did not need to hear  any
      detailed submissions on the  content  of  that  judgment.   Mr  Melvin
      informed me that consideration was being given by the Respondent to an
      appeal of that decision to the Supreme Court on  limited  aspects  but
      that the Respondent did not consider the judgment to  be  contrary  in
      the main to the previous case-law.  Mr  Yacoobali  accepted  that  the
      judgment still  makes  clear  that  "unduly  harsh"  involves  a  high
      threshold for an appellant to  surmount  because  of  the  context  of
      deportation of foreign criminals and the importance  of  that  to  the
      public interest.  In particular, at [44] of the  judgment,  the  Court
      pointed out that "[t]he underlying concept is clearly of  an  enhanced
      degree of harshness sufficient to outweigh the public interest in  the
      deportation of foreign criminals in the medium offender category" (see
      also [51] of the judgment).

20.         The difference if difference there be relates to  what  is  also
      said at paragraph [44] that the question of the need for the degree of
      harshness to "go beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any
      child  faced  with  the  deportation  of  a  parent"  cannot  be  read
      literally.  The point to be taken from KO (Nigeria)  (which  is  there
      being analysed) is that "some level of harshness is to be regarded  as
      'acceptable or justifiable' in the context of the public  interest  in
      the deportation of foreign criminals and  what  'unduly'  does  is  to
      provide that Exception 2 will only  apply  where  the  harshness  goes
      beyond that level."  The change in emphasis in the Court  of  Appeal's
      judgment does however undermine the point  made  in  the  Respondent's
      grounds in this case which relies on a  necessity  to  show  something
      beyond the normal consequences of deportation.  That this is  not  the
      test is now confirmed expressly by the Court of Appeal in  HA  (Iraq).
      The impact of deportation on the child or children in question (or the
      partner) is to be considered individually based  on  the  evidence  in
      each case to identify whether the high threshold which must  be  shown
      has been surpassed.

21.         Turning back therefore to the Decision,  the  issue  for  me  to
      consider is whether the Judge has recognised that the threshold to  be
      met is a high one and has  explained  how  it  is  met  based  on  his
      analysis of the evidence.

22.         I asked Mr Yacoobali to identify to me any part of the  Decision
      where the Judge had set out what is  meant  by  the  test  of  "unduly
      harsh".  He was unable to do so.  Although those words are used  on  a
      number of occasions including at [25] where the Judge's conclusion  on
      that issue is found, there is no indication that this involves a  high
      threshold.  Indeed, taking [25] of the Decision alone, one might think
      that this was not a deportation case at all if the  only  reasons  for
      finding that the Appellant's  deportation  was  disproportionate  were
      that the  children's  best  interests  were  better  served  by  their
      father's presence and that they and  their  mother  were  British.   I
      leave out of account the reference to the "public  interest  question"
      in the final sentence which seems designed to  move  on  to  the  next
      section dealing with  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  but  even  that
      sentence does not identify the strong public interest  at  play.   One
      finds that public interest articulated only at [26]  of  the  Decision
      and even there not in the context of the high level of that  interest.



23.         Even when setting  out  the  statutory  provisions  which  apply
      (including Section 117C) at [14] of the Decision, the Judge's focus is
      on Section 117B and not Section 117C so that there is no reflection of
      the public interest inherent in deportation of foreign criminals.

24.         I accept of course that the Judge recognised  that  this  was  a
      deportation case.  He has set out the Appellant's offending at [2] and
      [3] of the Decision although even in those paragraphs, there is little
      reflection on the public interest in both the prevention of crime  and
      deterrence, nor that the Appellant's offences involved the  supply  of
      Class A drugs and the societal impacts of such offences.

25.         Mr Yacoobali relied on what he said was  a  recognition  of  the
      case-law which applies at [9] to [12] of the Decision.  I accept  that
      there is some reference there to clearly relevant cases.  However, for
      reasons which are not apparent, the Judge refers only to those in  the
      context of the "very compelling circumstances" test  and  not  to  the
      threshold level which applies to the exception before one reaches  the
      issue whether there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
      the exceptions.  Whilst clearly the threshold is higher in relation to
      the very compelling circumstances over and above the  exceptions  than
      it is in relation  to  the  exceptions  themselves  (which  are  self-
      contained  and  therefore  contain  no  balancing  exercise  with  the
      offending/ public interest), if the Judge has erred by failing to take
      into account the threshold when considering the exceptions, that has a
      potential knock-on  effect  on  his  conclusion  that  deportation  is
      disproportionate when the balancing exercise is undertaken.

26.         Finally, in this regard, there is some ambiguity in the  Judge's
      terminology at [15] of the Decision.  It is  not  a  question  of  the
      "extent" to which the impact is "unduly harsh" but whether it  reaches
      the threshold.

27.         For those reasons, I am therefore concerned that the  Judge  may
      have failed properly to assess the level of impact  which  deportation
      is required to have when reaching his  conclusion  that  there  is  an
      unduly harsh impact on both the Appellant's children and his  partner.



28.         Whether that is so, however, depends on a consideration  of  the
      whole of the Judge's reasoning.  As I have already said,  if  [25]  of
      the Decision stood alone and were the sole reasoning, I would  not  be
      satisfied that the Judge had properly understood and applied the test.
      However, it is not.  What is there said has to be read with the  whole
      of the section leading up to it including [20] to [24] of the Decision
      which I have already cited and in particular to the paragraphs of  the
      social workers' reports to which the Judge makes reference.

29.         In relation to what is said in those  paragraphs,  I  reject  Mr
      Melvin's submission that the Judge has failed to ask himself the right
      question namely what is the impact  on  the  Appellant's  partner  and
      children of his deportation rather than what his presence  within  the
      family adds.  Whilst I would accept that some of the references in the
      section I have cited above do focus on the position of  the  Appellant
      within the family and the benefit  he  brings,  that  is  a  necessary
      corollary of the consideration of the impact if he departs the UK and,
      in any event, there is reference to the evidence about the  effect  of
      separation at [21] and [23] of the Decision.

30.         I have  carefully  read  the  social  workers'  reports  and  in
      particular the paragraphs relied upon by the Judge.  Sections 22,  23,
      24 and 25 of the report of Ms Mwape in  particular  support  what  the
      Judge says about the adverse impacts of deportation on the Appellant's
      partner and children at [21] and [23] of the Decision.  Her report  is
      supported by the earlier report of Mrs Lyons.  Although that report is
      directed at a chronologically earlier period when the Appellant was in
      prison, it is instructive as to the level  of  the  bond  between  the
      Appellant and his family,  as  the  Judge  observes  at  [21]  of  the
      Decision.

31.         Whilst it might have been  preferable  for  the  Judge  to  have
      expanded on what is contained in those reports and provided some  link
      between what is there said and his conclusion at [25] of the Decision,
      setting that in the context of the high threshold which  applies,  the
      social workers' reports and the Judge's analysis of them does  provide
      an evidential underpinning for the conclusion reached that deportation
      would have  unduly  harsh  impacts  on  the  Appellant's  partner  and
      children.

32.         For that reason, although I  accept  that  it  would  have  been
      preferable if the Judge had set  out  somewhere  in  the  Decision  an
      understanding of the high threshold in the test which he was  applying
      when reaching his conclusion as to undue  harshness,  I  am  satisfied
      that, read in the context of the reasoning as a whole, the  conclusion
      was one which  was  open  to  him  and  adequately  reasoned.   As  Mr
      Yacoobali frankly accepted, the conclusion reached may be  a  generous
      one,  particularly  where  Class  A  drugs  offences  are   concerned.
      However, the issue for me is whether the  Decision  read  as  a  whole
      discloses an error of law and not whether it is the decision  I  would
      have reached on the evidence. For the reasons I  have  given,  I  have
      reached the conclusion that an error of law is not  disclosed  by  the
      grounds.

CONCLUSION

33.   For the above  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  do  not
      disclose a material error of law in the Decision. I  therefore  uphold
      the Decision.

DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey  promulgated  on  2  January
2020 does not involve the  making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   I
therefore uphold the Decision with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal remains allowed.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 17 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
