
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08667/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 January 2017                         |On 24 January 2017              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DANIELLE SMITH
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Singh (One Immigration (Leicester))


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal of 6 September  2016  allowing  the  appeal  of
    Danielle Smith, a citizen of Ghana born 23 October  1990,  against  the
    Home Office refusal, dated 6 October 2015.

 2. The  Respondent's  application  of  26  June  2016  was  based  on  her
    relationship with Kwaku Asiamah Adumatta: she argued that although  she
    lacked immigration status to qualify for  the  five  year  route  under
    Appendix FM, she could meet the  "ten  year"  criteria  as  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to their relocation abroad, and as their  son,
    Jedidah, born on 15 July 2014, was  a  British  citizen,  it  would  be
    unreasonable for him to relocate  to  Ghana.  The  immigration  history
    supplied by the Secretary of  State  sets  out  that  she  entered  the
    country as a visitor on 30 April 2007.

 3. The application was refused because it was not accepted that there  was
    evidence establishing two years of cohabitation sufficient  to  qualify
    for consideration under the  partner  route  within  Appendix  FM,  and
    accordingly it was not accepted that she  had  established  a  parental
    relationship with a child. Given the length of time she had resided  in
    Ghana before coming to the UK and her family and cultural ties  in  her
    country of origin, where she spoke the language, it  was  not  accepted
    that there were any significant obstacles to her integration there.

 4. In her witness statement the Respondent explained that  she  had  first
    entered the UK with her uncle in  2006,  aged  16,  her  father  having
    previously separated from her mother.  She lived here  with  her  uncle
    and his family in Kent, but following problems there, she moved out  in
    2008, aged 18, when she became homeless, until Gloria Banahene, who she
    described as a Good Samaritan, took her in. She first met her  husband-
    to-be in March 2010 when he was studying at Coventry University;  their
    relationship developed quickly and she moved in with him in  May  2010,
    since when they had consistently cohabited at  various  addresses,  and
    she moved to Leicester to live with Kwaku, and his mother  and  sister,
    in October 2013.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  the  couple's  evidence  of
    consistent cohabitation due to vagueness and discrepancies between  and
    within their accounts, although it accepted that their relationship was
    genuine, given their evidence on this front  was  plausible,  and  that
    they had a British citizen child. The Judge found that  there  were  no
    very significant obstacles to Ms Smith's integration  in  Ghana,  where
    she would  be  familiar  with  the  country,  traditions,  culture  and
    languages, but that the child's potential loss of the benefits  of  its
    citizenship rendered the immigration decision unreasonable.

 6. Grounds of appeal by the Secretary of State argued that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law by finding that the couple  did  not  qualify
    for  consideration  under  Appendix  FM  via  the  partner  route,  but
    nevertheless considering whether or not their son's relocation to Ghana
    would be reasonable. The mother had no claim under the parent route.

 7. Judge Dineen granted permission to appeal for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to the Upper Tribunal  on  25  November  2016  because  the  Judge  had
    arguably not properly considered the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 8. Before me, the parties were agreed that the appeal should  be  remitted
    for hearing afresh, on the basis that the Judge had wrongly  approached
    the Rules: he had considered the parent route rather than  the  partner
    route, for which the Appellant did not qualify.




    Findings and reasons

 9. I accept that the parties were correct in their own view of  the  case.
    This is an appeal where the First-tier Tribunal, in an overly  succinct
    passage of reasoning, apparently  considered  that  the  Appellant  was
    eligible for consideration under the parent route. However she was  not
    so eligible, as she was in an extant relationship with her partner, the
    child's father. Her claim was that she  qualified  under  the  ten-year
    route  within  Appendix  FM  for  partners  because  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her British citizen child to relocate abroad.

10. That error in itself might not have been determinative of  the  appeal,
    as the question of reasonableness arises  under  the  partner  ten-year
    route under Appendix FM just as it does on an assessment of  the  claim
    outside the Rules by reference to the statutory criteria set out in the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However,  the  single-line
    conclusion that relocation  would  be  unreasonable  because  it  would
    deprive the child of the benefits of  nationality  is  insufficient  to
    justify the appeal being allowed: as is clear from MA (Pakistan) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705, wider public interest considerations than simply the best
    interests of the child must be taken into  account  when  applying  the
    reasonableness test, either within the exception under Appendix  FM  or
    outside the Rules having regard to section 117B(6 of the 2002 Act.

11. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. As there are no lawful
    relevant findings upon which to build, the matter is suitable  for  re-
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. I accordingly remit the  appeal  to
    that forum.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date  12 January 2017

[pic]

Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

