
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08946/2016
     HU/08948/2016
     HU/08950/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2018                               |On 20 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         sesan [o] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                          [k o] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       shubusola [o] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   First appellant (in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the respondents  as  the  appellants  in  this  appeal
    before the Upper  Tribunal  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State  shall  be  referred  to  as  the
    respondent.  The appellants were born respectively in  1978,  2008  and
    1977.  The first and third appellants are married to each other and the
    second appellant  is  their  child.   They  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hindson) against a decision  dated  16  March  2016  to
    refuse their application  on  human  rights  grounds.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  7  August  2017,  allowed  the
    appeals on Article 8 grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first appellant appeared in person before the Upper Tribunal.   Mrs
    Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  I am grateful to the first appellant  for  his  attendance
    and I listened carefully throughout  to  what  he  told  me  about  his
    appeal.

 3. I find that Judge Hindson erred in law such that the decision falls  to
    be set aside.  First, the judge failed to have any regard to  the  fact
    that there is in existence a residence order in  the  Family  Court  in
    respect of the second appellant and in favour of the first  appellant's
    mother (a British citizen).  She also has a residence order in  respect
    of the other child of the first and third appellants who  was  born  in
    July 2011 but (as Judge Hindson recorded) had "not been included as  an
    appellant in this case because of financial constraints."   Both  first
    and third appellants and their children are citizens of Nigeria.   Both
    children have lived in the United Kingdom throughout their lives.

 4. The residence orders referred to are discussed in the refusal letter at
    page 13 of 16:

         "It is also noted that your mother who is a British citizen  has  a
         residence order for your  two  children  and  claims  she  provides
         financial support for the family.  The residence order  states  the
         children will live with their parental  grandmother  however,  from
         the information you and your mother have  provided,  you  and  your
         children are living in one of her properties at  [43  -,  Bradford]
         and your mother lives at her other property [20 -, Bradford].   You
         have therefore not been compliant  with  the  instructions  of  the
         residence order.  Your representatives also claimed your mother has
         not consented to the children travelling to Nigeria  due  to  their
         wellbeing however you  have  stated  that  K,  your  eldest  child,
         travelled with you to Nigeria in 2010."

 5. Although I accept that the second appellant was  very  young,  she  has
    travelled to Nigeria, as the first appellant  confirmed  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  What the judge says at [23] is therefore  incorrect.
    Further, the judge has ignored the existence of the  residence  orders.
    At the very least, the existence of the orders (which would  have  been
    apparent to the judge from any reading of the  refusal  letter)  should
    have led to an enquiry as to  the  role  which  the  first  appellant's
    mother plays in the lives of the children.  I accept that there may  be
    nothing in the point raised in the refusal letter, that  is,  that  the
    children  are  living  with  their  natural  parents  rather  than  the
    grandmother.  However, I am not satisfied that the judge has  completed
    a full and thorough analysis  of  the  facts  in  this  case.   In  the
    circumstances, his decision is set aside.  Given that there is  further
    fact-finding to be made, I find that the appeal should be  returned  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a judge to make a decision in that forum.



Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 7  August  2017  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The  appeal  is
    returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Hindson)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


