
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/08752/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th December 2019                |On 24 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               mr abdul sabbor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright (instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision of Judge Murray promulgated on  13th  August  2019  after  a
    hearing in Newport on 30th July 2019.

 2. Judge Murray, in a very careful Decision, dismissed this  human  rights
    appeal.

 3. One of  the  reasons  the  original  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State was because it  was  said  that  the  Appellant  had
    cheated in a TOEIC test.

 4.  Judge Murray, after considering all  of  the  evidence,  came  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant had not cheated in a  TOEIC  test.   That
    finding has not been challenged by the Secretary of State.   Having  so
    found, the judge was then directed to  the  case  of  Khan  and  Others
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1684.  She recited the relevant part of  that  case  at
    paragraph 42 of her judgment.  That case  sets  out  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy where persons have been found, by the Tribunal,  not  to
    have cheated in a TOEIC test and what the Secretary of State would then
    do.

 5. Unfortunately,  the  judge  was  misled  at  the  hearing  because  the
    chronology that she was provided with in  the  Letter  of  Refusal  was
    wrong.  Reliant on that chronology, Judge Murray found, quite  rightly,
    that Khan did not assist the Appellant and  so  dismissed  the  appeal.
    However, I have been  provided  with  an  accurate  chronology  and  Mr
    Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State accepts that  Judge  Murray
    was applying Khan on the basis of  an  incorrect  immigration  history.
    That was an error of fact amounting to an error of law and as that  was
    the rationale leading to the appeal being dismissed it  was  clearly  a
    material error of law.

 6. I have been assisted considerably by Mr Bramble and  Mr  Plowright  who
    have worked out the correct chronology and how  Khan  applies  in  this
    case and I am grateful to them because  it  is  not  a  straightforward
    matter.

 7. Having found a material error of law it was agreed by both parties that
    it was appropriate for me to immediately go on and redecide the matter.
     The Appellant's representatives had provided  a  supplementary  bundle
    for the purposes of the remaking of the Decision and asked me to accept
    that into evidence.  Mr  Bramble  also  asked  me  to  accept  it  into
    evidence and I  did.   That  bundle  contains  a  chronology  which  is
    extremely helpful.  Mr Bramble  accepted  the  chronology  as  set  out
    therein.  In particular, the key dates pertinent to my Decision are  as
    follows.

 8. The Appellant made an application on 26th February 2013  leading  to  a
    Decision on 24th May 2013 which granted him leave to remain  until  8th
    September 2015.  The leave was curtailed by the Secretary of  State  on
    25th June 2013 with  an  expiry  date  of  30th  September  2013.   The
    Appellant then made an application, in  time,  on  2nd  September  2013
    although that application was initially voided for lack of a  fee  that
    fee was subsequently paid and accepted by the Secretary  of  State.   A
    Decision on that application was made on 23rd December  2013.   It  was
    rejected  because  biometrics  had  not  been  provided.    A   further
    application was then made, within 28 days, on 13th January 2014.   That
    was the relevant application, which was only decided by  the  Secretary
    of State on 23rd July 2015 when it was refused.

 9. Therefore, Mr Bramble accepts that Khan has application  to  this  case
    and in particular the section which reads: -

         "For those whose leave had expired and  who  had  made  an  in-time
         application for further leave to remain, which was refused  on  ETS
         grounds, the effect of an  FtT  determination  that  there  was  no
         deception would be  that  the  refusal  would  be  withdrawn.   The
         applicant in question would still have an  outstanding  application
         for leave to remain and the Respondent will  provide  them  with  a
         reasonable  opportunity  to  make  any  further  changes  to  their
         application, which will be considered on  the  basis  of  them  not
         having employed any deception  in  the  obtaining  of  their  TOEIC
         certificate and they would in no way be disadvantaged in any future
         application they chose to make".

10. That then is the situation which now applies in this  case  and  it  is
    accepted by both parties that the appropriate step is for me  to  allow
    the appeal on human rights grounds.   It  is  then  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State to grant whichever leave  he  deems  appropriate  in
    accordance with his policy.   The  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed [pic]                            Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the correct chronology was, for  the  first  time,  put  before  the
Tribunal.

Signed [pic]                            Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
