
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08117/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                              THE HON LADY RAE
                 (sitting as a judge of the upper tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H D G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms T Murshed, Counsel instructed by Lonsdale Mayall
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Respondent
    (also "claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt
    of court. We make this order because the appeal raised issues about the
    welfare of children who might be harmed by publicity.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse
    him leave to remain on human rights grounds after  deciding  to  deport
    him.

 3. It was the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the effect of  removal
    on the claimant's partner and children would be "unduly harsh given the
    unusual facts in his case" and permission to appeal that  decision  was
    given to the Secretary of State by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  because
    it was considered arguable that the case was reasoned inadequately  and
    showed insufficient regard to the public interest.

 4. We begin by  considering  carefully  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.

 5. The claimant was born in October 1975 and is a citizen of Jamaica.   He
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in September 2000.   His  leave
    expired in October 2000.  In July 2001 he applied for leave  to  remain
    as a student but the application was refused and he  had  no  right  of
    appeal.  In December 2001  he  claimed  asylum.   The  application  was
    refused and certified  as  clearly  unfounded  in  February  2002.   He
    entered an appeal but then  withdrew  the  appeal  in  June  2002.   In
    October 2009 he was given indefinite leave to remain on an  exceptional
    basis outside the Immigration Rules.  On 16 October 2015 at  the  Crown
    Court sitting at Portsmouth he was sentenced to 42 months' imprisonment
    for possessing controlled drugs of class A.  Although  not  clear  from
    the judge's decision it is clear from other papers that the offence was
    involved his being concerned in the supply of controlled drugs of class
    A, in that case heroin, and possessing cocaine  and  possessing  heroin
    with intent to supply.

 6.  The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  slightly
    concerning because they criticise the Secretary of State's  application
    of the Rules.  This is not irrelevant because the proper application of
    the Rules illuminates an Article 8 balancing exercise. The  remedy  for
    criticising a decision under the Rules is by way of judicial review but
    that is rarely appropriate because there is usually a right  of  appeal
    against a decision to refuse leave on human rights  grounds.  It  would
    have been more helpful if, rather than  criticising  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision,  the  grounds  had  directed  the  Tribunal  to  the
    requirements of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 and explained how the Tribunal should allow the appeal  under  the
    Act.

 7. Be that as it may, it is quite plain that the  claimant's  case  before
    the First-tier Tribunal is that the decision was unduly  harsh  because
    of its consequences for the claimant's family in the United Kingdom.

 8. There are aspects of the claimant's case that puzzle us.  For  example,
    although NB and the claimant describe each other as "partners"  and  NB
    is the mother of three of his children, he has a fourth child,  D,  who
    was born on 16 February 2011.  Her mother  is  TM.   The  claimant  has
    relied in part on his relationship with this daughter but  TM  did  not
    give evidence.  Given the child's date of birth it is  plain  that  the
    claimant's relationship  with  NB  is  not  characterised  by  complete
    faithfulness.  Further there is a puzzling entry  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter to the claimant having another daughter born in May 2002
    but  the  claimant  did  not  rely  on  that  relationship   in   these
    proceedings.

 9. The claimant's sometime partner TM did write letters of support to  the
    Secretary of State before the decision was made.

10. However there was clear evidence that each of the three children of his
    relationship  with  NB   have   significant   health   and   associated
    difficulties.  We summarise them from  the  witness  statement  of  the
    claimant but we make it plain that this evidence was  accepted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It was supported by other evidence  including  the
    evidence of Ms Bunting and the evidence of social workers  and  medical
    practitioners who had written to the Tribunal. We have taken the  dates
    of birth from copy birth certificate in the bundle.

11. His daughter TE was born in November 2003. She has Down's syndrome  and
    autistic spectrum disorder.  She does not have  insight  into  emerging
    danger and cannot deal with her personal hygiene.  She cannot  be  left
    alone with strangers as she does not protect her  personal  decency  in
    public places.  She suffers from severe developmental delay and  severe
    learning difficulties.

12. His daughter TJ was born in May 2010. She has  "extreme  problems  with
    social communication".  She is described as "a child with special needs
    and challenging behaviour" and  had  taken  to  reacting  violently  to
    anything that disquieted her.  The claimant was  seen  as  particularly
    adept at calming her.

13. His son TM was born  in  October  2015.  He  has  been  diagnosed  with
    autistic spectrum disorder.

14. The older children were each subject to  an  education  and  healthcare
    plan.

15. Clearly, and with respect to the children who cannot help being as they
    are, parenting any of these children will make exceptional demands  and
    to have all three children in the same family can  be  expected  to  be
    challenging.

16. It  is  plain  that  the  sentencing  judge  was  concerned  about  the
    claimant's domestic circumstances.  The judge said  in  his  sentencing
    remarks:

         "I have read the  letter  from  your  wife  indicating  the  severe
         disabilities of your children and of course, your acts have  caused
         and will cause untold misery for them because your wife  will  have
         to cope on her own with those children for a period of time."

17. The judge continued:

         "Bearing in mind the personal mitigation that  applies  because  of
         your children I will reduce the sentence that I am going to  impose
         but a custodial sentence and an  immediate  custodial  sentence  is
         inevitable.  Anyone who deals in class A drugs must expect to go to
         prison.  The minimum sentence I can, therefore, impose is  not  the
         starting point of four and a half but I will reduce it to three and
         a half years, concurrent on each count."

18. In other words the trial judge, like the First-tier Tribunal Judge, was
    satisfied that the claimant was needed in the family home  and  reduced
    the necessary prison sentence accordingly.

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not allow the appeal out of  a  sense
    of pity or desire to somehow compensate the claimant for his  difficult
    family  circumstances.   Rather  the  judge  accepted  the   claimant's
    evidence was that he "had put his family through a phenomenal amount of
    hardship and that his  family  had  suffered  whilst  he  had  been  in
    prison".

20. The claimant's partner suffered a mild stroke in 2010 that was  "stress
    related".  NB suffered from depression and  said  that  the  claimant's
    imprisonment "had a catastrophic effect on her" because  she  had  been
    "unable to cope and to look after the children".  The  local  authority
    had become involved and  the  children  had  been  placed  on  a  child
    protection plan because of her depression.  The claimant gave a lot  of
    support and with him she could manage.

21. The short point is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found the  effect
    of deportation to be "unduly harsh  given  the  unusual  facts  in  his
    case".

22. The grounds in various guises challenge the finding that the effects of
    removal would be unduly harsh.  They make much of the  public  distaste
    for drug-related offences and the harm that they do to society.  We  do
    not see anything in  that  point,  not  because  it  is  other  than  a
    legitimate concern but because it was in the  mind  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  He reminded himself expressly that the appellant is  a
    foreign criminal and that the public interest lies in his  deportation.
    Whilst it is right that section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that
    the more serious the offence committed the greater the public  interest
    in deportation it is also right that the statute created  two  distinct
    categories of foreign criminal.  It is extremely difficult for a person
    sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment  or  more  to  succeed  on  a
    deportation appeal.  It is difficult but less difficult  for  a  person
    sentenced to less than four years' imprisonment and this claimant is in
    that category.  This claimant falls  into  the  less  serious  category
    where and the test is whether the effect is unduly harsh.

23. We do not see any need for  additional  self-directions  in  which  the
    judge reminds himself expressly of the seriousness of the  offence  and
    the public interest in removal.  The point is clearly made and there is
    no need for it to be laboured.  The judge knew perfectly well  that  he
    was conducting a balancing exercise where the material things were  the
    clear public interest in deportation which is  established  by  statute
    and recognised by the judge and the particular effects  of  deportation
    in this case.

24. The judge's findings that the claimant  was  indeed  an  important  and
    beneficial presence in the  family,  however  undesirable  his  conduct
    might be in other aspects of his life, have not been challenged and, as
    indicated above, were supported by diverse sources going far beyond the
    evidence of the claimant and his partner.

25. The First-tier Tribunal did not dwell on the claimant's good conduct in
    prison and fall into the error of suggesting that that somehow entitled
    him to avoid deportation.  The point is that an appeal that might  well
    satisfy the "unduly harsh test" can be  allowed  with  more  confidence
    when there is no reason to suspect the claimant will get  into  further
    trouble and this is such a case.

26. Mr Bramble  argued  that  the  decision  was  unsatisfactory  and  that
    conclusion was not explained adequately.  This is a decision that could
    have been written better.  That is an observation that can probably  be
    made with some justification about almost every decision that has  ever
    been made including no doubt this one.   The  judge  has  given  proper
    reasons for finding that the effect of removal would be  unduly  harsh.
    The claimant was removed when he was  in  prison  and  that  has  given
    insight into how the family might cope. His absence led to  predictable
    strains and local authority involvement.  It  is  unlikely  that  there
    will often be a bright line between an unpleasant decision that has bad
    effects on family members but is not unduly harsh, because  deportation
    is a harsh sanction, and the effects becoming unduly harsh.  The  judge
    was clearly of the view that the claimant's partner was pushed  to  her
    absolute limit if not beyond it when the claimant was  in  custody  and
    continuing separation would be unduly harsh.  There is a whole  package
    of obvious reasons to see why the claimant's  removal  is  particularly
    hard hitting in its effects in this family and we  are  satisfied  that
    the judge's conclusion was open to him.

27. We therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

28. In short, the Secretary of State's grounds identify no material error.

    Notice of Decision

29. We dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 May 2019                    |



