
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08571/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 5 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     HSJ
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION is made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, Counsel instructed by Dassaur
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India and his date of  birth  is  20  May
    1980.  I have anonymised the Appellant. Neither party addressed  me  on
    this issue. However, having considered Rule  14  (7)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and   the   Upper   Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Guidance  Note  2013  No  1:  Anonymity
    Orders, I conclude that the making of an anonymity order in  this  case
    is appropriate.

 2. On 20 August 2018 the Appellant made an application for leave to remain
    on human rights grounds.  This was refused by the Secretary of State on
    30 April 2019.

 3. The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State.
    His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Row
    in a decision that was  promulgated  on  6  August  2019,  following  a
    hearing on 31 July 2019.  Permission was granted to the Appellant on 14
    November 2019 by Judge of the FtT Keane.  The matter came before me  to
    determine whether the judge had made an error of law.

The decision of the FtT

 4. The judge referred to the Appellant's immigration history at  paragraph
    8.  This is set out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.   The  Appellant
    came into the UK unlawfully on 20 August 2007.  He has never had lawful
    leave at any time throughout his stay.

 5. The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant.   There  was  medical
    evidence that the Appellant was suffering from depression and  anxiety.
    The judge said at paragraph 6 that he would treat the  Appellant  as  a
    vulnerable  witness  and  he  took  into  account  his  condition  when
    assessing the evidence.  His evidence before the judge was that he  has
    not been in touch with his parents in India since 2007 because they had
    disagreed with his decision to come to the  UK.   He  has  siblings  in
    Canada with whom he has contact.  He does not have any assets or  money
    in India.  He was supporting himself here in the UK with the assistance
    of friends and the Sikh Temple.  He had worked here  in  the  UK.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that he has been diagnosed with depression and
    prescribed antidepressants.  He said that treatment  was  available  in
    India but he would have to pay for it.  The quality  of  treatment  was
    better in the UK.

 6. The judge had before him a letter from the Appellant's GP and a  report
    prepared by a consultant psychiatrist Dr Hussain.  The judge  noted  at
    paragraph 12 of his decision that the Appellant's GP  said  that  there
    was nothing wrong with the Appellant and he did  not  suffer  from  any
    medical problems.  The Appellant's evidence before the judge  was  that
    he had been complaining to his GP for many years that he was  not  well
    but  his  GP  had  refused  to  do  anything  about  it  and  in  these
    circumstances he had instructed Dr Hussain on a private basis.

 7. The judge said the following about the evidence of Dr Hussain:

         "15. Dr Hussain found that the appellant  was  sad  throughout  the
             interview.  There were  signs  of  slowness  of  movement  and
             thought.  His speech was slow.  The  quantity  of  speech  was
             standard.  He was able to engage.  His mood  was  subjectively
             and objectively low.   His  effect  was  sad  and  blunted  in
             intensity.  There were no psychotic symptoms.  There  were  no
             hallucinations or perceptual dysfunction.  He  was  orientated
             in time place and person.  His attention span was normal.  His
             concentration fluctuated.  There were no  signs  of  cognitive
             impairment or dysfunction.

         16.  Dr Hussain was of the opinion that the appellant suffered from
             anxiety and a depressive disorder.   He  recommended  that  he
             take mirtazapine, a standard  first-line  antidepressant.   He
             thought he might benefit  from  cognitive  behaviour  therapy.
             There was a risk of deterioration of the appellant's condition
             if he did not comply with the treatment.  Further exposure  to
             a stressful situation might aggravate his symptoms.   He  felt
             he was not in a fit state to travel at the date of the report.
              If the appellant complied with  his  treatment,  and  if  his
             fears of having to live a vulnerable  and  destitute  life  in
             India were limited, his prognosis would be satisfactory."

 8. The judge found at paragraph 18 that the Appellant had  been  diagnosed
    with depression and anxiety  and  that  he  was  receiving  appropriate
    treatment.  The judge noted that India has its own health  service  and
    first-class medical facilities are available there.   The  judge  found
    that there was no evidence to show that the Appellant would not be able
    to obtain relevant care in India.

 9. The judge said as follows at paragraph 19:

         "The appellant's condition without treatment in the United  Kingdom
         does not appear to have inhibited his ability to function.  He  has
         been able to form relationships.  He has been able to work.  He has
         managed to support himself.  Counsel for  the  appellant  confirmed
         that the appellant  had  financed  the  obtaining  of  the  medical
         report.  He had also paid privately for his  legal  representation.
         By whatever means the  appellant  has  been  able  to  finance  and
         support himself in the United Kingdom."

10. The judge concluded that there was no reason why a person who had  been
    able to do all of the above would have  any  problem  integrating  into
    India and therefore the Appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

11. The judge concluded that the Appellant does not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration  Rules  and  that  this  weighed  against  him  when
    assessing  proportionality.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    private life could be continued in India.  He  had  regard  to  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   He  found
    that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant   is   financially
    independent although he accepted he is capable of being so.   He  found
    that the Appellant's private life has been established at a  time  when
    his status was "at best" precarious and for most of the time  unlawful.
    For this reason he attached little weight to it.

12. The judge concluded that the public interest  in  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant outweighed any interference with his private life.

The Grounds of Appeal

13. The grounds assert that the judge failed to  consider  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and the extent of his ill  health  when  considering  the
    Immigration Rules and proportionality.  Reference is made to  the  Home
    Office policy guidance entitled  Family  policy,  family  life,  (as  a
    partner or parent) private life in exceptional  circumstances,  version
    1.0 issued 25 July 2009.

14. The judge erred when considering the medical evidence.  At paragraph 14
    the judge said that Dr Hussain  did  not  say  when  he  had  seen  the
    Appellant whereas the date of the assessment is given at page 36 of the
    medical report as 13 July 2019.

15. It is asserted that Judge Row "attempts  to  limit  and  summarise  the
    Appellant's medical symptoms" in contrast to what is said by Dr Hussain
    at page 6 of his report as follows:

         "Furthermore, he considers that his life has been unbearable  after
         facing the risk of his forced removal to India, where he  will  not
         be able to survive in the absence of any kind  of  support  and  he
         will also be not able to bear his detachments from the UK,  and  he
         is emotionally so attached to this place.  He says he  is  able  to
         live a healthy life in the UK and if he is forcibly, he would  kill
         himself instead of having to live a life of a destitute  person  in
         India."

16. The judge set out his own prognosis at paragraph 16  of  the  decision.
    The judge said "If the appellant complied with his  treatment,  and  if
    his fears of having to live a vulnerable and destitute  life  in  India
    were limited, his prognosis would be satisfactory."  However Dr Hussain
    said as follows at page 9 of his report:

         "... Also, a further exposure to any stressful situation, which  he
         is likely to face  if  his  forced  removal  from  the  UK  becomes
         imminent, may aggravate his symptoms up  to  high  level  of  risk.
         [the Appellant] has expressed  thoughts  and  ideas  of  self-harm;
         therefore this risk is likely to escalate if he returns to face the
         distressing situation in any unsafe environment."

17. It is asserted that not only has the judge not properly considered  the
    findings of Dr Hussain but also the Appellant's evidence and  reference
    is made to paragraph 22 of the Appellant's witness statement of 19 July
    2019 which states as follows:

         "I have not stepped foot in India for over fourteen years and  have
         spent the majority of my adult life in the United Kingdom.  I  have
         no savings, employment, or assets in  India.   My  parents  are  no
         longer in contact with me, they are disappointed and embarrassed by
         the way I was misled and are almost in disbelief.  My parents  have
         given me their life savings of which I have nothing to show for.  I
         have not  spoken  to  my  parents  since  2007.   My  parents  have
         previously stated that I am no longer welcome back into the  family
         home.  At present despite numerous attempts to contact them,  I  am
         unaware as to where they are residing.  The  whole  experience  has
         been devastating and has truly turned my life upside down."

18. Judge Row has not correctly applied the test  of  "very  insurmountable
    obstacles" with regard to the Appellant's  specific  circumstances  and
    the test of proportionality.

Submissions

19. Mr Nadeem made submissions. He conceded that the ground relating to the
    judge having made his "own prognosis" was incorrect in so far that what
    the judge said in paragraph 16 was what Dr  Hussain  had  said  in  his
    report.  He said that the judge had made inadequate findings  of  fact.
    He had not engaged with the risk of suicide as found by Dr Hussain when
    assessing very significant obstacles and  Article  8  generally.  There
    were no findings about whether he needed family or  social  support  on
    return. Mr Nadeem relied on Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813. He  said
    that the Appellant needs antidepressants and CBT.

20. Mr Kotas submitted that if the Appellant receives treatment his outlook
    is good and there was no evidence that there  would  not  be  treatment
    available to him in India.  Whilst it is difficult to go back to India,
    the evidence did not establish very significant  obstacles.  There  was
    very little in the Appellant's Article 8 claim and s.117B of  the  2002
    Act does not assist him.

Conclusions

21. This was an appeal under  Article  8  and  not  Article  3.  Mr  Nadeem
    addressed me as if this was an appeal under Article  3.   The  relevant
    test in relation to the Immigration  Rules  was  that  under  paragraph
    276ADE (1) (vi), namely very significant obstacles to integration  (not
    insurmountable obstacles as asserted in the grounds of appeal).

22. The matter identified by the Appellant as capable  of  presenting  very
    significant  obstacles  to  integration  are  mental  health   problems
    (including a risk of suicide), estrangement from  his  family  and  the
    length of time he has been here.  At section 4 of his report Dr Hussain
    recorded that the Appellant had told him that he had attempted  suicide
    by cutting his wrist and that he showed him the  marks.  The  Appellant
    told him that he banged his head against the wall and as  a  result  he
    sustained a head injury which required hospital treatment.

23. Dr Hussain said that the Appellant's symptoms fulfil  the  criteria  of
    mixed anxiety and depressive disorder classified as F41.2 under the ICD-
    10 classification of mental  Behavioural  Disorder.  Relevant  symptoms
    include thoughts of self-harm. In section 8 of the  report  Dr  Hussain
    recommends  antidepressants  and  psychological  intervention.  In  his
    recommendation he said that "His present risk of self-harm  is  already
    high and if the current symptoms are left untreated his  condition  may
    worsen to the extent that it becomes resistant to  treatment  and  also
    risk of self -harm may increase significantly". In  section  9  of  the
    report Dr Hussain says that there is a risk  of  deterioration  in  his
    mental health should the Appellant fail to comply  with  treatment  and
    that a further exposure to any stressful situation which he  is  likely
    to face if his  forced  removal  becomes  imminent  may  aggravate  his
    symptoms up to a high level of risk. Ideas of self-harm are  likely  to
    escalate. If he complies with treatment and the fear of removal removed
    his prognosis is satisfactory.  He concludes that the Appellant is  not
    fit to travel "in circumstances where his symptoms will be aggravated".



24. Whilst the judge did not engage with all aspects  of  the  report  when
    assessing Article 8, I find that any  error  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome. The judge accepted  the  diagnosis  made  by  of  Dr  Hussain.
    However, he did not accept that he was not fit to fly or the prognosis.
    He was entitled to form this view in the light of the evidence from the
    Appellant's GP that indicated that there was  nothing  wrong  with  the
    Appellant. Furthermore, Dr Hussain had not had  sight  of  any  of  the
    Appellant's medical records. The Appellant was not receiving  treatment
    and the judge made findings at [19] of the decision which are  grounded
    in the evidence and  reasoned.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he  had
    received treatment for mental health issues whilst  in  the  UK  during
    which time he has formed relationships and worked.  The judge was  also
    entitled to infer from the evidence that the Appellant had been able to
    finance and support himself here in the UK.

25. In respect of the prognosis and recommended  treatment,  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant would not be able to  access  treatment  in
    India and the judge's findings at [18] are lawful. Whilst is  clear  is
    that the judge had well founded reservations about  the  extent  of  Dr
    Hussain's evidence, he did not and  should  have  specifically  engaged
    with the evidence about self-harm.  However, the  evidence  was  vague.
    There was no evidence backing up what the  Appellant  told  Dr  Hussain
    about previous suicide attempts. He  indicated  that  he  had  received
    hospital  treatment  for  a   self-inflicted   head   injury.   It   is
    extraordinary, in my view, that Dr Hussain did not wish to see evidence
    in support of this, particularly in the light of  the  GP  having  said
    that there was nothing wrong with the Appellant.  The report  does  not
    indicate the date of the self-harm or the reasons behind it.  The  lack
    of enquiry  into  the  incidents  of  self-harm/suicide  is  a  serious
    omission in the report and undermines the prognosis made by Dr Hussain.
    There was insufficient evidence that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  the
    Appellant committing suicide should he be removed.

26. Despite there being no appeal under Article 3, Mr Nadeem  addressed  me
    on the case of  J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629. I do not know whether the
    case was relied on before the FtT. In any event,  the  evidence  before
    the judge the Appellant cannot meet the first test. The severity of the
    treatment that the which the Appellant would suffer if removed does not
    attain  a  minimum  level  of   severity.   (The   ill-treatment   must
    "necessarily be serious" such that it is  "an  affront  to  fundamental
    humanitarian principles to remove an individual to a country  where  he
    is at risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah v SSHD [2004] UKHL  26,
    paras [38-39]). In this case the evidence does not establish that there
    is a real risk of suicide should the Appellant removed. In  any  event,
    there was insufficient evidence that treatment would be unavailable and
    or inaccessible to the Appellant on  return  to  India.   There  is  no
    cogent evidence that the Appellant would need social support or  family
    support in order to access treatment.

27. I am sure that if the Appellant's  solicitors  genuinely  thought  that
    there was sufficient evidence to meet the test in J  ,  he  would  have
    been advised to make a claim on Article 3 grounds or to at least appeal
    against the  decision  on  Article  3  grounds.   Whilst  the  evidence
    establishes that the Appellant has depression and anxiety which may  be
    exacerbated by the prospect  of  removal,  the  judge's  finding  about
    available treatment on return was one that  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. It is not challenged in the grounds.

28. The Appellant's evidence is that he had no family in India and that  he
    is estranged from his parents. He does not have a wife  or  partner  or
    wider family here. He has friends here. There is no evidence  from  his
    friends  before  the  judge.  There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the
    Appellant's assertion that his friends are like family.  The  Appellant
    has been here since 2007. He  entered  unlawfully  and  has  never  had
    leave. He has been here for 12  years.  His  evidence  is  that  before
    coming to the UK he lived in Paris for 3 years, having  left  India  14
    years ago.

29. In Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the Court of Appeal considered the
    very significant obstacles test in the context of  s.117C  (4)  of  the
    2002 Act. The test under paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) is the same. At [14]
    Sales LJ said as follows:-


          "In my view, the concept of  a  foreign  criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C (4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."

30. Whilst the Appellant has been out of India for 14 years,  the  evidence
    was  not  capable  of  establishing  very  significant   obstacles   to
    integration. He is an Indian citizen. He  was  aged  25  when  he  left
    India. He was well into adulthood and must be familiar with life there.
    He speaks the language and there is no reason for him not to find  work
    there. Whilst he is estranged from his family in  India,  there  is  no
    evidence of family ties here and the Appellant has managed  to  support
    himself and work and form relationships.  His  mental  health  has  not
    prevented him from doing so. There is no reason why he could  not  form
    relationships in India.  There  is  no  reason  why  he  cannot  access
    treatment for his mental health in India.



31. The Appellant is not able to meet the Rules.

32. The Appellant relies primarily on health as a reason  why  his  removal
    would breach his private life. His evidence in support of this  was  Dr
    Hussain's report. What weight to attach to the evidence  was  a  matter
    for the judge. For the reasons I have identified that report  does  not
    establish that the  UK  would  breach  Article  3  when  returning  the
    Appellant to India. In GS (India) 2015 EWCA Civ 40; the Court of Appeal
    considered the relationship between the  Article  3  criteria  and  the
    Article 8 criteria in the context of healthcare cases.  The court  held
    that "article 8 cannot prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
    factual element which brings the case within the article 8  paradigm  -
    the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a  state  of  affairs
    having some affinity with the paradigm." On the other hand,  "degrading
    treatment" within the meaning of Article 3 must have "a  minimum  level
    of severity" and the threshold is high.  By contrast, as  Laws  LJ  had
    held Article 8  seeks  to  protect  family  and  private  life  and  is
    concerned with the quality of life. It is a  very  wide  provision  and
    rights  conferred  by  it  inevitably  conflict  with  the  rights  and
    interests of others, including those derived from  the  ECHR,  and  the
    public interest. The threshold of engagement of Article 8 is low but as
    Lady Hale said in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  there  must  be  a  strong
    healthcare case before Article 8 is even engaged.  Once  Article  8  is
    engaged, a balancing exercise must be conducted.  Because  interference
    by the state on lawful and necessary grounds is possible, the focus and
    structure of Article 8 is distinct from Article 3.


33. The Appellant cannot meet Article 8 as informed by the Rules.  He  does
    not have a strong healthcare case.  He relies on his private  life.  He
    has been here for 12 years and has friends here.  These facts  together
    with the diagnosis of anxiety and depression and his estrangement  from
    his family in India do not amount to a strong private life  claim.  The
    judge found that he would have access to  treatment.  That  finding  is
    sound. The evidence is not sufficient to establish a  risk  of  suicide
    for the reasons given above. The Appellant has not identified  evidence
    capable of amounting to compelling  circumstances.  The  Appellant  has
    never had lawful leave here. Properly applying s.117B of the 2002  Act,
    the decision to remove the Appellant is proportionate. Any error by the
    judge is not material to the outcome in the case.

34. It is unarguable that  the  Home  Office  guidance  identified  in  the
    grounds of permission are of any assistance to the Appellant.  This was
    not pursued in oral submissions.  In addition, that  the  judge  seemed
    not to have realised that the date of Dr Hussain's assessment  was  the
    date when he had seen the  Appellant,  namely  13  July  2019,  is  not
    material.

35. The decision of the FtT to dismiss the appeal on Article 8  grounds  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 28 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

