
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/08000/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                          |On 08 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                               mr shakil ahmad
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood of Zenith Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of  Mr  Shakil  Ahmad  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to deport him from the United Kingdom.   He  was  in
    fact deported and there was an appeal against the  decision  which  was
    adjourned twice and ultimately came before a  Judge  in  Birmingham  in
    September 2017.  There was no attendance by or on behalf of  Mr  Ahmad,
    perhaps not surprisingly on his behalf as he was out of the country and
    the judge in his absence including the absence of a  witness  statement
    found he had not discharged the burden on him and dismissed the appeal.



2.   He sought permission to appeal on the basis that he was  not  aware  of
    the hearing date, he would have sought representation had he been aware
    of the hearing date and Article 8 had not been properly  considered  by
    the judge.  There is a lengthy grant of permission  which  notes  among
    other things that he had provided an address in an application  for  an
    adjournment and in the grounds of appeal the file was  not  amended  to
    include that address and the notice of hearing was sent to a  different
    address, and as a consequence there may have been procedural unfairness
    and permission was granted on that basis.

3.   The Secretary of State in a response under Rule 24  has  accepted  that
    there had been administrative errors which led to disadvantage  to  the
    appellant and proposed, and I think it  is  common  ground,  that  the
    appropriate disposal of the appeal is for it  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing since he has not had the  benefit  of
    any hearing at all so it would be quite  inappropriate  for  it  to  be
    heard in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  therefore  depriving  him  of  his
    opportunity in the First-tier.  I note that helpfully at paragraph 3 of
    the response it is said that the technology it seems is in place for  a
    hearing to take place so he can benefit from that also.

Notice of Decision

The outcome therefore is that the judge's decision is set  aside  and  there
will be a full hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date : 31 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

