

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: hu/08949/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice                 |Decision signed:   22.01.2018|
|On    22.01.2018                              |On 24.01.2018                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                    [M M]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Reginald Arkhurst (counsel instructed by Caulker & Co)
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Paul Housego), sitting at Harmondsworth on 19  October,
    to  a human rights and revocation of deportation appeal by a citizen of
    the DRC, born 1981. The appellant had come  here  with  his  mother  in
    1991, and been granted indefinite leave to remain with her in 1999.  In
    2003, contrary to the result for his siblings, he was  refused  British
    citizenship on account  of  convictions  he  already  had.  While  that
    criminal record went on over the years, the only  serious  sentence  of
    imprisonment he received was  one  of  three  years'  imprisonment  for
    attempted robbery in 2005; but the Home Office wrote to him in 2006  to
    say they would take no further action over that.

 2.  Eventually  in  2014  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  six   weeks'
    imprisonment for breach of a non-molestation order, involving  his  ex-
    partner, by then the mother of his two daughters, L, born [ ] 2008, and
    K, born [ ] 2010, and of a son R, not by him, born  in  2001.  In  2015
    that led to a deportation order, with a certificate under s. 94B of the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  At  this  point  the
    appellant absconded from his conditions of release, and  was  not  seen
    again till he was arrested for a public order offence on 15  May  2017.
    That offence was punished only with a fine; but meanwhile the  decision
    in Kiarie and Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42 came out on 14 June, leading to a
    further decision on 7 August, with an in-country right of appeal.  That
    decision refused the appellant's  human  rights  claim,  together  with
    revocation of the deportation order against him.

 3. The decision was made  on  the  basis  of  paragraph  398  (c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules: where

       '... the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
        public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
        Secretary of State, ... they are a persistent offender who shows  a
        particular disregard  for  the  law,  the  Secretary  of  State  in
        assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or  399A
        applies and, if it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation
        will only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
        compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
        paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

    It followed that it was important for the respondent to establish  that
    this appellant was  a  'persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law'. If she did so, then he would have to show 'very
    compelling circumstances' over and above those set out.

 4. The appellant appealed, and on 22 August notice of hearing was sent  to
    him in detention, and to his solicitors, for 27 September. On that  day
    the case came before Judge Housego, who did not have the  usual  appeal
    bundle from the Home Office in his file; the appellant's solicitors had
    written in to say  they  had  no  bundle  either,  and  asking  for  an
    adjournment. The  judge  adjourned  the  hearing  without  waiting  for
    counsel (Mr  Arkhurst),  who  was  late,  and  the  presenting  officer
    undertook to serve the bundle within 3 days.

 5. As it turned out, the Home Office had served what the judge referred to
    as the Nexus bundle on the appellant's solicitors on 26 September,  and
    went on to serve the appeal bundle on the 28th. The Nexus bundle was of
    considerable importance, as it dealt with the appellant's whole history
    of offending, as required by Chege ("is a persistent  offender")  Kenya
    [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC): it was over 1800 pages long.

 6. On 27 September, the day of the adjournment, notice of hearing was sent
    again, for 10 October. On 6 October the  appellant's  solicitors  asked
    for another adjournment, which was granted till the 27th,  with  notice
    of hearing sent out on the 9th. On the 10th Judge Housego was  told  of
    this; but he had noted that the appellant's current Polish partner  was
    due to give birth on the 28th. So,  of  his  own  motion,  and  without
    having the appellant's solicitors consulted first, he had  the  hearing
    brought forward to the 19th, and notice of that was sent the same day.

 7. On 17 October the solicitors faxed the  Tribunal  to  say  they  needed
    another two or three weeks to assess the  Nexus  bundle.  On  the  18th
    Judge Housego refused that application, noting that the solicitors  had
    had since 26 September to work on it,  and  had  only  been  under  the
    illusion that the hearing would not be till 27 October  overnight  from
    the 9th to the 10th.

 8. On 19 October, Mr Arkhurst appeared before the  judge  and  once  again
    applied for an adjournment, on the basis that he had not been  provided
    with the whole Nexus bundle: he told me that he had had not had any  of
    it, but that is by the way. He said he would be unable to represent the
    appellant if  the  case  went  ahead  that  day,  and  rather  unwisely
    threatened the judge with a  further  appeal,  or  an  application  for
    judicial review if it did.

 9. Nevertheless the judge expressed sympathy for Mr Arkhurst  in  refusing
    an adjournment: however, as he pointed out, the solicitors had by  then
    had all the papers since 28 September, giving them three clear  working
    weeks to deal with them, and only briefly being under the illusion that
    they had till 27 October to  do  so.  Mr  Arkhurst  withdrew,  and  the
    hearing went ahead. As it happened, the  appellant's  partner  was  not
    there: he gave an explanation, recorded by the judge at 46.4-5.

10. It must already be perfectly clear that, so far as the conduct  of  the
    solicitors  was  concerned,  the   judge's   decision   was   eminently
    reasonable. They could have immediately provided Mr Arkhurst  with  the
    Nexus bundle, when they got it on  27  September,  and  with  his  help
    prepared the case well within the month that would have given them till
    the original hearing date of 27 October. Nor, when on  the  10th  Judge
    Housego brought the hearing forward to the 19th, did they make  another
    application till the 17th.

11. However, Mr Arkhurst relied on Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 418 (IAC), the ratio of which appears in the judicial head-note as
    follows:

       Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is
       important to recognise that the question for the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied
       is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the  affected
       party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

12. Nwaigwe  was a  case  of  a  very  different  kind,  as  was  SH.  This
    appellant, who had been in this country for over 25 years, since he was
    ten, had a significant record of previous convictions against him;  but
    his longest sentence dated back to 2005, had  resulted  in  no  further
    action by the Home  Office,  and  did  not  in  any  case  involve  the
    requirement for him to show 'very compelling  circumstances'  under  s.
    117C (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He had an
    ex-partner and children, and apparently  a  current  one  and  a  child
    shortly expected with her.

13. It followed that the appellant had a claim to consideration under  both
    Exceptions 1 and 2, set out at s. 117C (4) and (5),  and  corresponding
    parts of the Rules. While it was essential for the Home Office to  show
    he was a 'persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
    law' if he were to be required to show 'very compelling circumstances',
    the history of his offending was highly relevant to his case on whether
    the effect of his removal on his present partner would be unduly harsh,
    as the judge's assessment at 57.7 showed.

14. The judge did not refer to Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT
    418 (IAC); but that was not essential. What was essential, in my  view,
    was for him to consider whether the effect of an adjournment would be a
    hearing which was less than fair to  the  appellant,  who  had  counsel
    ready to appear for him, but, through  the  fault  of  his  solicitors,
    rather than his own or counsel's unable to do so effectively, for  lack
    of opportunity to consider the Nexus bundle.

15. Very much to my regret,  I  have  to  say  that,  in  these  particular
    circumstances, and especially bearing in mind that the hearing had been
    brought forward from 27 October of the judge's own motion, for  however
    understandable a reason, I do not think it was fair to go ahead with it
    on the 19th.

Appeal : decision set aside
Fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Harmondsworth, not before  Judge
Housego



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
