







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/08319/2016

                                             HU/08321/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 22 January 2018               |                  On: 01 February 2018   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                              Mr Gautan dangol
                             Mrs Sapana Shrestha
                       (anonymity directions not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T Uppal, Banglen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are husband and wife,  born  on  27  May  1981  and  11
      October 1988 respectively, and are nationals of Nepal.

   2. They appeal with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Freer dismissing their appeals under the Rules  and  on
      human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 6 September 2017.

   3. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
      found that it was arguable that the Judge did not sufficiently address
      the appellants' difficulties on return or the best interests of  their
      child.

   4. Mr Uppal relied on his grounds of appeal where he contended  that  the
      Judge  did  not  give  "appropriate  weightage"  to  the  difficulties
      relating to the first and second appellant's  integration  into  Nepal
      and failed to consider the best interests of the child under  s.55  of
      the 2009 Act.

   5. He contended that the Judge did not discuss the fact  that  the  first
      appellant's family members were forced to  live  in  India  after  the
      earthquake  and  the  bundle  contained  evidence   that   the   first
      appellant's only other brother lived in the  Netherlands.  The  second
      appellant's father passed away during her childhood and her mother and
      only brother were also forced to live in India after  the  earthquake.
      They do not have any support from friends and family in Nepal.

   6. The grounds also contend that the  appellants  expressed  concerns  to
      return to Nepal "due  to  political  turmoil  and  lack  of  essential
      medicines  for  their  child."  This  was  not  discussed  during  the
      determination.

   7. Mr Uppal referred to paragraph [18] of  the  determination  where  the
      Judge noted that the extended family has survived the earthquake.  The
      second appellant has family originating outside the area  affected  by
      the earthquake.  There  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  a  number  of
      relatives live who may be able to assist the  appellants  in  settling
      into new accommodation and finding work.

   8. Mr Uppal submitted that no question was asked of the  appellant  about
      this. They had expressed concerns about returning to Nepal on  account
      of the political turmoil and  lack  of  essential  medicines  for  the
      child. Further, an incorrect private life test was applied  [29].  The
      assessment of the likely interference is not  whether  the  appellants
      could establish a private life  elsewhere  but  rather  whether  their
      removal would interfere with the private life  they  currently  enjoy.
      Manifestly, that would not be the case.

   9. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis referred to the legal framework
      adopted by the appellants in the grounds  from  paragraphs  [2-9].  He
      submitted that most of these are not relevant.

  10. With regard to the error of law suggested, it  was  asserted  that  no
      consideration was given about the absence of family support.  However,
      there is in fact detailed consideration given by the Judge as to  what
      they would face on return.

  11. Mr Jarvis referred to [15]. The Judge found that the  first  appellant
      is culturally Nepalese and would find it much easier to be  understood
      in Nepal. He found it to be a concern that the educated family work in
      a fast food restaurant, well under their capacity. There is no  public
      interest demonstrated in allowing former students to work in such jobs
      which must be unfulfilling for them. This is  not  the  fault  of  the
      respondent but a direct consequence of a choice to attempt  to  settle
      in the UK after they had completed their studies. The purpose of their
      studying in the UK is  to  gain  a  qualification  and  there  was  no
      legitimate expectation of any further leave after their  studies  were
      completed (other things being equal).

  12. Mr Jarvis pointed to the printouts produced by the Home Office at [11]
      regarding unemployment statistics over a period of  several  years  in
      both countries. A smaller percentage of the population is recorded  as
      unemployed in Nepal. The UK employment rate stood at 4.9 in July  2016
      and fell steadily to 4.4 in June 2017. The 2016 figures for Nepal were
      3.2 for the year. Nepal as a whole from 2007 to  2016  never  exceeded
      3.3.

  13. Judge Freer also noted that the appellant stated in evidence  that  he
      has returned once to Nepal and visited family members who are  now  in
      India. He also noted that his wife has a brother in India [12]

  14. He also had regard to the appellant's signed witness statement at  'J'
      in the respondent's bundle and the attached  photographs  showing  his
      family home which was devastated by the 2015 earthquake.  However,  he
      noted that this statement is dated October 2015  and  was  almost  two
      years old.

  15. Mr Jarvis submitted that the findings  at  [18]  with  regard  to  his
      extended family is just one of a number of findings.  The  predominant
      finding is that the appellants could relocate. There was no reason why
      they would be unable to find work. The child is young and there was no
      proposal to separate them on removal.

  16. The child will have access to education at the appropriate age.  There
      was no evidence that realistically showed that the  parents  would  be
      unable to maintain and support the child  as  well  as  themselves  in
      Nepal, having regard to the material evidence of serious damage to the
      former family home, which he accepted is now unsafe and  will  not  be
      occupied [19].

  17. He noted that Immigration decisions often  require  relocation  within
      the country of origin and this is one of those decisions.  It  is  not
      shown  to  be  rendered  unlawful,  disproportionate  or  unreasonable
      thereby [19].

  18. Mr Jarvis noted that none of the findings relating to the  ability  of
      the appellants to support themselves and obtain  employment  has  been
      challenged. There has been no material error of law.

      Assessment

  19. First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer has given  a  detailed  decision.  The
      child of the family was neither British nor settled in the UK, nor had
      he lived here for at least  seven  years.  The  Judge  noted  that  no
      evidence was submitted from friends in the UK with whom the appellants
      wished to maintain connections.

  20. As noted,  the  appellant  adopted  as  evidence  his  signed  witness
      statement found at 'J'  in  the  respondent's  bundle.  However,  that
      statement is dated October 2015 and was almost two years  old  at  the
      date of hearing [13].

  21. The first appellant has a Bachelor degree in Nepal and gained  further
      qualifications in the UK. He has worked for six months in Nepal.  Both
      he and his wife worked part time in McDonald's. The judge  noted  that
      the appellant worries that he will not be given a job in Nepal because
      of the time gap after his degree [14].

  22. The Judge stated that the purpose of studying in the UK was to gain  a
      qualification and there was  no  legitimate  expectation  of  anything
      further after the studies had completed, (other things being equal)  -
      [15].

  23. The 2015 witness statement which had not been updated  must  be  given
      limited  weight,  particularly  in  terms  of  any  transient  matters
      mentioned therein [16]. He found that  it  overstated  the  degree  of
      detachment from Nepal at the date this was written and  the  appellant
      has not addressed adequately the issue of reconstruction over time  or
      employment opportunities in the following two years.

  24. Judge Freer noted that there was no evidence of any serious search for
      work in Nepal. The appellant had been funded by a loan from the family
      in his studies, which raised questions about his  motivation  to  find
      work. The facts, supported by statistics indicated that  both  parents
      could find work in Nepal. There is no challenge by the  appellants  to
      that finding.

  25. The Judge had proper regard at [19] to s.55 of the 2009 Act  regarding
      their child, who was not a qualifying child. He found that it  was  in
      the best interests of the child to remain with both parents and  there
      was no proposal to separate them on removal. In  addition,  the  child
      will have access to education at the appropriate  age.  There  was  no
      evidence that realistically showed that the parents would be unable to
      maintain and support the child as well as themselves in Nepal.

  26. He also had regard to the material evidence of serious damage  to  the
      former family home which he accepts is now  unsafe  and  will  not  be
      occupied. However, this is one of the cases where  relocation  in  the
      country may be  required.  Nor  were  there  any  exceptional  factors
      relating to the child.

  27. He had proper regard to Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11.  In  order  to
      succeed under Article 8 outside the rules, the appellants will need to
      show that the consequences of the decision will cause very substantial
      difficulties or exceptional circumstances or unjustified harshness for
      them.

  28. He also had regard to Patel v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72  at  [57]  which
      prevents PBS students from relying on Article 8. He  noted  that  this
      authority is applicable to these  appellants  who  had  no  legitimate
      expectation of remaining here after studies were completed.

  29. He considered their claims based on Article 8 and adopted  the  Razgar
      approach. He had regard  to  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act.  At  [29]  he
      concluded that the first appellant spent about 28 years in  Nepal.  He
      has visited it. There is no qualifying child or partner. The status is
      precarious. He is doing work for which he is underqualified.  All  his
      relatives and in-laws are present in the sub-continent. Those  factors
      tip  the  balance  in  the  weighing  exercise  strongly  against  the
      appellants.

  30. The appellants did not make a protection claim. The political  turmoil
      referred to in  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  not  relevant  to  the
      appellants.  The  first   appellant   has   a   degree   and   further
      qualifications in the UK. He thus has realistic prospects  of  gaining
      employment in Nepal.

  31. In the  circumstances  the  finding  that  there  were  no  compelling
      circumstances warranting  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  is
      sustainable on the evidence presented. The findings were not outside a
      range of reasonable responses to the evidence.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity directions not made














      Signed                             Date 30 January 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer










