
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08500/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 August 2017                          |On 27 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KAMALPREET KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Miss N. Foster, instructed by Just Ask Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    Sweet in the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent, whom we  shall  call
    "the claimant", is a national of India.  She was admitted to the United
    Kingdom as a spouse on 20 March 2013.  She had leave which was  due  to
    expire on 20 December 2015.  On 1 December 2015 she applied for further
    leave; that, it is clear therefore, was an in-time application and  had
    the consequence that her leave continued under s.3C of the  Immigration
    Act 1971 during the  time  in  which,  firstly,  it  awaited  decision;
    secondly, during which any appeal against a negative decision could  be
    brought; and thirdly, during the time in  which  any  such  appeal  was
    pending.

 2. The Secretary of  State  decided  on  10  March  2016  to  refuse  that
    application.  She issued a letter  which  sets  out  substantively  the
    reasons for the refusal and a notice purporting to indicate  the  legal
    consequences of the refusal.  The notice appears to indicate that there
    is an in-country right of appeal against the decision; but the decision
    itself includes  certification  of  a  claim  under  s.  94(3)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, with the consequence,  as
    stated immediately after the certification  decision,  that  no  appeal
    could be brought whilst the claimant remained in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Before Judge  Sweet,  Counsel  for  the  appellant  managed  to  deploy
    arguments that the provisions of the letter were such as  to  give  the
    appellant before him a right of appeal.  That,  despite  Miss  Foster's
    submissions today, we are satisfied was wholly wrong.  The  certificate
    is entirely unambiguous. The terms of it, the statutory  provision  for
    it, and its consequences, are clearly set out in the  decision  letter.
    There can be no doubt that the consequence of reading  this  letter  is
    the conclusion that the Secretary of State  has  certified  the  claim.
    The judge therefore erred, by thinking  that  there  could  be  an  in-
    country right of appeal against the decision.  That, however, is not in
    our judgment, the end of the matter, because it appears to us that  the
    judge made a further error.  The error was in thinking that there was a
    decision at all.

 3. The provisions  of  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  (as
    amended) require that notice be given  containing  certain  content  in
    relation to any decision which is appealable.  The decision  which  the
    Secretary of State purported to make on 20 March 2016 was  not  subject
    to any right of appeal in-country, but was appealable in the sense that
    the claimant had the right to appeal against it from outside the United
    Kingdom within 28 days after leaving the United Kingdom.

 4. The notice of decision, instead of containing the rights of appeal of a
    person outside the United Kingdom, indicates,  entirely  wrongly,  that
    the applicant could appeal against the decision within 14 days  of  the
    notice.   There  is  no  mention  in  the  communications  between  the
    Secretary of State and the claimant of any right to appeal against  the
    decision after leaving the United Kingdom or any time limit  given  for
    that.

 5. It therefore follows that the notice given is not  one  which  complied
    with the Notices Regulations.  Mr Jarvis has drawn our attention to the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in E1 (OS Russia) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 357 in which a notice similarly failing  to  indicate  a  right  of
    appeal was considered by the Court of Appeal under the general head  of
    whether  there  had  been  substantive  compliance  with  the   Notices
    Regulations.  It is fair to say that Mr Jarvis did not rely with  great
    vigour on either the decision of the Court of  Appeal  or  its  reason;
    that was a case in which the facts were very different  and  where,  in
    particular, the omission was, if we  may  so  put  it,  the  other  way
    around, that is to say the notice failed to indicate the possibility of
    an in-country right of appeal in the case of a person who under certain
    circumstances would have had one.  It seems to us  that  the  principal
    purpose of the Notices Regulations is  to  give  notification  of  such
    rights of appeal as exist.  The notice in the present case was not  one
    which began to comply with  that  requirement:  it  notified  only  the
    circumstances for a right of appeal which  did  not  exist  and  failed
    wholly to set out the terms under which a right  of  appeal  which  did
    exist, could be exercised.

 6. We conclude that the judge therefore should have appreciated that  this
    notice was in fact not a notice at all, and so the starting  point  for
    his consideration was not met.  It follows from that,  first,  that  we
    find that the judge erred in law; secondly, we set aside his  decision:
    there was no jurisdiction to hear an appeal from this  claimant  whilst
    she remained in the United Kingdom; but there was also, in  any  event,
    no jurisdiction to hear an appeal from  this  purported  decision.   It
    follows from what we said at the beginning of this  determination  that
    the claimant's leave continues under  s.  3(C)  because  she  awaits  a
    lawful decision on her application.

 7. That will inevitably mean that the Secretary of State needs to  make  a
    new decision on the application made on 1 December 2015.  It  may  well
    be that since the application; there  have  been  developments  in  the
    circumstances of the claimant and her partner.  No doubt the  Secretary
    of State will wish to take those into account  before  making  any  new
    decision and we think it is therefore appropriate to indicate that  she
    should take into account any material that is presented to  her  within
    the next 14 days.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 21 September 2017








