
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08842/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 April 2018                           |On 25 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             MRS JUSTINA AMPONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Oji, Counsel, instructed by Amethyst Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James (the judge), promulgated on 16  October  2017,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 31 July 2017, which in turn refused her human rights claim.



 2. The Appellant was and is married to Mr Ampong, a British citizen.   The
    Appellant initially arrived in the United Kingdom with entry  clearance
    as his spouse with leave running until 18  June  2017.   Prior  to  the
    expiry of that leave she made an application for an  extension  of  her
    leave.  In refusing that application the Respondent relied on a  single
    ground, namely the Appellant's failure  to  have  provided  an  English
    language test certificate in accordance with E-LTRP.4.1A of Appendix FM
    to the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant elected  to  have  her  appeal
    decided without an oral hearing, a  course  of  action  which  was  not
    objected to by the Respondent.  Thus the matter came before  the  judge
    on 2 October 2017.

The judge's decision

 3. There are essentially two important aspects of the judge's decision for
    the purposes of the appeal before me.  First, he did  not  have  before
    him any bundle of evidence from the Appellant as at  the  time  of  the
    writing of his decision on  12  October  2017.   The  absence  of  such
    evidence is noted at [12] to [15] of the decision.  Second,  the  judge
    was of the belief that the  Respondent  had  returned  the  Appellant's
    passport to her in July 2017, thus affording her an opportunity to  sit
    a relevant English language test prior to a decision being made on  her
    appeal.  The Appellant's failure to have  apparently  either  arranged,
    sat or passed an English test was  relevant  and  counted  against  the
    Article 8 claim.  The absence of any bundle of evidence was also deemed
    to undermine the claim.   Ultimately,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate and the appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds assert that a bundle of evidence had in fact been  sent  to
    and received by the Tribunal.  It is said that the bundle was  received
    on 2 October 2017, the day on which the  judge  considered  the  appeal
    (although this decision was written up  and  finalised  some  ten  days
    later).  In addition, the grounds assert that the judge  was  wrong  to
    have believed that the Appellant had had her passport returned  to  her
    by the Respondent.  It was her husband who had had  his  passport  sent
    back to him: the Appellant's passport remained with the  Respondent  at
    all material times.  Finally, it  is  said  that  the  judge  erred  in
    respect of the Article 8 assessment in light of the first two  matters.



 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on
    12 February 2018.  He noted the absence of proof  that  the  bundle  of
    evidence had in fact been received by the  Tribunal,  as  claimed.   He
    noted the importance of the Appellant submitting such  evidence  before
    or at the time of a hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

The hearing before me

 6. The Appellant's solicitors had submitted a bundle under Rule 15(2A)  of
    the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  The bundle was received  at  Field
    House the day before the  hearing.   Mr  Tufan  had  a  copy.   Without
    objection from him I admitted this bundle in  evidence.   It  contains,
    amongst other items, proof that the bundle of evidence relied on before
    the First-tier Tribunal had  in  fact  been  received  at  the  Glasgow
    Hearing Centre on 2 October 2017 (pages 174-175).  Page 168 is a letter
    from the Respondent to the Appellant confirming that her passport would
    not be returned to her.

 7. Ms Oji submitted that there had  been  procedural  unfairness,  as  the
    Appellant's bundle had not been put before the judge  at  the  time  he
    made his decision.  In addition, the judge had made a factual error  in
    assuming that the Appellant had had her passport when she had not.   It
    was submitted that these  errors  were  material  because  a  full  and
    accurately correct assessment of Article 8 had not been carried out.

 8. Mr Tufan raised some doubts as to whether the errors would be  material
    but ultimately indicated that they may be in all the circumstances.

Decision on error of law

 9. I am satisfied that there are material errors of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

10. First, although the Respondent's letter at 168 of the bundle post-dates
    the judge's decision, it is quite clearly the case that the Appellant's
    passport has in fact remained  with  the  Respondent  at  all  material
    times.  I am unclear as  to  whether  there  was  specific  documentary
    evidence before the judge as to when or in what form the Appellant  had
    requested return of her passport, but I am satisfied that there was  no
    evidence to show that her passport had in fact gone back  to  her.   It
    may well be the case that the judge  simply  made  a  mistake,  perhaps
    believing that the passport being returned by the Respondent  was  that
    of the Appellant rather than her husband.  In any event,  there  is  an
    error of fact.  In combination  with  other  matters,  it  is  material
    because the judge has clearly held against the Appellant the  perceived
    fact that she had her passport and yet had taken no action  in  respect
    of the English language test.  As it turns out, the Appellant  had  not
    ever had her passport and so could not  have  undertaken  the  relevant
    test.

11. Second, the evidence now before me does show that a bundle submitted by
    the Appellant was received at the Glasgow Hearing Centre on  2  October
    2017.  I note from the IA35 form sent  out  to  the  parties  that  the
    deadline provided for any evidence to be submitted by the Appellant was
    2 October 2017 so, although the Appellant left it very late in the day,
    the bundle of evidence had been provided within the deadline.  It  then
    appears to be the case that this bundle was not put  before  the  judge
    prior to him signing  off  the  decision  on  12  October.   I  do  not
    criticise the judge for this. As seems to have happened in other cases,
    administrative problems do occur leading to procedural unfairness.   In
    this case there  was  evidence  contained  in  that  bundle  which  was
    relevant to the overall Article 8 assessment.  That is not to say  that
    it would necessarily have led to a successful claim,  but  nor  can  it
    properly be said that the Appellant's case was always bound to fail.

12. I did express to Ms Oji that I have some concerns as to  the  prospects
    of this case succeeding at the end of the day.   It  is  an  undisputed
    fact that the Appellant has not undertaken a relevant English  language
    test.  Strictly speaking, she was and is unable to satisfy the  English
    language requirement under Appendix FM.  This in  turn  would  make  it
    harder for her to succeed under Article 8.  However, the  retention  of
    her passport by the Respondent is something that needs to be considered
    as part of an overall assessment.  So too is the evidence contained  in
    the bundle.  In light of the above I set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

13. Both representatives were agreed that if there were material errors  of
    law the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  In light
    of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  and  the   particular
    circumstances  of  this  case  I  agree.   There  has  been  procedural
    unfairness and an  error  of  fact,  both  of  which  have  led  to  an
    incomplete assessment of the Appellant's case.   As  discussed  at  the
    hearing, the appeal should be re-decided after an oral hearing.

14. I set out directions to the First-tier Tribunal, below.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


