
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08435/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2016                    |On 01 December 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         miss yashal muhammad younus
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Siddiqi promulgated on 7 June  2016  refusing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision made on 8 September  2015  to  refuse
    the appellant entry clearance to the UK as a child of a person  present
    and settled here under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    said in paragraph 3 of the determination that the appeal related to the
    appellant being refused leave to remain but it must  be  a  refusal  to
    grant entry clearance. The determination in the FtT was  considered  by
    reference to Appendix FM of the Rules under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  It is to be noted that  the  determination
    was on the basis of the papers, there being  no  appearance  by  either
    party.  In addition the respondent's appeal bundle had not reached  the
    FtT by the time the judge determined the appeal.

The Background

2.   The appellant was born on 24 May 1997 in  Pakistan.   Before  her  18th
    birthday she sought entry clearance to join her father who  is  present
    and settled in the UK.  The application was under paragraph 297 of  the
    Immigration Rules.   The  relevant  parts  of  that  paragraph  are  as
    follows:


         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
                leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,
                parents or a relative present and settled or being  admitted
                for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

                (i)    is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a
                    parent, parents or a relative in one  of  the  following
                    circumstances:

                    (a)    both parents  are  present  and  settled  in  the
                        United Kingdom; or

                    (b)    both parents  are  being  admitted  on  the  same
                        occasion for settlement; or

                    (c)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom and the other is being admitted on the  same
                        occasion for settlement; or

                    (d)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion  for
                        settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                    (e)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion  for
                        settlement and has had sole responsibility  for  the
                        child's upbringing...


               (ii)   is under the age of 18 ..."

3.   No argument was presented either to the First-tier Tribunal  or  to  us
    in relation to Rule 297(f).

4.   The appellant's sponsor is her father, who is present  and  settled  in
    the UK.  It appears plain  that  the  appellant,  her  mother  and  her
    brother all intended to join the sponsor but the appellant's mother, it
    is said, was having problems with her TB  test  and  with  the  English
    language test.  The appellant's application was therefore submitted  in
    advance of those of her mother and brother.  The appellant claims  that
    she informed the Entry Clearance Officer that her  mother  and  brother
    would subsequently be submitting applications for leave to  enter  but,
    as paragraph  19  of  the  determination  makes  clear,  they  had  not
    submitted their applications as at the date of the ECO's  decision.   A
    decision of the Entry Clearance Manager dated 19 April 2016 also  makes
    the position clear.  Although the appellant's mother  and  brother  had
    since applied to join the sponsor in the UK they did not apply until 21
    October 2015 which was four months after the  appellant  applied.   The
    ECM found that the ECO was correct to consider  the  application  under
    paragraph 297 because, at the time, the appellant was travelling  alone
    to join her father in the UK as her mother  had  not  yet  applied  and
    there was no indication when this would happen.  They should  all  have
    applied together then she would have been assessed under  Appendix  FM.
    It was noted that by then, 19 April 2016, the mother's entry  clearance
    had been issued.  It is not said but it is apparent that the  brother's
    had also.  The  Entry  Clearance  Manager  considered  the  appellant's
    rights  under  Article  8  but   was   satisfied   the   decision   was
    proportionate.  He also considered whether there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which might warrant a grant of  entry  clearance  outwith
    the Rules but was satisfied that there was no basis for that.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge pointed out that the  appellant  did  not
    refer to any policy or guidance which suggested that the appellant  was
    entitled to have her application held in abeyance until her mother  and
    brother had submitted their applications  and  there  was  no  evidence
    before her to show the basis upon which the respondent could have dealt
    with the application differently.  The judge found therefore  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules as at the date  of
    decision and that the decision was therefore  in  accordance  with  the
    law.

6.   Before us it was not argued that that  finding  was  wrong.   This  was
    however a human rights application.  Even if the ECO did  not  know  of
    the intention that the whole family should come  to  the  UK,  the  ECM
    certainly knew that and the FtT knew it also.  The  FtT  in  particular
    failed to take account of the interests  of  the  family  and  did  not
    conduct a proper balancing exercise in terms of Article 8.

7.   In reply Mr Armstrong submitted that the FtT Judge came to  a  decision
    which was open to her.  The mother had made an application four  months
    after the appellant had made hers.  If it had been intended to make one
    application as a unit the mother had had  plenty  of  opportunities  to
    meet the appropriate requirements.  He accepted that the ECM was  aware
    that the rest of the family had made applications but was  unsure  what
    the position was as far as the  ECO  was  concerned.   Nonetheless  the
    decision whether or not to exercise any discretion  in  favour  of  the
    appellant was not in breach of any policy or guidance.  It could not be
    faulted.

8.   As  far  as  Article  8  was  concerned,  the  FtT  plainly  gave  full
    consideration to the question and she had made  no  material  error  in
    law.  Amongst other things, at paragraph 26 the judge  noted  that  the
    family were  well  aware  of  the  importance  of  submitting  complete
    applications in  sufficient  time  to  enable  them  to  be  considered
    together, there having been previous refusals.

9.   The appellant could still apply in a different  category,  for  example
    as a student.

10.  Mr Chohan submitted that while the previous applications  were  refused
    the mother was not educated.  The ECO would have been  aware  that  the
    whole family had been refused before, another application would not  be
    as a dependent child and the FtT had failed to carried out a  balancing
    exercise.

Decision and Reasons

11.  We are  unable  to  find  that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  As we have said, no issue is
    taken with the decision that the application could  not  succeed  under
    the Rules.  The judge  plainly  thereafter  went  on  to  consider  the
    position under Article 8.  At paragraph 4 she made it plain  that  that
    was what she was doing.  At paragraph 5  she  indicated  that  she  was
    following the approach set out within the case of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  She referred to the appropriate principles at  paragraphs  12  and
    13.  In paragraph 21, having considered the matter under the Rules, she
    reverted to the human rights issues and dealt with Sections 117A,  117B
    and 117D of the 2002 Act.

12.  In the light of these considerations she then went on  to  discuss  the
    limited evidence which was before her in a manner which showed that she
    properly took into account all of  the  factors  for  and  against  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  The balancing exercise which was  carried
    out cannot be faulted.

Notice of Decision

13.  It follows that we can find no error of law  in  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal must be refused.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 25 November 2016

