
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08680/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2020                      |On 17 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Joshua [E]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, any order restricting publicity
    about this appeal.

 2. This decision is based very closely on the transcript of the extempore
    judgment but is the subject of some modest revision and uncontroversial
    details have been added.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal of the respondent,
    hereinafter "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of
    State refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The
    claimant is subject to deportation. His criminal behaviour is
    discreditable; he was in trouble as a young person and most recently he
    was convicted of burglary with intent to steal.  It was the third time
    that he was convicted of burglary and consequently his conduct
    attracted a mandatory sentence of three years' imprisonment.  It is
    this most recent sentence that has prompted the deportation order that
    has led to these proceedings.  It is right to say that a previous
    deportation order was set aside and a warning letter issued.

 4. Plainly nobody will have a great deal of sympathy for the claimant in
    the predicament that he put himself.  However he has been in the United
    Kingdom for a long time.  He was born in 1990 and has lived in the
    United Kingdom since 1992.  He was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain
    shortly thereafter.  The vast majority of his short life has been spent
    here.

 5. We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal clearly had its mind on
    Exception 1 to deportation, as set out in section 117C(4)  of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It asked itself if the
    claimant had spent most of his life lawfully present in the United
    Kingdom (which he clearly has), whether he had established social and
    cultural integration to the United Kingdom and whether there were very
    significant obstacles in the way of re-establishing himself in his
    country of nationality.

 6. The Secretary of State says that the concept of integration, as
    considered in Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 551; [2019] Imm AR 1026
    was not understood properly by the Tribunal and is barely, if at all,
    reflected in the decision.  We just do not agree with that.  Paragraph
    64 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision is quite clear.  The judge
    clearly had in mind the proper approach to the analysis of integration;
    she set out the Presenting Officer's submissions, as below, and said:

         "It was submitted by [the Presenting Officer] the [Secretary of
         State's representative] that because of the [claimant's] offending
         and time spent in prison, the [claimant] had not fully integrated
         into British society.  I find looking at the periods the [claimant]
         has spent in prison and the length of time he has lived in the
         United Kingdom, on balance, the [claimant] has integrated into
         British society and he has spent more time in British society
         mingling with family and friends who are British and law-abiding
         persons, evidenced by the many letters of support from some of
         these family and friends."


 7. The judge then referred to a reported decision that gave some support
    to this analysis.  We cannot agree with Mr Lindsay that this paragraph
    has origins in anything other than the need to consider integration and
    it was considered, it was resolved in favour of the claimant and the
    reasons are perfectly sensible in law.   She clearly had in mind the
    possibility that the claimant's offending might militate against a
    conclusion that he was integrated to the UK and decided, perhaps
    unsurprisingly given his length of residence, that it did not.

 8. The judge in paragraph 65 made plain that she had in mind the "very
    significant obstacles" test and the judge found unequivocally that the
    claimant would have no understanding of the:

         "culture and mores of Grenada, having lived in the United Kingdom
         since then without returning to Grenada".


 9. The judge then referred to a well-known passage from the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Mr Lindsay
    acknowledges that the case was mentioned but says, with some
    justification, that it is an important part of the test in Kamara that
    a person will not be able settle into the country in a reasonable time.
     It is not the case that the returned offender has to be able to settle
    in straight away.  That point is also answered by reading the Decision
    and Reasons. It is there in paragraph 67 where the judge says:

         "it will take time for someone who is an 'outsider' to understand
         enough about how things are done in Grenada in order to participate
         fully in that society".


10. It may be that the judge could have expressed this conclusion rather
    better but again it is perfectly obvious the judge had in mind that it
    was not a question of how things are going to be immediately on return
    but whether or not the claimant was going to be able to manage.  She
    clearly applied the test which she had cited moments before.

11. Then there were two telling paragraphs.  One is at paragraph 68 where
    there was a recognition that the claimant has no meaningful social ties
    in Grenada and it was said that there were no friends or anyone who
    would have any interest in providing any support.

12. We have to say that this is not surprising. We are surprised at the
    readiness with which the Secretary of State and, sometimes, Tribunals
    are willing to assume that long-lost distant relatives will have any
    interest in supporting a disgruntled and disaffected young person from
    the United Kingdom. Here the judge was entitled to conclude from the
    evidence that there was no such support in this case.

13. Then there is paragraph 69 which we find is important and perhaps goes
    to the very core of her findings here.  The judge said:

         "The [claimant] is not highly educated.  He was excluded from both
         primary and secondary schools and as a result he has limited
         educational and work skills.  I find this will impact on the
         [claimant's] search for employment in a small island such as
         Grenada."


14. Well, perhaps the judge is using tactful language.  The point is the
    judge has formed a view of the abilities of this particular claimant,
    which is one of the things she was there to do, and decided, having
    read about him and observed him, that he was not going to "make it".
    It should not be overlooked that he has been in the United Kingdom
    since he was 2 years old.  That was a very long time.  He has no
    meaningful links with his country of nationality and he has very
    limited social and educational skills to prepare him for life in that
    country without anyone to support him.  It is not necessarily a view
    that everybody would have reached and with respect to the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge no doubt with the wisdom of hindsight and a great deal
    of time the points could have been made better but we are entirely
    satisfied that the correct legal tests were identified and points and
    conclusions were reached that are intelligible and open to the judge.
    That is a sufficient reason for dismissing the Secretary of State's
    appeal.

15. There is another point here that needs to be mentioned. For reasons
    that are not entirely clear, when permission was granted (by an
    experienced Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal) it was granted
    as if the Secretary of State had made criticisms of findings on
    "Exception 2" (which were adverse to the claimant) but no such
    criticisms were made by the Secretary of State. It follows that the
    terms of the grants of permission caused a certain amount of confusion
    which no doubt Mr Fripp would have dealt with deftly if the need had
    arisen. We have read his skeleton argument but we see no need to engage
    with the arguments raised therein (as permitted by SSHD v Devani [2020]
    EWCA Civ 612; [2020] 1 WLR 2613) about the correctness of the judge's
    conclusions in respect of Exception 2. We are satisfied, for the
    reasons given, that the judge directed herself correctly and reached an
    open conclusion and the Secretary of State's appeal therefore must be
    dismissed.  That is our decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 August 2020                 |


