
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08185/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 6th November 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            Mrs ROOPADEE CHADIEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P S Aujla, promulgated on 22nd November 2016, following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 16th November 2016.  In the determination the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Mauritius, and was born on 15th
    December 1979.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 1st October 2015, refusing her application for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her  family  life
    and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she first arrived  in  the
    UK on 4th December 2004 on a visit  visa.   She  was  living  with  the
    Sponsor at [London], who was a British citizen, and  they  subsequently
    married on 4th June 2015.  She has not been back to Mauritius since she
    first arrived in the UK.  Her parents and other family members lived in
    Mauritius.  She had lived there for the first 25  years  of  her  life.
    Nevertheless, she could not return.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge concluded that  the  Appellant  and  her  sponsoring  British
    citizen husband were both healthy  and  educated  and  both  spoke  the
    English language which is widely spoken in  Mauritius.   The  Appellant
    also spoke the local language there.  She was familiar with the culture
    in Mauritius, having lived there for the first 25 years  of  her  life.
    She  had  her  parents  and  brothers  still  living  there.   She  was
    previously employed as a dispenser in a pharmacy before she came to the
    UK.

 5. The judge also held that although there was an established family  life
    between the Appellant  and  her  sponsoring  husband,  the  Appellant's
    removal from the UK would not constitute interference with the right to
    family life, as far as the law is concerned.  The option of  relocating
    to Mauritius with the Appellant was open to the Sponsor.   There  would
    be hardship initially but  for  the  benefit  of  their  education  and
    employment experience, as well as help  from  the  Appellant's  family,
    they would be able to settle in Mauritius (paragraph 41).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  made  perverse
    irrational  findings  with  respect  to  the  domestic  and  employment
    circumstances of the Appellant and  her  husband  and  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for these findings.

 8. On 2nd June 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me on 18th August 2017, the Appellant was not  in
    attendance, and nor was there anyone else on  her  behalf  as  a  legal
    representative, in attendance.  I put the matter  to  the  end  of  the
    morning's list.   The  court  clerk  then  made  enquiries.   She  even
    telephoned the solicitors on record, who informed  her  that  they  had
    already telephoned the Tribunal on the morning of the hearing today, to
    inform the Tribunal that the Appellant had come to their  offices,  and
    had taken  away  her  files,  and  that  they  were  under  no  further
    instructions to act for her.  In the circumstances, I proceed with  the
    appeal, notwithstanding the non-attendance of the Appellant or a  legal
    representative on her behalf.

Submissions

10. In his submissions before me, Mr Tufan, appearing as Senior Home Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the Respondent, stated that the  judge
    had referred to how it was that the sponsoring husband in this case had
    been looking after his mother and father, and that after the  Appellant
    had married the Sponsor, she also began to look after her father-in-law
    and mother-in-law.  The  judge's  conclusion,  however,  was  that  the
    relationship that the Appellant enjoyed with her parents-in-law did not
    engage Article 8.  It was open to  the  Appellant  to  return  back  to
    Mauritius and to make an application  to  re-enter  in  order  to  join
    family members in the UK, and the decision reached by the judge was not
    irrational in this respect.  Furthermore, there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles that prevented her from doing so.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007),  and  re-make
    it.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, whereas I am aware that the grounds of application suggest  that
    the judge erred with respect to the  stated  facts  before  him,  these
    errors are not material.  For example, it is said that  the  judge  (at
    paragraph 33) referred to the sponsoring husband as  a  security  guard
    who has no other profession, whereas it was the  case  that  he  ran  a
    consultancy business, but also worked as  a  security  guard,  such  an
    error would not have affected the eventual outcome of the decision made
    by the judge.  The judge did not hold that  there  was  no  established
    family life between the Appellant and the Sponsor (see  paragraph  41).
    The issue here to determine was whether the  Appellant's  removal  from
    the UK would constitute an interference with her right to family  life.
    In this respect, the judge's conclusions were open to him.

13. Second, in Chen [2015] UKUT 189 it was made clear that Appendix FM does
    not  include  consideration  of  the  question  whether  it  would   be
    disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home  country
    to make an entry clearance application to rejoin family members in  the
    UK.  There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  UK  but  where  temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance may be disproportionate.

14. In all cases, it will  be  for  the  individual  to  place  before  the
    Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such  temporary  separation  will
    interfere disproportionately with protected rights.

15. For the reasons that the judge gave, the Appellant could not  establish
    that   a   period   of    temporary    separation    would    interfere
    disproportionately with her protected rights.

16. Third, as far as consideration of the appeal "outside  the  Immigration
    Rules" is concerned, this case is no different from Agyarko [2015] EWCA
    Civ 440,.  There the Appellant had a "precarious family life" and there
    were "no medical circumstances shown to exist".  Furthermore,  and  "in
    any event no materials were submitted which might show  that  leave  to
    enter would have to be granted under Appendix FM if applied for" in the
    sense of Chikwamba.  This meant that there was no  arguable  case  that
    "could show that  exceptional  circumstances  existed  to  support  the
    conclusion that Article 8 required that she be granted leave to remain"
    (see paragraph 51 of Agyarko).

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

