
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 July 2017                          |On 01 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 MUJEEB [P]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. M. Vidal instructed by Haris Ali Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Afghanistan
   who was born on [ ] 1975. He entered the UK in March 2002 and claimed
   asylum. His application was unsuccessful and he has remained unlawfully
   in the UK for many years. In 2010 he met, and began a relationship with,
   a British Citizen (hereinafter referred to as "Ms S"). Ms S is originally
   from Afghanistan and was granted asylum in the UK in 2003. She
   subsequently became a British citizen. Ms S and the claimant married on
   10 September 2015.


2. On 6 July 2015 the claimant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the
   basis of his private and family life. On 30 September 2015 the
   application was refused on the grounds that he was not able to satisfy
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules and there were not exceptional
   circumstances to warrant allowing the application under Article 8 ECHR
   outside the Rules. The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant and
   Ms S were in a genuine and subsisting relationship but reached the view
   that there were not insurmountable obstacles to the relationship
   continuing in Afghanistan. It was also not accepted that the claimant
   would face very significant obstacles integrating into Afghanistan.


3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
   heard by Judge Farmer. In a decision promulgated on 17 November 2016,
   Judge Farmer allowed the appeal. The judge stated that it was agreed that
   the claimant and Ms S were in a genuine and subsisting relationship. He
   also stated that it was agreed that the only issue in respect of Appendix
   FM to the Immigration Rules was whether there would be "very significant
   obstacles" to the claimant and Ms S continuing their family life in
   Afghanistan.


4. At paragraph 10 the judge stated that he found there to be "very
   significant obstacles" to the claimant and Ms S enjoying family life in
   Afghanistan. After stating this finding, the judge set out his reasons.
   These included that:


     a) The claimant has lived for 14.5 years in the UK and has attempted
        to live here lawfully (paragraph 11).
     b) The claimant is a qualified doctor in Afghanistan and is
        intelligent and educated with excellent English (paragraph 12).
     c) Ms S is highly educated and intelligent, and works as a dental
        nurse (paragraph 12).
     d) Ms S has a subjective fear of returning to Afghanistan which is
        reasonably held. The judge observed that she was successful in her
        asylum claim in 2003, which was based on fear due to her father's
        position, her ethnicity, her education in Russia, and her
        involvement in the Woman's Organisation of Afghanistan (paragraphs
        13 and 14).
     e) Neither the claimant nor Ms S have family in Afghanistan that could
        support them.
     f) Ms S returned to Afghanistan for about 6 weeks in 2012 to try and
        locate her family but this does not undermine her claim to fear
        returning to Afghanistan (paragraph 17 -19)
     g) Ms S is a celiac. The judge stated that this was a minor issue.


5. The grounds of appeal make two arguments. Firstly, they argue that the
   judge applied the wrong test in considering the claimant's family life.
   The test under Appendix FM is whether there would be "insurmountable
   obstacles" to family life continuing in Afghanistan, not whether there
   would be "very significant obstacles".


6. Secondly, the grounds argue that the judge took into account irrelevant
   factors in assessing the obstacles the claimant and Ms S would face in
   returning to Afghanistan.

Error of Law

7. There are two clear errors of law in the decision.


8. The first error is that the judge mis-stated the legal test. The
   claimant sought to show that he met the requirements of EX.1(b) of
   Appendix FM. Under this paragraph of the Immigration Rules, an applicant
   must show there are "insurmountable obstacles to family life" with their
   partner continuing outside the UK. In the decision, the judge has asked
   herself whether there are "very significant obstacles" rather than
   whether there are "insurmountable obstacles".  It may be that the judge's
   analysis would have been identical had she stated the correct test and
   therefore this error is not material. However, the second error, as
   explained below, was material.

9. The second error is that the judge has taken into consideration
   irrelevant and immaterial factors when assessing the obstacles the
   claimant and Ms S would face in Afghanistan, such as the claimant and Ms
   S's English ability, education, length of time in the UK and
   qualifications/work experience in the UK. Although these factors are
   relevant to an overall evaluation of their private and family life in the
   UK, they are of marginal, if any, significance to the issue of whether
   they would face insurmountable obstacles moving to Afghanistan. Indeed,
   if anything, several of these factors (such as speaking English, and work
   experience in the UK) might reduce obstacles in Afghanistan. The judge
   has also fallen into error by finding that Ms S has a reasonably held
   fear of returning to Afghanistan as someone granted refugee status in
   2003 without explaining why the factors that made her eligible for asylum
   14 years ago are still relevant today, given the huge changes in
   Afghanistan in the intervening period.


Remade Decision


10. After delivering my error of law decision I advised the parties that I
   would proceed to remake the decision.


11. I heard evidence (in English) from Ms S.


12. In response to questioning from Ms Vidal, Ms S gave several reasons why
   she feared returning to Afghanistan. Firstly, she feared being
   recognised. She stated that her father was considered a communist and
   that she would be in danger if people recognised her as his daughter. She
   said that the culture in Afghanistan is such that people are held
   responsible for the actions of their parents and she would always be
   known as her father's daughter and at risk because of this. She said that
   when she went back to Afghanistan in 2012 she became very fearful that
   she would be recognised. She also commented that the culture in
   Afghanistan is that people drop in unannounced to other people's homes.
   She found this put her at risk as if she was in the home of someone she
   felt safe with there was no way of knowing that someone could visit and
   recognise her.


13. Secondly, she found it distressing to wear a burka. She stated that
   when she visited Afghanistan in 2012 she felt compelled to wear a burka
   when travelling outside or between homes. As well as finding this
   physically unpleasant, she found it went against her values as an
   independent educated woman who does not cover her face (or hair) when in
   the UK. Connected to this, Ms S found it difficult to be in a society
   where she was unable to express herself or indeed "be herself", given her
   values as a woman who believes in women having independence and personal
   rights and freedoms. She did not want to be in a society where women were
   expected to merely sit at home.

14. Thirdly, she was concerned about being affected by the violence and
   lack of security generally - even if not targeted at her specifically.


15. Fourthly, she did not think she would be able to work in Afghanistan,
   as she would not be safe. She expressed concern that her background would
   come to light when she looked for a job and that this would put her in
   danger.


16. In cross-examination, Mr Kotas focused on Ms S's trip to Afghanistan in
   2012. Ms S stated that she went to Afghanistan despite the claimant
   advising against it because she was desperate to try and find her family,
   who she had not seen or been in touch with since 1991. She stated that at
   the time she went to Afghanistan the security position was considered to
   be better than it is now and she thought this was an opportunity to see
   if she could locate her family. She said that she felt fearful whilst in
   Afghanistan and had to move around to avoid detection.  In response to Mr
   Kotas's questioning, Ms S stated that she did not pre-arrange where she
   would stay before travelling to Kabul and just took a taxi to her old
   house - which was no longer there. She then went to a neighbour's house,
   where she stayed.


17. After Ms S gave evidence, Mr Kotas and Ms Vidal made submissions.


18. Mr Kotas stated that he had difficulty accepting Ms S's account of just
   turning up as a lone female in Kabul. He argued that whatever the reason
   and way Ms S returned to Kabul in 2012, the fact that she voluntarily
   travelled to Kabul demonstrates a lack of subjective and objective fear.
   He noted that the country guidance is clear that the level of
   indiscriminate violence in Kabul is not at such a high level as to mean
   that, within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive,
   Ms S would face a real risk which threatens her life or person. AK
   (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC). He argued that Ms
   S would not be returning to Afghanistan as a lone female (as she had on
   her visit in 2012) but as the wife of an Afghan national, who was
   educated and would most likely be able to find employment. He maintained
   that although it would no doubt be challenging to move to Afghanistan,
   the claimant and Ms S have the skills and familiarity with Afghanistan to
   be able to manage, such that it cannot be said that the high hurdle of
   showing "insurmountable obstacles" has been met.


19. Ms Vidal argued that Ms S's decision to travel to Afghanistan in 2012
   does not show an absence of fear. Rather, it was a desperate attempt,
   taken against advice, to try and find her family, even though she was
   fearful (and had good reason to be fearful) of returning to Afghanistan.
   Ms Vidal highlighted Ms S's evidence about wearing the Burka, observing
   that Ms S would be compelled to wear a burka even though it went against
   her values and beliefs.


20. The claimant's appeal turns on whether paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix
   FM, interpreted in accordance with EX.2, is satisfied.  EX.1(b) and EX.2
   state:

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen...and there are
         insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner.

21. It was common ground that the claimant and Ms S are in a genuine and
   subsisting relationship and that Ms S is a British citizen. Accordingly,
   the only question to be resolved is whether there are insurmountable
   obstacles to family life between the claimant and Ms S continuing outside
   the UK.


22. Insurmountable obstacles is a stringent test. The fact that Ms S is a
   British citizen, has a profession in the UK, does not wish to move to
   Afghanistan and would find it difficult to move to Afghanistan is not
   enough to meet the threshold. See, for example, Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ
   440 at paragraph [25]:

         "The mere facts that Mr Benette is a British citizen, has lived all
         his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here - and hence might
         find it difficult and might be reluctant to re-locate to Ghana to
         continue their family life there - could not constitute
         insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

23. Ms S's evidence before me, which I found credible and accept, is that
   when she returned to Afghanistan in 2012 to see if she could locate her
   family she was so fearful of being recognised as her father's daughter
   that she had to move location and restrict her movements. The conclusion
   of the Immigration Appellate Authority in 2003, when considering Ms S's
   asylum appeal, was that her father was a high ranking military officer in
   the People's Democratic Part of Afghanistan ("PDPA").


24. I do not have sufficient evidence before me to reach a view on whether
   there is an objective basis for Ms S's fear today (in 2017) as opposed to
   2003 when her appeal was allowed by the Immigration Appellate Authority.
   However, this is not an asylum appeal and it is not necessary for me to
   determine if Ms S's fear is well founded. The question for me is whether
   her subjective fear of return to Afghanistan (which I accept is genuine)
   creates an insurmountable obstacle to family life continuing in that
   country. I am satisfied that it does. Ms S, upon relocating to
   Afghanistan, would be fearful of being recognised. This would, more
   likely than not, prevent her applying for and undertaking work, as this
   could lead to her being recognised; and prevent her visiting homes of
   other people, given the culture of people "dropping in" announced, as she
   described in her oral evidence.


25. In my view, if Ms S relocates to Afghanistan she would face very
   serious hardship as a consequence of fearing persecution and having to
   adapt her lifestyle to avoid being seen by someone who she fears might
   recognise her as her father's daughter.


26. Taken together with other difficulties Ms S is likely to face in
   Afghanistan - such as having to wear a burka and feeling that she would
   need to refrain from expressing her views on issues that matter to her
   such as women's equality and education - I am satisfied that this is a
   case where the high threshold of "insurmountable obstacles" is met.


 Decision


27. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and the decision
   is set aside.


28. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under Appendix FM of the
   Immigration Rules.


    |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated:  30 July 2017                 |









