
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08673/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 September 2015                     |On 9 October 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  ROSE [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan, instructed by Citadel Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Rose [S], was born on [ ] 1966 and is a  female  citizen
    of Jamaica.  She entered the  United  Kingdom  in  January  2001  as  a
    visitor.  She was subsequently granted leave to  remain  as  a  student
    until August 2002 and successfully applied for  an  extension  of  that
    student leave which terminated in September 2004.  She made no  further
    attempt to regularise her immigration status until April 2010 when  she
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on compassionate grounds.   That
    application was refused by a decision dated 19 August 2010.  She made a
    human rights application on 15 May 2013 which was  refused  on  3  June
    2013.  She made a further human rights application  in  September  2015
    which was refused  on  7  October  2015.   She  appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Asjad) which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 6 January 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant seeks to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her
    relationship with her family.  She has no contact with her  mother  who
    lives in the United Kingdom but she claims to have a relevant with  her
    adult children, Kenisha (who  has  leave  to  remain  until  2020)  and
    Carlington (who has indefinite leave  to  remain).   Carlington  has  a
    child (K) who suffers from a heart condition.  The appellant also helps
    to look after another grandchild (M) who is the child of her  daughter,
    Kenisha.

 3. Judge Asjad found [12] that the appellant did not qualify under HC  395
    for leave  to  remain;  she  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) as she  could  not  prove  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her  reintegration  in  Jamaica.   Before  the
    Upper Tribunal, that finding has  not  been  challenged.   The  appeal,
    therefore, concerns only the judge's findings in respect of  Article  8
    ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. Granting permission, Judge Gibb summarised the grounds as comprising  a
    complaint that the judge had erred in  (1)  not  considering  the  best
    interests of the appellant's grandchildren in the UK at  all,  and  (2)
    not considering their best interests as a primary consideration.

 5. The parties accept that the appellant enjoys family life in the  United
    Kingdom.  In his grant of permission, Judge Gibb considered that it was
    arguable the judge had failed to  give  consideration  as  to  how  the
    grandchildren would be affected if the appellant were to be removed  to
    Jamaica.  There was no suggestion that the grandchildren, or indeed the
    appellant's children, will follow her to Jamaica.   Both  grandchildren
    are British citizens.  Judge Gibb considered that it was arguable  that
    the judge had concentrated  unduly  upon  the  appellant's  immigration
    history "treating it as of overwhelming weight throughout"  in  failing
    to have proper regard to the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
    primary factor.  In addition, Judge Gibb considered that, in the  light
    of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and  that  judgment's  "re-statement  of  the
    importance of delay" it was arguable that the appellant,  who  had  not
    "gone to ground", had been put at a disadvantage by the failure of  the
    Secretary of State to remove her.

 6. Judge Asjad's findings appear at [9] et seq.   The  judge  concentrated
    upon the child care which the appellant was  able  to  provide  to  the
    grandchildren.  Her approach in this respect was without  legal  error,
    given that the evidence which was put on behalf of the  appellant  also
    concentrated on her ability to offer child care.  The judge found  that
    the present arrangement is a "status quo that  suits  them  all".   The
    appellant's daughter, when asked in cross-examination how she  intended
    to arrange child care in the absence of the appellant, stated that  she
    had not considered the matter because her mother was "just there".

 7. Having read the decision of the judge very carefully, I find  that  she
    has not erred in law such that her decision falls to be set  aside.   I
    have reached that finding for the following reasons.   First,  she  has
    properly applied the provisions of Section 117D of  the  2002  Act  (as
    amended).   She  has  concluded   that   the   only   public   interest
    consideration in favour of the appellant was the fact that  she  speaks
    English. Secondly, the judge was right to take into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant's immigration status had (to  put  it  mildly)  been
    precarious at the time  when  she  formed  her  relationships  in  this
    country with her family members.  Precariousness as a consideration  is
    not confined to private life (as provided for in the 2002 Act) but  may
    also be a relevant consideration in family life: see  Rajendran  [2016]
    UKUT 138 (IAC).

 8. Thirdly, it is entirely implicit  in  the  judge's  decision  that  the
    children's best interests should be to  remain  with  their  respective
    parents in the United Kingdom.  There has been no suggestion  that  the
    children should follow the appellant to Jamaica.  It is also clear from
    the judge's analysis that, whilst  the  grandchildren  would  no  doubt
    prefer the appellant to remain living with them in the United  Kingdom,
    her family members do not rely on her to the extent  that  her  removal
    would lead to any member of the family suffering hardship was available
    to her on the facts.  As the judge characterises it, the status quo  is
    one which "suits them all".  There was no need for the judge  to  state
    explicitly that there is a bond of  love  and  affection  between  this
    appellant and her family members, including her grandchildren; that was
    axiomatic.  Equally, there does not appear to have  been  any  evidence
    (notwithstanding  the  grandchild's  medical  condition)  which   would
    suggest  that  the  children  would  suffer  significantly   if   their
    grandmother were removed.   Indeed,  had  the  evidence  indicated  the
    contrary, then the judge's decision would have been arguably  perverse.
    Perversity was explicitly  rejected  by  Judge  Gibb  when  he  granted
    permission [3] although Mr  Chohan,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant
    before the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the decision was perverse.  I
    disagree.  On the basis of the evidence which was before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the outcome was available to the judge.  Any vitiating error,
    therefore, must lie in the method and analysis of the judge.  Whilst  I
    acknowledge that the judge has [19] dealt  "first  and  foremost"  with
    Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act (public interest considerations), as  I
    have stated earlier, the case was not argued on the basis that the best
    interests of the children required the presence of the  appellant  over
    and above the need to maintain existing emotional ties  and  convenient
    child care arrangements.  The judge  could  have  said  more,  perhaps,
    regarding the best interests of the children and I  am  satisfied  that
    she has considered those interests before moving on to deal with public
    interest concerned with the appellant's removal.   In  any  event,  the
    best  interests  of  the  children  were  both   fairly   obvious   and
    uncontroversial in this instance. In the circumstances, for  the  judge
    to move briskly to a consideration of the public interest was  not,  in
    my opinion, an error of law.

 9. The remaining question is whether the judge has given excessive  weight
    to the public interest  in  this  case.   I  find  that  she  has  not.
    Clearly, the judge was very concerned that  the  appellant  had  simply
    defied UK immigration provisions over a number of  years.   The  public
    interest concerned with the removal of such an individual is likely  to
    be considerable.  Further, I do not consider any delay on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State to be a significant factor;  the  appellant  had
    known for years that she needed to leave the United Kingdom because she
    had no regular status here.  As the judge records, the arrangements for
    child care had been formed at a time when every adult family member was
    aware that the appellant's  status  was  precarious.   Looking  at  the
    statutory provisions,  the  judge  was  right  to  say  that  only  the
    appellant's ability to speak English weighed in her favour.

10. I find that the judge's decision was not perverse on  the  evidence.  I
    find that the judge has not significantly erred in law in her  approach
    to or analysis of the appeal under Article 8  ECHR.   She  has  reached
    findings which were open to her and she has given  cogent  reasons  for
    reaching those findings.  I do not find that the judge  has  given,  on
    the facts of the case, excessive weight to the public interest.  I find
    that she has properly taken into account  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, M and K.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane











TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

