
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08381/2017
                                                               HU/08383/2017
                                                               HU/08386/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision Promulgated
On 7th February 2019   On 4 March 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between
                                    V I D
                                    E E D
                                    A A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    The first appellant.
For the respondent:    Mr Govan, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

      1. The 1st named appellant has asked for anonymity. Given that there
         are children involved I would be agreeable to the proceedings being
         so anonymized.

      2. The first appellant is a national of Nigeria who came to the United
         Kingdom on 28 September 2005 as a student. He was then granted
         leave under the fresh talent scheme until 19 January 2009.
         Thereafter he overstayed. In February and April 2013 he made
         applications based upon human rights which were invalid. On 7
         August 2014 he made a valid application which was refused no right
         of appeal. He continued to remain in the country and on 23 February
         2017 made further representations which were treated as an
         application for leave to remain on the basis of his human rights.

      3. He was joined by his wife who is also from Nigeria. The second
         appellant is their child who was born in the United Kingdom on 17
         September 2011. The 3rd named appellant is her brother who was also
         born in the United Kingdom on 15 November 2008. Since the
         proceedings were launched the appellant and his wife had another
         child. The children have a blood disorder and at the time of
         application had check-ups annually.

      4. The applications for leave to remain was refused on 30 May 2017.

The First tier Tribunal

      5. The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal PA Grant
         Hutchison in Glasgow on 11 June 2018. In a decision promulgated on
         4 September 2018 they were dismissed. The judge did not find very
         significant obstacles to the 1st appellant's reintegration into
         Nigeria. The judge saw no reason why the appellant's wife and
         children could not return with him.

      6. The judge found that the immigration rules did not assist them when
         considered Article 8 freestanding basis. There is accepted that
         removal would engage Article 8. Progressing through the Razgar
         sequential approach the determinative issue was the proportionality
         of the decision. At paragraph 20 the judge referred to the need to
         have regard to the best interests of the children affected as a
         primary consideration. The judge accepted they were well integrated
         into life here. However, the judge felt all of the children would
         be primarily focused upon their parents and saw no reason why they
         could not return as a family unit.

      7. The judge referred to the public interest consideration set out in
         section 117 A and B of the 2002 Act. The judge pointed out that the
         1st appellant had no extant leave to be here and his private life
         was largely established when his immigration status was precarious.



The Upper Tribunal

      8. Permission to appeal was granted the basis that the judge did not
         specifically consider section 117 B(6). It was also arguable that
         the judge had not made clear findings on the best interests of the
         children or if it would be reasonable for them to leave the United
         Kingdom.

      9. At hearing, the presenting officer accepted the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal PA Grant Hutchison materially errs in law because of
         his failure to consider section 117 B6. There was a need to
         identify precisely the best interests of the children and this was
         not done.

     10. The Supreme Court has now given its decision in KO (Nigeria) and
         Others (Appellants) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.  The Supreme Court referred to the
         immigration rules referring to children and concluded they are
         intended to be consistent with the general principles relating to
         the "best interests" of children. This includes the principle that
         a child must not be blamed for matters for which they are not
         responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

     11. Following this decision the respondent amended its instructions to
         caseworkers. The latest guide was issued on 29 January 2019. The
         presenting officer has referred to this guidance and the fact that
         the appeal involves qualifying children.

     12. In light of the above the presenting officer asked that I find a
         material error of law and remake the decision, allowing the
         appeals. Given the agreed facts I would be agreeable to this
         course. First-tier Tribunal PA Grant Hutchison did not have the
         benefit of the Supreme Court decision. However I am required to
         apply the law as it is now understood. Consequently, the decision
         dismissing the appeals is set aside and remade, allowing the appeal
         is on the basis of Article 8.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge PA Grant Hutchison dismissing the
appeals is set aside and remade. I allow the appeals on the basis of
Article 8.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

