
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08183/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                          |On 25 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             MUhammed [B] (+ 3)
                   (no anonymity order made or requested)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bedford, instructed by Farani Taylors Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant and proceedings

 1. This  Pakistani  citizen  born  in  1979  appeals  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him and his wife and their 2 children, born in the
    United Kingdom, leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  their  family  and
    private life here. The appellant had been granted leave to enter  as  a
    student in 2006 which had been variously extended until 19 April  2015.
    The application he made days before his leave expired was  refused  and
    efforts to obtain an in country right of appeal by judicial review were
    unsuccessful in February 2016.  The  appellant  then  made  of  further
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  long
    residency which was similarly refused without right of  appeal  but  in
    the event on judicial review he was successful in obtaining  a  consent
    order for reconsideration which led to a further refusal decision on 10
    July, but with an in country right of  appeal.  In  the  meantime,  the
    appellant and his wife had had a 2nd  child,  the  4th  appellant.  The
    judge was satisfied that the appellant had  not  had  10  years  lawful
    leave, but only 9 years  3  months,  that  there  were  no  significant
    obstacles to the families'  reintegration  in  Pakistan,  so  that  the
    appellants did not meet any of  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules. With regard to the position of the children  born  in  2012  and
    2015 respectively, the judge concluded that whilst the  best  interests
    of the children were to stay in the UK and benefit from  education  and
    health services available in the UK, the weight  to  be  afforded  that
    position did not outweigh the public interest in removal in the context
    of the absence of difficulty on return for the  parents  who  would  be
    able to support children.

 2. The appeal  is  brought  with  permission  granted  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr Bedford maintained 3 grounds of appeal at the hearing:

      a) First, the judge was wrong to find that the  appellant  had  worked
         illegally because:

          i) until his leave expired in August 2015 he would have been able
             to work because he was a student, so any work would have  been
             lawful

         ii) a matter that the judge should have taken into account  before
             finding it adverse that he had lied about his employment  when
             registering the birth of his 3 children is  that  people  from
             East Asia have a culture  of  lying  to  save  face  and  this
             explains why when reporting the births of the children he said
             he was working when he was not: he was too embarrassed to tell
             the truth that he was  a  student  or  latterly  that  he  was
             unemployed because he did not  have  immigration  status.  The
             equal treatment bench book sets out that  judges  should  take
             into account such cultural factors.

      b)  Second,  the  error  tainted  the  consideration  of   the   minor
         appellant's best interests because:

          i) for one  thing  the  judge  has  started  his  proportionality
             assessment with the finding about the father working illegally
             when he should have been looking at the best interests of  the
             children as his primary consideration and

         ii) for another in weighing up what was in the best  interests  of
             the children he allowed his adverse finding against the father
             to creep in and affect his best interest consideration so that
             there was no proper consideration of the best interests of the
             children separately or outside the  negative  public  interest
             factor of the father's illegal working, that is  reflected  in
             the judges use of the conjunctive  in  the  last  sentence  of
             paragraph [39] where he states:

                  The fact that I have made findings that the appellant  has
                  worked in this country illegally further detracts  on  the
                  merits of his case and is an added factor in the balancing
                  exercise  when  assessing  proportionality  and  the  best
                  interests of the children.

 3. Third the judge has failed to make any explicit finding of fact  as  to
    whether or not the son who has learning difficulties would receive  any
    educational  provision  in  Pakistan  at  all  given  the  UN   country
    information he quotes at [38] to the point that Pakistan  has  some  of
    the worst, if not the  worst,  facilities  for  dealing  with  disabled
    children in the world and certainly in south Asia.

 4. Other grounds in the application did not attract  positive  comment  in
    the grant of permission and Mr Bedford did not rely on them before me.

 5. Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  the  adverse
    credibility finding. The reference in the equal treatment bench book to
    people of East Asia do not specifically assist the appellant. The point
    was that he had admitted lying on 3  different  occasions  to  3  state
    entities. In any event that was not the only factor which  impacted  on
    the overall adverse credibility assessment there was also  the  judge's
    findings at [32] that he had failed to establish an alternative  source
    of income  from  illegal  working  because  although  he  said  he  was
    maintained by his friend in the UK the friend did not come to court and
    his letter simply said that he lived with him at his house and made  no
    reference to the question  of  rent  nor  the  provision  of  financial
    support, and although he and his wife said that  they  received  income
    from his mother who lives in America, there was no evidence beyond  the
    assertion.

 6. Ms Cunha submitted that in any event the  adverse  credibility  finding
    did not have any impact in the assessment of the best interests of  the
    children. The decision clearly follows the structure  approved  in  the
    case of KO Nigeria with the position  of  the  parents  being  assessed
    prior to that of the  children  in  order  to  provide  the  real-world
    setting, with the judge considering whether or  not  they  fall  to  be
    returned in the light of their own circumstances before turning to  the
    position of the children. It is quite clear reading the  decision  that
    the judge has separately considered the position of the best  interests
    of the children, the consideration is at paragraphs [37-38] and that is
    clearly reinforced by the fact that the judge concludes that  the  best
    interests of the children are to remain in the United Kingdom, and then
    moves on to look at whether or not the weight to be  attached  to  that
    position with regard to  the son assessing whether or not his condition
    is "so problematic that his removal would have such a serious effect on
    his future development that his removal would  be  disproportionate  to
    the public interest of maintaining effective immigration  control.  The
    use of the conjunctive in [39] does not detract from that  position  as
    it follows the assessment that his circumstances do  not  make  removal
    disproportionate.

    Discussion

 7. I find no merit in the grounds. The point that the appellant enjoyed  a
    window when as a result of student status he would have  been  able  to
    work legally has no impact on the  question  of  credibility  that  was
    being decided by the  judge.  This  was  a  case  where  the  appellant
    admitted that he had lied. The fact that he could have  worked  legally
    had he elected to do so for part of his period of  residence  does  not
    alter that.

 8. The  judge  has  clearly  identified  the  appellant's  explanation  of
    embarrassment and considered it at length at [32] and was  entitled  to
    find that his lying  on  3  different  occasions  and  on  each  giving
    different types of employment on the  2  birth  certificates  and  then
    again in his discussions with the clinician at the  Royal  Free  London
    child  development   clinic,   were   not   adequately   explained   by
    embarrassment. The evidence of the appellant was that he did  not  work
    illegally, and in deciding whether or not to believe that evidence  the
    judge was entitled to take into account that he had admitted lying when
    he had interacted with officialdom in connection with the birth of  his
    children. The grounds assertion that the judge should have accepted  as
    an adequate explanation that he was embarrassed because  as  the  bench
    book points out people from East Asia may be affected by considerations
    of saving face. Contrary to Mr Bedford's submission that is not such an
    obvious point that the judge should have taken it on board himself, not
    least because if it had been so obvious one  would  have  expected  his
    counsel to mention it, but also because he's not from East Asia.  There
    is no issue before me that having found that the appellant  had  worked
    illegally the judge was entitled to weigh that against the appellant in
    the overall balancing exercise along with  the  public  interest  point
    that the appellant had failed to meet the requirements of the rules.

 9. Nor do I find any merit in the assertion  that  the  structure  of  the
    judge's reasoning shows that the assessment of the  best  interests  of
    the children was affected by  his  adverse  credibility  conclusion  in
    respect of their father. It is quite clear on a  fair  reading  of  the
    decision that  the  judge  dealt  with  the  arguments  concerning  the
    position absent the question of the children between [32 to 36]  before
    turning to deal with the position of the children at [37 to 38] because
    [37] starts: "I  now  need  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    children".

10. I find that [39] adds no force to the grounds.  The  paragraph  is  the
    concluding paragraph and explicitly expressed to be a  summary  of  the
    balancing exercise of proportionality. The best interests assessment is
    not a balancing exercise. The  point  is  further  made  clear  by  the
    judge's framing of the proportionality assessment in the  structure  of
    section 117B of  the  2002  Act.  The  paragraph  is  no  more  than  a
    reflection of the earlier findings pertinent  to  subsections  (1)  and
    (5), and the additional public interest factor of the appellant  having
    worked illegally and does no more than reference the earlier finding at
    [37] that the best interests of the children, and specifically  of  the
    son, do not of themselves operate to make removal  disproportionate  to
    the public  interest  of  maintaining  effective  immigration  control.
    Although the judge makes no reference to private life considerations of
    children set out at section 117B (6) of the 2002  Act or paragraph  276
    ADE of the immigration  rules  because  neither  of  the  children  are
    qualifying children, neither having obtained 7 years residence  in  the
    UK, the consideration as to whether or not their best interests operate
    to make removal disproportionate is plainly a consideration of the test
    reflected in the private life rules as well as the Act  in  respect  of
    qualifying children, so that their position has been considered at  the
    highest, and self-evidently  discretely  from  the  position  of  their
    parents.



11. The ground that the judge needed to  make  an  explicit  finding  about
    whether or not the son would receive any education in Pakistan  at  all
    mistakes the burden. Contrary to the written grounds there is no burden
    on the respondent to show that the appellant will  receive  a  learning
    difficulties  appropriate  education.   The  appellant  argued  for   a
    specific factual matrix on return to Pakistan and had  the  opportunity
    to bring forward evidence to support it. The duty of the judge  was  to
    say what he made of the evidence presented. The report relied  upon  by
    the appellant was a background paper prepared for  the  "Education  for
    All Global monitoring report of 2015" and addressing the  education  of
    children with disabilities in India and  Pakistan.  The  judge  plainly
    read it because he confirms the accuracy of counsel's  quotes,  but  he
    was entitled to his conclusion that it was generic  and  did  not  deal
    specifically with the position of children with learning  difficulties.
    The judge found that the  appellant  would  have  material  support  in
    Pakistan particularly from the appellant's wife's family who  lived  in
    Pakistan as well as through his own employment. Whilst the report  made
    statements reflecting the challenges faced by  mainstream  teachers  in
    addressing the needs of children with disabilities and  criticises  the
    lack of concrete advancement of the  aspirational  national  policy  of
    providing for persons with disabilities, and flagged  up  that  in  any
    event  Pakistan  has  the  highest  out-of-school  population  (whether
    amongst those with disabilities or otherwise) there was no  suggestion,
    as Ms Cunha pointed out,  that  as  apparently  from  the  report  some
    parents do,  that these parents would be content to assume  that  there
    was nothing that could be done to us improve the son's position because
    their evidence was were very concerned about his education  and  taking
    concrete steps to maximise his position.  The judge was also taken to a
    key finding from the  report  which  included  that  children,  "across
    southern contexts" and so including Pakistan which says  that  children
    with disabilities were 10 times more likely not to attend  school,  and
    that when they do attend school the level of learning is below that  of
    their peers. In conclusion the judge was  entitled  to  his  conclusion
    that the evidence  did  not  establish  that  there  was  no  schooling
    available for children with learning difficulties or that the  position
    would be so adverse as to compel a finding that his  position  made  an
    otherwise proportionate decision disproportionate.

12. AS (Iran) [2017] EWCA 1539: "In approaching criticism of reasons  given
    by a First-tier Tribunal, the Respondent correctly reminds us to  avoid
    a requirement of perfection. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his
    decision in R (Iran) v The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982, "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged  failure
    to give adequate reasons are all too  frequent.  The  obligation  on  a
    Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles
    on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have  led  to  the
    decision. Such reasons need not  be  elaborate,  and  do  not  need  to
    address every argument or every factor which weighed in  the  decision.
    If a Tribunal has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are
    grounds on which the argument could properly  have  been  rejected,  it
    should be assumed that the  Tribunal  acted  on  such  grounds.  It  is
    sufficient that the critical reasons to the decision are recorded."

13. As was said in Mukarkar [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 "Factual judgments of this
    kind are often not easy, but they are not  made  easier  or  better  by
    excessive legal or linguistic analysis."

14. In respect of each of these grounds I find  that  acceptable  reasoning
    was set out in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Decision

15. The appellant has failed to show that the decision is marred  by  legal
    error and the decision dismissing the appeal stands.


Signed   [pic]

Date 18 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

