
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/08952/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 September 2017                       |On 24 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Samina Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Samina Bibi, was born on 31 August 1990 and is a  female
    citizen of  Pakistan.   By  a  decision  dated  12  January  2016,  the
    appellant was refused further leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jessica Pacey) which, in
    a decision promulgated on 16 December 2016, dismissed the appeal.   She
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The decision of  Judge  Pacey  contains  two  errors.   Mr  Mills,  who
    appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    acknowledged that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have  excluded  evidence
    submitted by the appellant prior to the application being determined by
    the Secretary of State but which had  not  been  submitted  "with  it".
    Such evidence was not excluded in an in-country appeal  in  respect  of
    the provisions of Appendix FM-SE of HC 395 (as amended).  Secondly,  by
    the provisions of the 2002 Act (as  amended),  the  appeal  before  the
    judge did not lie in respect of possible breaches  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but on human rights grounds, in this case Article  8  ECHR.   The
    judge's statement at [21] that she was "not satisfied  that  compelling
    circumstances had been identified to enable me to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules" is problematic for two reasons;  first  the  judge's
    decision does, indeed, consider the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds
    and, secondly, the judge was wrong if (as  appears  to  have  been  the
    case) she sought to identify some threshold criterion which had  to  be
    crossed before Article 8 should be considered.

 3. Notwithstanding these errors, the question remains as to whether or not
    the Upper Tribunal should exercise its  discretion  to  set  aside  the
    decision or to leave it in place.  At the Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  Mr
    Mills, who appeared for the respondent, submitted that the  only  issue
    which had prevented the  appellant  succeeding  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (and which may, therefore, have made a difference to the  judge's
    assessment of the appeal on human rights grounds) concerned the  extent
    which the appellant had  complied  with  Appendix  FM-SE.   The  appeal
    turned on the assessment of the income of  the  sponsor  who  is  self-
    employed.  The sponsor's self-employment began in September 2014.   The
    accounting year for his business, therefore, ran from September 2014 to
    2015  and  from  September-September  in  the  years  thereafter.   The
    application for leave to  remain  was  made  in  August  2015  and  the
    appellant accepts that the sponsor had been unable to provide  evidence
    for a full financial tax  year  (that  is,  April  6-April  5)  as  the
    respondent contended Appendix FM required.  Paragraph 13(e) of Appendix
    FM-SE provides as follows:

         (e) Where the person is self-employed, their  gross  annual  income
         will be the total of their gross income from their  self-employment
         (and that of their partner  if  that  person  is  in  the  UK  with
         permission to work), from any salaried or  non-salaried  employment
         they have had or their partner has had (if their partner is in  the
         UK with permission to work), from specified  non-employment  income
         received by them or their partner, and from income  from  a  UK  or
         foreign State pension or a private  pension  received  by  them  or
         their partner, in the last full financial year or as an average  of
         the last  two  full  financial  years.  The  requirements  of  this
         Appendix for specified evidence relating to these forms  of  income
         shall apply as if  references  to  the  date  of  application  were
         references to the  end  of  the  relevant  financial  year(s).  The
         relevant financial year(s) cannot be combined  with  any  financial
         year(s) to which paragraph 9 applies and vice versa.

 4. The entire focus of this appeal, therefore, is upon the construction of
    the words "in the last full financial year".  Although  the  appeal  is
    brought on human rights grounds only, the fact that the respondent  may
    have wrongly rejected the application because she  considered  that  it
    did not meet the requirements of HC 395 (as amended) when, in fact,  it
    did would be a factor of weight in the Article 8  ECHR  proportionality
    analysis.  The appellant contends that the words "full financial  year"
    should refer to the accounting year of the applicant/sponsor which need
    not necessarily be the commensurate with the tax year (April-April) but
    may be the yearly accounting period adopted by  the  applicant/sponsor.
    Mr Mills submitted to me that the words "last full financial year" must
    refer to the tax year.  If Mr Mills is correct, then  the  parties  are
    agreed that, because the  sponsor's  business  had  only  commenced  in
    September 2014 and the application was made in  August  2015,  accounts
    for a full tax year were not supplied as required.

 5. Paragraph 19(d) of Appendix FM-SE provides as follows:

         (d) The financial year(s) to which paragraph 7 refers is the period
         of  the  last  full  financial  year(s)  to  which   the   required
         Statement(s) of Account (SA300 or SA302) relates.

 6. In my opinion, the last sentence of sub-paragraph (d)  clearly  intends
    that the words "last full financial year" be synonymous  with  the  tax
    year.  The statements of account and tax calculation  forms  SA300  and
    SA302 are standard HMRC forms which are submitted for tax year  periods
    from April-April.  Sub-paragraph (d) makes a direct connection  between
    the words "last full financial year" and these HMRC  forms  ("to  which
    the required statements of account relates ...")  Use of the adjectival
    "full" in relation to "financial years" should be read as referring  to
    the tax year to which the  statements  of  account,  in  turn,  relate.
    Indeed, the use of the  word  "full"  is  a  clear  indication,  in  my
    opinion, that "financial year" is synonymous with tax year.  The use of
    the word 'full' is not nugatory; it is intended by  the  Rule  that  an
    applicant should supply accounts relating to a full tax year, that is a
    tax year which has been subject to an assessment by HMRC.   Indeed,  it
    is the linking of reference to a  financial  year  to  HMRC  procedures
    (which, of course,  are  concerned  with  tax  years)  that  ultimately
    persuades me that Mr Mills' interpretation of the Rule is correct.

 7. It follows from what I have said that the appellant did not comply with
    Appendix  FM-SE.   Her  failure  to  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules to represent a thorough application of  law  relating
    to Article 8 ECHR leads me to conclude that, in the  absence  of  other
    compelling circumstances (and it was  not  submitted  to  me  that  any
    existed), the First-tier Tribunal was correct to  dismiss  the  appeal.
    Both of the errors of law which I have  identified  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision do  not,  in  my  opinion,  materially  affect  the
    outcome of the appeal.  In the circumstances, I exercise my  discretion
    to refrain  from  setting  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    notwithstanding the errors of law.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 30 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 30 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

