
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08663/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2020                  |On 13th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                          VIVIAN NKIRUKA OFFIAJIAKU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik instructed by Victory Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Ms Offiajiaku's human rights claim, made on  11th  March  2019  was
         refused by the Secretary of State for reasons set out in a decision
         dated 1st May 2019. Her appeal against that decision was  dismissed
         for reasons set out in a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hawden-Beal promulgated on 13th August 2019. Ms  Offiajiaku  sought
         and was granted permission to  appeal  on  the  following,  briefly
         summarised, grounds:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to make clear credibility
             findings;

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal's approach to  the  appellant's  claim
             under EX1 was legally flawed in that she failed to make  clear
             findings in relations  to  the  test  of  whether  there  were
             insurmountable obstacles and failed to engage with the  policy
             guidance in relation thereto;

        iii) Failed to assess properly the available evidence and to engage
             properly with the principles in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40  and
             Hayat (nature of Chikwamba  principle)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT
             00444 (IAC);

         iv) Failed to attach any weight to the considerations set  out  in
             paragraph 117B Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
             and

          v) Failed to deal adequately with the relevant test in  paragraph
             276ADE (1)(vi) namely whether the appellant  would  face  very
             significant obstacles to  reintegration  upon  her  return  to
             Nigeria.

      2. Before me, Mr Malik reduced his grounds, confirming he would not be
         relying on (iv); (v) would be subsumed in his submissions  on  (ii)
         and that the focus of his submissions  would  be  on  (iii)  -  the
         Chikwamba point.




         Background

      3. Ms Offiajiaku is a Nigerian citizen, born on 10th November 1971 who
         came to the UK in 2008 as a student and had leave to  remain  as  a
         student until 16 December 2012. In May 2012 she had sought leave to
         remain in the UK as a dependant of her sister who  was  settled  in
         the  UK.  That  application  was  refused  and  she  appealed  that
         decision, withdrawing her appeal on 10th  May  2012  prior  to  its
         determination. On 8th May  2012  she  sought  leave  to  remain  on
         compassionate  grounds,  such  application  being  refused  on  4th
         September 2013. She remained unlawfully in the UK. On 23rd December
         2013 she applied for leave to remain as the spouse of  her  husband
         Vincent Page; the application was refused with no right of  appeal.
         She did not leave the UK. A further  similar  application  made  on
         25th October 2016 and was refused under paragraph 353 on  3rd  July
         2017. It seems that application was reconsidered  and  the  current
         refusal decision taken; a refusal of a human rights  claim  with  a
         statutory right of appeal exercisable in- country.

      4. The appellant's husband, Mr Page was born in  France  in  2003  and
         moved to the UK. He is  now  a  British  Citizen;  he  works  as  a
         healthcare assistant.

      5. The couple met at the beginning of November 2012; Mr Page  proposed
         to her in January 2013 and they started living together in  October
         2013. They were married on 9th  December  2013  and  remain  living
         together. There is no dispute but that the couple  have  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship and intend to continue living together.
         Nor is there any dispute but that the  couple  meet  the  financial
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.





         First-tier Tribunal decision

      6. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out the evidence before her,  the
         submissions made and her findings. The appellant had not sought  to
         challenge the summary of evidence given or  record  of  submissions
         made but rather her challenge was, essentially, to what she  stated
         was an incorrect application of the relevant jurisprudence.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal decision, in so  far  as  relevant  to  the
         issues before me is as follows:

              22.  The  appellant  cannot  meet   the   immigration   status
                  requirements of the rules because  she  has  not  had  any
                  leave to remain in the UK since 2012 and therefore  cannot
                  succeed under the 5-year route to settlement. She may meet
                  the requirements for the 10-year route  to  settlement  if
                  she does not meet all the eligibility requirements,  which
                  is the case here, but she can meet EX.1(b) and show  there
                  are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  her
                  partner continuing outside the UK in Nigeria, which  could
                  not be overcome or would cause her or her husband  serious
                  hardship.

              23. There is no evidence that  there  are  any  insurmountable
                  obstacles which could not be overcome or would  cause  the
                  appellant serious hardship. She was  born  and  raised  in
                  Nigeria, speaks the language and worked there as  a  nurse
                  until she came here in 2008. She has  placed  no  evidence
                  before me to indicate  that  she  could  not  go  back  to
                  Nigeria. Her husband supports her now financially  because
                  she is not allowed to work and there has been nothing  put
                  before me to indicate that  he  could  not  or  would  not
                  support her whilst  she  was  in  Nigeria  waiting  for  a
                  decision on  an  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
                  spouse. She has worked there in the past and has placed no
                  evidence before me to indicate that she would not be  able
                  to obtain employment there again.

              24. In so far as her husband  is  concerned,  again  there  is
                  nothing   which   demonstrates   that   there   would   be
                  insurmountable obstacles to  him  continuing  family  life
                  with the appellant in Nigeria. He came to  the  UK,  never
                  having visited before and knowing little English  and  yet
                  managed to find himself a job and has adapted to life here
                  in the UK. He speaks English which  is  widely  spoken  in
                  Nigeria and the appellant would  be  able  to  assist  him
                  adjust to life over there.  He  works  in  the  healthcare
                  sector and I see no reason why he could not obtain similar
                  employment  over  there,  with  the  assistance   of   the
                  appellant. In the alternative there is nothing  before  me
                  to indicate  that  the  sponsor  could  not  maintain  the
                  appellant whilst she waited for a decision  on  her  entry
                  clearance application.

              25. ...There is no evidence of  any  significant  difficulties
                  which cannot be overcome or any serious hardship which the
                  appellant and her husband would suffer if they had  to  go
                  to Nigeria. I  have  considered  the  respondent's  policy
                  guidance and note that the appellant and her partner  have
                  provided no evidence to suggest that her partner would not
                  be permitted entry into Nigeria or have they provided  any
                  evidence to suggest that there are  any  serious  cultural
                  barriers in  Nigeria,  which  would  put  the  appellant's
                  partner at a disadvantage and which could not be overcome.
                  I am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  her
                  partner cannot take advantage of EX.1(b).

              26. In so far  as  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  is
                  concerned, the appellant has not been here  for  at  least
                  20years and has not shown that there are very  significant
                  obstacles to her integration into Nigerian society. ...

              27. I am satisfied that the appellant would have  no  problems
                  integrating back into  Nigerian  society.  She  was  born,
                  raised there and educated there and had gainful employment
                  as a nurse until she came here in 2008. There was  nothing
                  specific put before me to say what problems she would have
                  when she went back....she has not provided any evidence to
                  show what would stop her taking up employment or the reins
                  of her life again in Nigeria.

              28. I am satisfied that the decision was justified because the
                  maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
                  public interest under sections 117A and B of the 2002  NIA
                  and therefore refusing entry  or  leave  to  remain  to  a
                  person  who  does  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
                  immigration rules is justification for exclusion.

              29. That leaves the final question as to whether the  decision
                  is proportionate...

              30. I have also given consideration  to  section  117B(4)  and
                  note that she has established a family life  here  with  a
                  qualifying partner....the relationship  with  her  partner
                  was established when her status  was  precarious  and  she
                  knew that she could be forced to leave the UK at any time.

              31. But balanced against that is the fact that she  meets  all
                  the requirements of the rules other than the fact that she
                  is an overstayer and so, if she returns to Nigeria to make
                  the  appropriate  application  for  entry  clearance,  the
                  question is she likely to succeed? CHIKWAMBA (supra)  made
                  it clear that there was little point  in  sending  someone
                  back to apply for entry clearance for no other reason that
                  it was normal procedure under the rules. But in CHIKWAMBA,
                  there was a child involved and a husband who could not  go
                  back to Zimbabwe with the appellant. That is not the  case
                  here.  And  I  am  satisfied   that   CHIKWAMBA   can   be
                  distinguished.

              32. I am satisfied that there are no insurmountable  obstacles
                  to  their  family  life  continuing  in  Nigeria,  but   I
                  acknowledge that the husband  is  a  British  Citizen  and
                  cannot be forced to leave the  UK.  I  am  satisfied  that
                  there are no exceptional circumstances in this case and in
                  dismissing her appeal, I am satisfied that  a  few  months
                  enforced separation will not result in unjustifiably harsh
                  circumstances for herself or  her  partner.  There  is  no
                  reason why  she  cannot  make  an  application  for  entry
                  clearance in the usual way from Nigeria.

              33. In the circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the  evidence
                  before  me  does  not   outweigh   the   public   interest
                  considerations which  justify  maintaining  the  decision.
                  Given the above I am satisfied that the decision to refuse
                  leave to remain is proportionate...





         Discussion

      8. Mr Malik submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to
         have any or any adequate regard  to  the  policy  guidance  of  the
         respondent in relation to the issue of  'insurmountable  obstacles'
         and/or 'very significant difficulties. He  drew  attention  to  the
         section of the policy guidance headed 'Serious cultural barriers to
         relocation overseas' and submitted the judge had failed  to  engage
         with potential barriers to relocation  such  that  the  appellant's
         partner would  face  insurmountable  obstacles  to  relocation.  He
         acknowledged that there had been no significant evidence put to the
         judge other than that the sponsor had never been to Nigeria and was
         employed in the UK. It was, he submitted,  unreasonable  to  expect
         the appellant's husband to leave the UK.  He was not able  to  draw
         my attention  to  any  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge that could have impacted upon a decision  made  with
         regard to serious cultural or other barriers; he acknowledged  that
         no evidence had been put before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  of
         any limitation or restriction on the ability of Mr Page  to  enter,
         remain, live or  work  in  Nigeria.  I  note  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge specifically considered the appellant's evidence  in
         the context of the policy guidance (see paragraph 25 of the  First-
         tier Tribunal decision). The appellant did not take issue with  the
         summary of the evidence considered by the First-tier Tribunal judge
         in determining whether there were such  obstacles  to  the  partner
         relocating (see paragraphs 23 and 24 First-tier Tribunal decision).



      9. Mr Malik submitted the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to
         apply the correct test in reaching  her  findings  under  paragraph
         276ADE (1) (vi) and failed  to  have  regard  to  the  respondent's
         policy guidance. Mr Malik submitted  that  the  threshold  to  meet
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was lower than that required  to  meet  the
         'insurmountable  obstacle'  threshold.  The  threshold  however  is
         relevant to a different test. In paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) the  issue
         under consideration is the potential interference  in  the  private
         life of the appellant which,  although  it  may  also  include  her
         family life, is primarily  targeted  at  that.  In  this  case  the
         evidence relied upon is in any event the same  in  so  far  as  her
         family life is concerned and also  involves  consideration  of  her
         personal immigration history and status.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge set out in her decision these factors and no issue was  taken
         with that summary. In paragraph 27 the judge  says  in  terms  that
         there are no  problems  in  her  returning  to  Nigeria  and  gives
         detailed reasons for that finding. The submission by Mr Malik  that
         the judge should have expressly stated that  there  'were  no  very
         significant obstacles' and the failure to do so is an error of  law
         is difficult to comprehend. It is difficult to see  how  the  judge
         could have expressed herself in clearer terms  that  the  appellant
         did not meet 276ADE(1)(vi).

     10. The judge  examined  the  evidence,  took  account  of  the  policy
         guidance and relevant jurisprudence and reached a  conclusion  that
         was manifestly open to her that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
         required criteria set out in the Immigration  Rules.  There  is  no
         error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  finding  that  the
         appellant  and  her  spouse  would  not   face   very   significant
         difficulties in relocation or that she would not  face  significant
         obstacles to reintegration.

     11. As stated by Mr Malik the main thrust of his submissions  and  what
         he considered to be his strongest ground was what he claimed was  a
         failure by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  to  properly  apply  the
         'Chikwamba' principles.  The  appellant  would,  he  submitted,  be
         granted entry clearance on application because the  fact  that  she
         had married and formed her relationship with her husband whilst she
         was unlawfully in  the  UK  would  not  impact  adversely  upon  an
         application for  entry  clearance  where  she  met  all  the  other
         criteria - as found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There  would
         therefore 'be no point' in  requiring  her  to  leave  the  UK,  as
         supported by the findings of Chikwamba.

     12. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  is  correct  in  paragraph  31  in
         describing the factual matrix of Chikwamba as involving a child and
         a husband  who  could  not  return  to  Zimbabwe.  But  Mr  Malik's
         reduction of Chikwamba to the bare essential that if a person meets
         the Immigration Rules for entry clearance then removal to apply for
         such entry clearance is disproportionate is incorrect. The position
         is far more nuanced.

     13. Paragraph 60 of Lal [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 explains,

             "the policy embodied in the  Immigration  Rules  made  by  the
             Secretary of State and approved  by  Parliament  for  granting
             leave to remain as a partner of a British Citizen (or  settled
             person)  attaches  importance  to  the  partner's  immigration
             status  and  distinguishes  between  different  categories  of
             person whose immigration status  is  precarious,  rather  than
             treating them al  in  the  same  way.  Thus,  the  eligibility
             requirements for leave  to  remain  as  a  partner  quoted  at
             paragraph 8 above distinguish between (i) a person who  is  in
             the UK with leave to enter or remain of more than six  months,
             (ii) a person who is a visitor or has limited leave  to  enter
             or remain for a period of six months  or  less,  and  (iii)  a
             person who is on temporary admission or  release  (arrangement
             now replaced by immigration bail)  or  present  in  breach  of
             immigration laws. This is consistent with an  approach  which,
             in determining whether  refusing  leave  to  remain  would  be
             disproportionate,  gives  greater  weight  to  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship  formed  by  a  person  who  has  been
             permitted by the Secretary of State to reside in the UK for  a
             significant period for the purpose of study or work than to  a
             relationship entered into by someone who  is  merely  admitted
             for a short visit or whose presence is tolerated only  because
             they have made an asylum claim or other application which  has
             not yet been determined."

         In paragraphs 68 and 69,  the  Court  considered  the  weighing  of
         relevant factors in assessing the proportionality of the decision:

             "68. A further error of law in  the  reasoning  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal (quoted at paragraph 48  above)  is  that  the  judge
             applied the wrong test by asking whether the couple  would  be
             able to live in India "without serious hardship". As discussed
             earlier, that is a  relevant  criterion  in  deciding  whether
             there are "insurmountable obstacles" to continuing family life
             outside the UK. In considering,  however,  whether  there  are
             "exceptional circumstances", the applicable  test  is  whether
             refusing leave to remain would result in "unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences" for the applicant or their  partner,  such  that
             refusal would not be proportionate: see the passage  from  the
             Secretary of  State's  instructions  to  officials  quoted  at
             paragraph 11 above and the Agyarko case at  paras  54-60.  The
             essential difference (reflected in the  word  "unjustifiably")
             is that the latter test requires  the  tribunal  not  just  to
             assess the degree of hardship which  the  applicant  or  their
             partner would suffer, but to balance the  impact  of  refusing
             leave to remain on their family life against the  strength  of
             the public interest in such refusal in all  the  circumstances
             of the particular case.

             69.  The Upper Tribunal did not undertake such an  assessment.
             This was another error of law which  flowed  from  the  errors
             already identified.  From  the  judge's  point  of  view,  the
             question  of  proportionality  had  in  effect  already   been
             answered by his mistaken understanding that he was required by
             law to attach little weight to the couple's  relationship  and
             his  previous  finding  that  there  were  no   insurmountable
             obstacles to Ms Lal continuing family life  with  her  husband
             outside the UK. As a result of those errors, the judge  failed
             to  assess  the  factors   relevant   to   the   question   of
             proportionality in the circumstances of this case."

     14. Paragraph 11 of Lal reads:

             "Since August 2017 the obligation to  consider  whether  there
             are exceptional circumstances requiring leave to be granted on
             article 8 grounds has been contained in the Immigration  Rules
             themselves. But at the time  of  Ms  Lal's  application,  this
             element of the Secretary of State's  policy  was  embodied  in
             instructions issued to officials. The version then current was
             "Immigration  Directorate   Instruction,   Family   Migration:
             Appendix FM  Section  1.0b",  published  in  July  2014.  This
             stated:

                  "In  every  case  that  falls  for   refusal   under   the
                  Immigration Rules, the decision maker must go on  to  give
                  full consideration to whether there  are  any  exceptional
                  circumstances."

             The following further explanation was given:

                  "'Exceptional' does not mean 'unusual' or 'unique'. Whilst
                  all cases are to some extent unique, those unique  factors
                  do not generally render them exceptional. For  example,  a
                  case is not exceptional just because the criteria set  out
                  in EX.1. of Appendix  FM  have  been  missed  by  a  small
                  margin.  Instead,  'exceptional'  means  circumstances  in
                  which  refusal  would  result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
                  consequences for the individual or their family such  that
                  refusal of the  application  would  not  be  proportionate
                  under  article  8.  ...  Cases  that   raise   exceptional
                  circumstances that warrant a grant of  leave  outside  the
                  rules are likely to be rare.""

     15. In this case the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made  findings  with
         regard to insurmountable obstacles, very  significant  difficulties
         and concluded, rationally and lawfully with detailed  reasons  that
         those criteria were not met and thus the appellant did not meet the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.

     16. Ms Cunha submitted that paragraph 31  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision could not be read in isolation to the decision as a whole.

     17. Although paragraph 31 read in isolation  could  indicate  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge had merely been looking  at  whether  the
         appellant's  factual  circumstances  were  similar  to   those   in
         Chikwamba, I do not accept that to be the case. Paragraph 32 of the
         decision  makes  clear  that   the   judge   has   considered   the
         circumstances of the appellant as a whole. She  specifically  finds
         that there are no exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case
         and is satisfied that a few months enforced  separation  would  not
         result in unjustifiably harsh consequences - the  language  of  the
         test required  to  be  considered  under  the  respondent's  policy
         guidance, as endorsed in  Lal.  Read  as  a  whole  the  judge  has
         undertaken a detailed analysis of  the  evidence  relied  upon  and
         reached findings that were open to her; she has applied the correct
         test for each element and has properly assessed, weighed and  given
         reasons for the conclusion reached on the  proportionality  of  the
         decision to refuse the human rights claim.

     18. There is no error of law.




    Addendum

    Although not raised before me and if it had, it  could  not  have  been
    considered, it may be that if Mr Page holds  dual  French  and  British
    Nationality,  this  may  impact  upon  the  appellant  -   see   Lounes
    (Citizenship of the Union: Border checks:  Judgment)  [2017]  EUECJ  C-
    165/16 (14 November 2017)  and  R  (on  the  application  of  Zekri)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWHC 3058




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.


     Date 7th January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
