
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal no:
HU/08366/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|On 20 March 2019                     |Promulgated                          |
|                                     |On 8 May 2019                        |


                                   Before:

                                  LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                  Between:

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BRUCE HART KARWOSKI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:  Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Ms Julian Norman, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.     This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Neville) dated 16 November 2018 allowing
    an appeal by the respondent against the deportation order made  by  the
    appellant on 19 July 2016 under section 35 of the UK Borders  Act  2007
    ("the 2007 Act"). The judge held that the respondent was not liable  to
    deportation as he was  covered  by  the  exception  to  deportation  in
    section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") and article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights ("ECHR").

 2. The respondent was born on 28 April 1963. He is a citizen of the United
    States of America. He has lived in the UK since  around  1988  and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence on 5
    September 2011. He was married to an  American  citizen  from  whom  he
    separated in 2010 and from whom he was  divorced  in  2014.  There  are
    three grown-up children of that marriage, with whom he has no  contact.
    In 1994 he became a physics and chemistry teacher at a  school  in  the
    south east of England. He married his present wife, [AT], in  2014.  He
    was arrested for sexual offences allegedly committed  before  he  began
    his relationship with Ms [T] in 2011. On 12 April 2016 he was convicted
    in the Crown Court of  13  counts  of  sexual  activity  with  a  child
    contrary to section 16 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, which makes  it
    an offence for a person to engage in sexual activity with a person  who
    is under the age of 18 and in respect of whom he is in  a  position  of
    trust. There were two victims, who were aged 16 or 17 at  the  time  of
    the offences and pupils at the school at which he taught.  A  probation
    report on him stated that he had pursued the victims for his own sexual
    gratification selfishly, deliberately and over an extended  period.  He
    was sentenced to 32 months imprisonment and thereby became  subject  to
    the notification requirements of the Sexual Offences Act  2003  for  an
    indefinite period. That conviction also had the result that he became a
    "foreign criminal" within the meaning of section 2  of  the  2007  Act.
    Upon his release from custody he was assessed as being at  medium  risk
    of serious  harm  in  relation  to  children.  His  licence  conditions
    prevented him from living, having unsupervised contact or performing  a
    range of activities with anyone under the age of  18.  He  successfully
    completed his licence period, which expired on 3 March 2019.

 3. At the hearing before the judge the respondent maintained that he  fell
    within exception 1 in  section  117C(4)  and  exception  2  in  section
    117C(5) of the 2002 Act. The judge,  having  considered  the  evidence,
    decided that the respondent did not fall within exception 1,  but  that
    he did fall within exception 2 in that he had a genuine and susbsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner  and  that  the  effect  of  the
    deportation on her would be unduly harsh. Having considered the  effect
    on Ms [T] of the respondent's deportation, he concluded that the degree
    of harshness for  her  went  well  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
    involved for most other women in her position and amounted to  hardship
    that was undue. He therefore allowed the appeal. Permission  to  appeal
    against that decision was granted to the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the circumstances, if Ms  [T]  followed
    the respondent to the USA or if she  remained  in  the  UK,  could  not
    rationally be said to amount to undue harshness.

 4. Before considering the evidence about the  effect  on  Ms  [T]  of  the
    respondent's deportation  the  judge  reminded  himself  of  what  Lord
    Carnwath had said in the Supreme  Court  about  the  exceptions  in  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53
    at paragraph 23. He then considered in detail the  evidence  about  the
    effect on Ms [T] of the respondent's deportation to the  USA  and  made
    certain findings in fact. On the basis of evidence from a specialist US
    immigration lawyer he was satisfied that the respondent's offending was
    no barrier to the couple relocating to the USA; that when a US  citizen
    seeks to sponsor a  foreign  spouse  he  enters  an  agreement  via  an
    Affidavit of Support with the US Government stating  that  he  will  be
    responsible for supporting her until she becomes a US citizen  and  she
    would need to show a minimum of $61,000 in assets; and that the process
    leading to the issue of a green card permitting her  residency  in  the
    USA would take at least a year to complete. He found that Ms [T]  would
    accompany the respondent to the USA rather than continue to live in the
    UK without him for any longer than necessary, but that there would be a
    delay of at least one year, during which time they would be  separated,
    before the issuing of a green card to  her.  He  found  that  on  their
    return to the USA they would initially have to  undertake  menial  work
    and have only basic accommodation and housing. Ms  [T]'s  career  as  a
    teacher would be over, and it would take her years to rebuild  it.  Her
    real passion was for the subject of geography,  which  had  no  similar
    place in the US curriculum. There  were  aspects  to  her  personality,
    circumstances and relationship with the respondent which were relevant.
    He concluded at paragraph 72 that the degree of harshness for her  went
    well beyond what would necessarily be involved for most other women  in
    her position.  The  combination  of  losing  her  career,  lossing  the
    relationship with her mother and sister that went well beyond the usual
    ties between adult relatives, the loss of their protective support, the
    severe reduction in the likelihood  of  her  ever  having  children,  a
    severe reduction in her standard of living and the associated effect on
    her mental health would amount to hardship that is undue.

 5. The appellant in his reasons for appealing asserts that the hardship Ms
    [T] may experience does not meet the high  threshold  of  being  unduly
    harsh. The respondent in  his  skeleton  argument  contended  that  the
    reasons for appealing were no more than an attempt to reargue the case,
    that the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion which  he  did  and
    that he gave adequate and cogent reasons for doing so. It was submitted
    that he properly directed himself  and  reached  a  conclusion  he  was
    entitled to reach: he had had the benefit of hearing directly from  the
    witnesses, including Ms [T], and was entitled to place  weight  on  her
    vulnerability in concluding that in her  particular  circumstances  the
    impact upon her would be unduly harsh. He correctly directed himself as
    to KO (Nigeria) at paragraphs 45 to 48 and properly applied it  to  the
    facts of this case.  He  gave  proper  reasons  for  his  findings.  In
    particular, he distinguished between features which would not amount to
    undue harshness (paragraph 53); he distinguished "aspects to  Ms  [T]'s
    personality , circumstances and relationship" with the respondent which
    had the potential to affect that analysis (paragraph 53);  he  analysed
    the medical evidence and highlighted key elements  (paragraphs  54  and
    55); he did not accept the medical evidence uncrticially, but  assessed
    consistency and whether relaince could be placed on it (paragraph  55);
    he set out her family circumstances and gave reasons for  his  findings
    as to the evidence given by her witnesses (paragraphs  58  to  62);  he
    explicitly stated that he did not pander to her choice to go  with  the
    respondent but recognised that this was an inevitable decision in light
    of her dependent personality (paragraph 62); and he gave  detailed  and
    cogent reasons for his finding of undue harshness in the  circumstances
    of this case (paragraph 69) and correctly reminded himself that it  was
    a high threshold (paragraphs 71 to 73).

 6. In KO (Nigeria) Lord Carnwath stated as follows at  paragraphs  23  and
    27:

         "23. ... the expression 'unduly harsh' seems  clearly  intended  to
         introduce  a higher  hurdle  than  that  of  'reasonableness'   ...
         taking account of the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals.  Further,  the  word  'unduly'  implies  an  element  of
         comparison. It assumes that there is a 'due' level of  'harshness',
         that is, a level which may  be  acceptable  or  jusifiable  in  the
         relevant context. 'Unduly'  implies  something  going  beyond  that
         level. The relevant context is that set by  section  117C(1),  that
         is, the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

         27.  Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of 'unduly harsh'  in
         this  context  was  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J,
         President, and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone)  v  Secretary
         of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC)  ..  a
         decision given on 15 April 2015. They referred to  the  'evaluative
         assessment' required of the tribunal:

             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context denotes  something
             severe or bleak.  Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the  adverb
             'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher."

         On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal held  that
         the test was satisfied:

             "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation  in  concluding
             that it would be unduly harsh for either of the two seven year
             old British citizen children concerned to be abruptly uprooted
             from their United Kingdom life  setting  and  exiled  to  this
             struggling, impoverished  and  plague  stricken  West  African
             State. No reasonable or right thinking person  would  consider
             this anything less than cruel."

         ... I do not understand the conclusion on the facts of that case to
         be controversial."

   7. Having considered the findings in fact  made  by  the  judge  and  the
      competing submissions, we are satisfied that the  judge  did  make  an
      error of law in respect that he did not properly  apply  the  test  of
      "unduly harsh" to the facts found by him. On no  conceivable  view  of
      the facts can  it  be  said  that  the  effects  of  the  respondent's
      deportation  on  Ms  [T]  would  be  unduly   harsh.   They   may   be
      uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult, but they
      cannot properly denote something unduly severe or bleak.  While  every
      case will depend on its own facts, the facts in MK (Sierra Leone) give
      something of the flavour of what is required to  satisfy  the  "unduly
      harsh" test. The effects of the respondent's deportation on Ms [T] are
      in reality no more than the effects on any spouse of the other  spouse
      having to move to a foreign country to live or work.

   8. As the judge made an error of law his decision is set aside. We remake
      the decision on the basis of the facts found by the judge and  dismiss
      the appeal by the respondent.

Notice of Decision

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law and we set it aside.
    2. We remake the decision by dismissing the appeal

Appeal
                               Lord Uist
                                (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                               03 May 2019
