
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08639/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 12 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    M S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Markus, Counsel, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Jamaica, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Obhi of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  16
    October 2018 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 11 July 2017 to make a deportation order pursuant  to  s.
    32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  This decision was made in  light  of
    the fact that on 14 June 2016 he had been convicted of  sexual  assault
    of a female and sentenced to two years' imprisonment and certified as a
    sex offender for a period of ten years with  a  Restraining  Order  for
    eight years.

2.   The appellant's grounds were five in number, it  being  contended  that
    the judge erred in (1) her approach to the medical evidence of Dr Bell;
    (2) her approach to the witness evidence given by the appellant and his
    two sisters; (3)  her  approach  to  the  country  expert  evidence  of
    O'Hilaire Sobers and  Luke  de  Noronha;  (4)  failing  when  assessing
    whether there were very compelling circumstances  to  engage  with  the
    evidence of Dr  Bell  or  to  take  account  of  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant's partner, EB, of the appellant's deportation or to take into
    account the pervasive stigma attached to deportees to Jamaica and those
    suffering from mental illness or the OASys Report assessment  that  the
    appellant posed a low risk of re-offending; and (5) failing to  address
    the appellant's case under Article 3 ECHR.

3.   I received pertinent submissions from both representatives for which  I
    record my thanks.

4.   I have decided that the judge's decision is vitiated by material  legal
    error.

5.   Dealing with ground (1) it is plain enough  that  the  judge  took  the
    medical evidence into account and her decision accordingly sets out the
    evidence of Dr Bell.  The judge accepted Dr Bell's diagnosis  that  the
    appellant suffers from mental illness (schizo-affective  disorder)  "on
    the basis of the medical report before me"  (paragraph  53).   However,
    the judge arrives at a conclusion that the  appellant's  mental  health
    illness can be controlled through regular engagement with mental health
    services in Jamaica.  The difficulty with that conclusion is that it is
    quite different from that reached by Dr Bell.   In  itself  that  gives
    rise to no error; particularly since the findings  made  in  a  medical
    report, even of good quality, may be outweighed by or  contradicted  by
    other evidence and the rule of a judicial fact-finding is  to  consider
    the evidence as a whole.  However, where the  judge's  conclusions  are
    clearly different from a medical report of good quality it is incumbent
    on a judge to explain why.  The judge in this case  failed  to  explain
    why she did not  share  Dr  Bell's  assessment  that  if  there  was  a
    disruption in the relationship between the appellant and EB there would
    be a deterioration in his psychiatric state; that the  sudden  breaking
    of their relationship would be experienced as a "violent and  traumatic
    event"; that the  appellant's  prognosis  depended  entirely  upon  his
    social circumstances and in particular his relationship with EB and his
    sisters; and that if he were returned to Jamaica it would be "virtually
    certain" that his mental health would deteriorate.  Clearly it was  not
    Dr Bell's view that the appellant's mental illness could be "controlled
    through medication and  through  regular  engagement  with  the  mental
    health services" (paragraph 67).  What was  necessary,  therefore,  was
    for the judge to give reasons why she took a different view.

6.   There is a  related  difficulty  with  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence relating to EB - who was  the  subject  of  a  medical
    report from the same Dr Bell.  In Dr Bell's opinion EB suffered from  a
    personality disorder and if the appellant were removed she  was  likely
    to revert to a "a  pattern  of  behaviour  that  was  volatile,  highly
    sensitive to even quite minor stresses, she may  turn  to  alcohol  and
    there would be a risk of taking an overdose".  The judge properly noted
    this assessment by Dr Bell at paragraph 50.

7.   Whilst this diagnosis might be  said  to  reflect  relatively  moderate
    concerns in EB's  case  (as  compared  to  those  expressed  about  the
    appellant), this was a factor the judge  was  required  to  assess  and
    weigh in the balance when deciding the issue under s. 117C(5) ("... the
    effect of C's deportation on the partner ... would be  unduly  harsh").
    Yet all the judge's decision says about this is that:

         "I accept that the appellant will find the  move  distressing,  and
         that his partner may choose not to accompany him.   However  it  is
         not unduly harsh to expert her to do so.  The move can  be  planned
         by his family to enable the impact to be reduced."

8.   That again is a statement of the judge's conclusion.  It does  not  set
    out  any  reasons.   It  may  be  that  the   judge   considered   EB's
    psychological problems not to be severe enough to make  the  effect  on
    her of the appellant's  deportation  unduly  harsh;  or  she  may  have
    considered that whilst significant, there were other  factors  in  play
    (e.g. support from her own family) that would mitigate the effect.   We
    simply do not know.

9.   I do not find that ground (2) is made  out.   It  is  argued  that  the
    judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding that the  appellant  would
    have familial support in Jamaica, bolstered by financial  support  from
    his sisters.  It is true that the claims made to the  contrary  by  the
    sisters in their evidence were not the  subject  of  cross-examination,
    but read as a whole the judge's decision adequately  explains  why  she
    reached the consideration she did; her reasons  being  encapsulated  in
    paragraph 58:

         "I am told that he does not want to go to Jamaica as  he  does  not
         get on with any of his brothers.  However his sisters  continue  to
         support not just his brothers, but also his  nephew  who  has  been
         deported to Jamaica.  There is a thriving family  in  Jamaica  even
         though his parents are not deceased and two of his sisters live  in
         the UK.  They continue to  have  contact  with  their  brothers  in
         Jamaica and one of his sisters owns  a  property  in  the  country.
         Both of the appellant's sisters stated that they would assist their
         brother in any way they could."

10.  However, as with ground (1), I find ground (3) made  out.   There  were
    two country expert reports produced by the  appellant,  both  of  which
    identified that persons deported to Jamaica faced ostracism and  stigma
    there and that persons with mental illness also experienced stigma  and
    inadequate provision.  The  judge  also  had  a  detailed  report  from
    Georgetown University addressing the position of deportees  to  Jamaica
    who suffer from mental illness.  It stated at one part that:

         "[a]s a result of stigma,  discrimination,  and  a  lack  of  legal
         recourse to ameliorate their combined effects, it  is  particularly
         challenging  for  mentally  disabled  deported  persons  to  obtain
         employment, find  adequate  shelter,  and  even  maintain  personal
         safety".

    The judge did not address this report at all.  The  judge  did  address
    the report of Dr Sobers at paragraphs 69 to 70.  At  paragraph  70  she
    concludes:

         "The report, in my view is flawed in that it completely ignores the
         presence of family in Jamaica, and the presence of family in the UK
         who are willing to assist the appellant.  It also ignores the  fact
         that another member of his family has been deported  and  is  being
         supported.   It  is  not  a  balanced  and  objective  report.    I
         acknowledge that the appellant and his sisters have told me that he
         has a poor relationship  with  all  of  his  brothers  in  Jamaica;
         however he also told me that he was able to repair the relationship
         with the brother who died.  I  place  little  weight  on  what  the
         appellant  and  his  sisters  tell  me  about  the  nature  of  his
         relationship with his siblings, I understand why they would wish to
         play that down, but in reality I find  that  he  will  be  able  to
         obtain some assistance from them."

11.  Three difficulties arise from  this  .................  of  the  expert
    evidence.  First there is the point already  noted  that  it  does  not
    engage with the expert evidence of Luke de Noronha or the  report  from
    Georgetown University.  Second, in picking out from Dr  Sober's  report
    the reference to a government  supported  programme  aired  at  helping
    vulnerable people, the judge does not appear to have engaged  with  the
    point made by Dr Sobers that the appellant faced stigma as  a  deportee
    when it came to accessing any such  programme.   Third,  the  fact  (as
    found by the judge) that the appellant  could  obtain  assistance  from
    family relatives in Jamaica and some  degree  of  financial  assistance
    from his sisters in the UK,  did  not  in  itself  establish  that  the
    appellant would be protected from stigmatisation or that this  type  of
    assistance and support would ameliorate  his  mental  health  problems,
    which according to Dr  Bell  would  be  likely  to  be  exacerbated  by
    deportation.

12.  In view of my conclusions that the  judge's  decision  is  vitiated  by
    legal error in respect of her treatment  of  the  medical  and  country
    expert reports, it is unnecessary for me to address grounds (4) and (5)
    which as Mr Markus conceded, reprised the main points raised in grounds
    (1) and (2).  I see no alternative to the case being  remitted  to  the
    FtT.

13.  Despite my decision to set aside the judge's decision I  see  no  valid
    reason not to preserve the judge's findings in relation  to  assistance
    from family members in Jamaica and some level of financial support from
    the appellant's two sisters in the UK.

14.  Whilst I have found an error in the judge's  treatment  of  the  expert
    evidence, this is not to  be  taken  as  endorsement  of  the  opinions
    reached in them.  It will be entirely a matter for the judge to  decide
    what weight to attach to them.  It will also be important for the judge
    to weigh them in the light of the entirety of the background  evidence,
    including that produced by the respondent, which in general, reflects a
    quite different view.



Notice of Decision

15.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Obhi).



Directions

The  appellant's  representatives  had  already  submitted  a   Rule   15(2)
application to the effect that if I found a  material  error  of  law,  they
would seek to  obtain  an  updated  medical  report  from  Dr  Bell  on  the
appellant by end of October 2019.  I hereby direct that they  produce  (with
copy to the respondent) this addendum report by end of October 2019.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 02 August 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

