
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Monday 19 August 2019             |On Thursday 5 September 2019l        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  EDMAR [G]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION
BACKGROUND

 1. By a decision promulgated on 3 July 2019, I, sitting with  Mrs  Justice
    Thornton (sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge) found an error of law  in
    the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal.  We therefore set the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    aside and  gave  directions  for  a  resumed  hearing  to  re-make  the
    decision.  Our error of law decision is appended to this  decision  for
    ease of reference.

 2. The background history of the Appellant's case is set out in summary at
    [2] and [3] of the error of law decision.  I do not need to repeat  the
    facts there stated but it will be necessary for me to expand and update
    them when applying the law to the evidence.

 3. I have before me a bundle of evidence on  which  the  Appellant  relies
    (referred to hereafter as [AB/xx]).  The Appellant has also  filed  two
    supplementary bundles of evidence dated 22 February 2019  and  31  July
    2019  (to  which  I  refer   hereafter   as   [SB1/xx]   and   [SB2/xx]
    respectively).  He also adduced  at  the  hearing  a  letter  dated  14
    November 2019 (which should read 14 August 2019) from  his  caseworker,
    Ms Zarina Vidale, who is employed by Croydon Pathways  Team,  which  is
    part of Croydon Youth Offending Service.  Mr Melvin did not  object  to
    the late filing of what is a short letter.  I also have a copy  of  the
    Respondent's bundle filed with the Tribunal which I refer to as [RB/xx]
    adopting the internal numbering.

 4. I heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  himself.   Although  we  had
    indicated in our error of law decision that it would be helpful to hear
    from the Appellant's father, I  was  informed  that  he  could  not  be
    present as  he  was  on  holiday  in  Portugal  with  his  family.   No
    application was made to adjourn due to his inability to attend  and  no
    further statement was produced from him.

 5. I also had before me a skeleton argument  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant for the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and a skeleton  argument
    and authorities relied on by the Respondent at the error of  law  stage
    as well as a skeleton argument filed by Mr Melvin for this  hearing  on
    16 August 2019.

 6. I have had regard to all the evidence before me, but I  refer  only  to
    that evidence which is relevant to the issues I have to decide.

THE ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

 7. Due to his age at the date of  his  commission  of  the  offences,  the
    Appellant is  not  the  subject  of  an  automatic  deportation  order.
    Section 32(5)  UK  Borders  Act  2007  does  not  apply  to  him.   The
    deportation order is under sections 5(1) and 3(5) Immigration Act 1971.
     However, as we indicated at [4] of the error of law decision,  Section
    117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") does
    apply.  Equally, paragraphs A398 to 399A of the Immigration Rules ("the
    Rules") apply.

 8. The relevant legal provisions are as follows  (so  far  as  potentially
    relevant):

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)      The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)      The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

            (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
            most of C's life,

            (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
            Kingdom, and

            (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
            integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
            deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
         interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2."




         Immigration Rules

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

         (a)      a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
         deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 ... and

         ...

         (b)      the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
         the public good and in the public interest because they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         ... or

         (d)      the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or  settled  in
         the UK, and

            (i)  the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
            (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration  status
            was not precarious; and

            (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
            country to which the person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
            compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
            paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

            (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
            in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)      the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
         of his life; and

         (b)      he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
         integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
         deported."

 9. Although, the drafting of Section 117C suggests that Section  117C  (6)
    applies only to cases where a person is sentenced  to  more  than  four
    years in prison, the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 concluded at [25]  to
    [27] that this was a drafting error and that provision is  intended  to
    apply to all cases to which Section 117C applies.  That  is  consistent
    with the Rules.

10. The issues for me to determine, therefore, are as follows:

    (a)     Whether  the  Appellant  is  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a British citizen partner, formed whilst  he  was
         here lawfully and, if so, whether it would be unduly harsh for  her
         to remain in the UK or return to  Angola  with  him,  applying  the
         relevant threshold.

    (b)    Whether the  Appellant  can  meet  the  private  life  exception
         contained in Section 117C (4) and paragraph 399A of the Rules.

    (c)    If neither exception is met whether there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over  and  above  the  exceptions  which  render  the
         decision to  deport  disproportionate.   In  that  context,  it  is
         appropriate to adopt the "balance sheet" approach advocated by  the
         Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] UKSC 60,  balancing  the  interference  with  his
         family and private life made out by the Appellant on  the  evidence
         against the public interest justification  for  deportation  relied
         upon by the Respondent.

11. I refer to other relevant case-law as that arises when  discussing  the
    issues below.

FACTS AND EVIDENCE

12. The Appellant has been in the UK since April 2011 when he came to  join
    his father. He was then aged just under  twelve  years.   He  was  here
    lawfully as his father's dependent until 23 June 2017.  His  leave  was
    not extended further following  his  commission  of  criminal  offences
    which led to the notice of liability to deport in the context of  which
    the Respondent refused the Appellant's human rights claim on  29  March
    2018 which decision is the subject of this appeal.  The  Appellant  was
    born on 23 April 1999 and is therefore now aged twenty years.

The Appellant's Offences

13. The Appellant was convicted, on 30 March 2016, of an offence of robbery
    and for the possession in public of a sharp object (a knife).   He  was
    sentenced on 29 July 2016 to eighteen months' detention with a training
    order.  He was released on 28 April 2017 subject to licence  conditions
    (imposing  a  curfew  and  supervision).    The  Appellant  was   again
    convicted, on 3 August 2017, for the offence of having  a  blade  in  a
    public place (on 12 July  2017).   He  was  sentenced  to  ten  months'
    detention in a Young Offenders' Institution.

14. We referred at [3] of our error of  law  decision  to  an  updated  PNC
    record indicating that the Appellant was under  investigation  and  was
    bailed to 4 July 2019 with a condition that he  should  not  enter  the
    London Borough of Lambeth and Southwark.  I deal with  the  Appellant's
    evidence about that offence below.  Mr Melvin also  relied  on  further
    information received from the police on 9 August  2019  that  they  had
    arrested the Appellant on  suspicion  of  possession  of  an  offensive
    weapon.  Again, I deal with the Appellant's evidence about that offence
    below. For completeness, having regard to the updated PNC report  filed
    by the Appellant ([SB2/1-6]) I note that the Appellant  has  also  been
    cautioned for possession of cannabis  (on  9  November  2015)  and  for
    possessing an offensive weapon in a public place  on  5  December  2014
    (cautioned on 13 February 2015).

15. I begin with the information  concerning  the  offences  of  which  the
    Appellant has been convicted. In relation to the first conviction,  the
    facts are set out in a pre-sentence report  at  [AB/14-24]  ("the  Pre-
    Sentence Report").  On 21 February 2016,  the  Appellant  was  among  a
    group of young people who threatened  two  victims  in  an  attempt  to
    obtain their mobile phones.  One of the victims  who  refused  to  hand
    over his phone was punched and stabbed.  The Appellant was not  accused
    of having been involved in that aspect of the offence.  He was  present
    and had a knife hidden in  his  shoe.   He  did  not  dispute  that  he
    possessed a knife and pleaded guilty.  He denied being involved in  the
    robbery and said that he was just part  of  the  crowd.   He  therefore
    pleaded not guilty but was found guilty.

16. The Pre-Sentence Report  notes  that  the  Appellant  had  completed  a
    weapons awareness programme as part of an earlier caution, but  it  was
    said that the Appellant's "understanding of the problematic  nature  of
    carrying knives is limited and it also appears he is easily led by  his
    peers to do things he wouldn't normally think of himself".   Aside  the
    fear of return to prison (he had been held on remand)  his  "motivation
    to not carry a knife is low". The Appellant was also said to have found
    the fight "amusing" which showed "a distinct lack of insight  into  the
    long-term consequences of how the offence may impact on the victim". He
    is said to have been concerned not to "lose face" with his friends.

17. The Pre-Sentence Report  also  records  that,  whilst  on  remand,  the
    Appellant  was  involved  in  twenty-six  incidents  of  which  he  had
    instigated seventeen.  His behaviour  in  custody  is  recorded  as  of
    concern and said to  be  a  "marked  deterioration  from  his  previous
    behaviour in the community".  It is no doubt for that reason  that  the
    author of the report  advocated  that  he  not  be  given  a  custodial
    sentence. That is however what occurred.

18. The Pre-Sentence Report also records  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
    background  which  is  largely  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  own
    statements and I  therefore  consider  below.   The  report  notes  the
    potential impact of the Appellant's  (evident)  stammer  on  his  self-
    esteem and advocates speech and language assessment.  The officer  also
    recommends one-to-one supervision.   It  is  said  that  the  potential
    influences on his offending are his cannabis use (which he  had  a  low
    motivation to address) and, most importantly, his peer group,  some  of
    whom were gang affiliated. The Appellant's family were said to struggle
    to control the Appellant.

19. As to risk of re-offending and risk of harm,  the  Pre-Sentence  Report
    says this:

         "[5.2]   I would assess Edmar as a high risk of reoffending.  While
         Edmar is capable of assessing the influences around him, he  has  a
         lot of trouble saying no to the anti-social peers and  he  is  very
         easily led into offending behaviour in order  to  gain  status  and
         acceptance amongst his friends.  At  this  stage,  Edmar  has  very
         little motivation to stop carrying a knife with him  other  than  a
         wish not to return to the YOI.

         [5.3]    Edmar is considered a medium to high risk of serious  harm
         to the public.  While Edmar has been cautioned  and  convicted  for
         possession of a knife, he has yet to use it  in  any  altercations.
         Until his remand in custody, Edmar  was  a  spectator  to  violence
         rather than an instigator of it.  Within custody, however,  Edmar's
         level of violence has increased.  It is my  assessment  that  in  a
         less artificial situation,  Edmar  would  be  far  less  likely  to
         instigate violence.  This assessment is taking  into  consideration
         the fact that through a group attack, serious harm  was  caused  in
         the committal of the offence, albeit, not directly by Edmar.

         [5.4]    Edmar is  assessed  at  a  Medium  Risk  of  harm  towards
         himself.  Edmar has never disclosed any desire  for  self-harm  and
         has not experienced  suicidal  ideation.   Professionals  have  not
         noted any concerning self-harming behaviour.   Edmar  has  shown  a
         pattern of being impulsive due to his anger and will  likely  place
         himself in danger when it comes to supporting his peers in a fight.
          It should be noted that Edmar  is  considered  vulnerable  in  the
         [sic] due to his separation from his Mother at such  a  young  age,
         his ongoing speech and language problems and his  anti-social  peer
         group."

20. Turning then to the second conviction, the sentencing remarks appear at
    [RB/K1-3] as follows:

         "You are 18 years of age and you are here to be sentenced  now  for
         possession of two knives on 12 July of this year.  Police  searched
         you as part of a routine operation at Brixton tube station  in  the
         afternoon.  You were wearing a rucksack inside which  you  had  two
         large knives concealed in two socks.  One was  a  completely  metal
         kitchen knife, the other a kitchen knife with a black handle.  They
         were large knives.  You told police  immediately  about  them  when
         they began to search you and you said that you were  carrying  them
         because you feared for your safety, because you had  recently  been
         shot.  You had indeed been shot in June and been  in  hospital  for
         some time.

         You claim in mitigation that you have no idea why you were shot.  I
         find that difficult to believe but it seems to me I do not need  to
         make a factual finding about that this morning.  Your history is an
         unhappy one.  You were cautioned for possessing  a  bladed  article
         when you were 15 years of age, cautioned for cannabis when you were
         16 and then just before your 17th birthday you committed a  robbery
         with others in which you also possessed a knife which I am told was
         used to stab the victim.  You received an  18-month  detention  and
         training order for that.  You were released from that in only about
         April of this year and so you were on licence  for  the  equivalent
         period from that sentence when you were caught with  these  knives.
         Those are all in my judgement serious aggravating features.

         Your explanation for why you were carrying these knives may well be
         one which can be understood and you may well  have  feared  further
         attack and you may well also have intended to  use  knives  to  get
         revenge.  Either way I do not regard that as mitigation.  You  know
         that carrying knives means that if you were caught up in a  further
         incident you may well use them and someone else would get seriously
         hurt or even killed.  That is why these offences are so serious.

         They are so serious that only a custodial sentence can be justified
         and indeed the statutory  provisions  mean  that  I  must  pass  an
         appropriate sentence of at least six months subject to  credit  for
         plea.  In my judgement, given your  record  and  the  fact  of  two
         knives in this case,  the  appropriate  starting  point  for  these
         offences would be 15 months in a  Young  Offender  Institution.   I
         will give you full credit for your guilty  pleas  and  reduce  that
         therefore to 10 months..."

    As the Judge there  observed,  the  second  conviction  arose  from  an
    offence committed very shortly after his release from detention for his
    first offence, at a time when he was on licence and  under  supervision
    and, moreover, at a time  when  he  had  already  been  warned  by  the
    Respondent, by letter dated 5 September 2016,  that  he  would  be  re-
    considered for deportation in the event that  he  reoffended.   Neither
    that warning nor  the  detention  for  his  first  conviction  had  any
    deterrent effect on the Appellant.

21. The two more recent incidents in which  the  Appellant  has  apparently
    been suspected of involvement have not thus far led to  any  arrest  or
    conviction. To that extent, I obviously do not place weight on them  as
    offences which are proven against the Appellant.  Nonetheless, I record
    the Appellant's evidence about them because, as  Mr  Melvin  submitted,
    they do indicate that the police continue to have some  concerns  about
    the Appellant's conduct to the extent of preventing the Appellant  from
    entering an entire London  borough  whilst  their  investigation  takes
    place.   It  is  therefore  necessary  to  have  some  regard  to   the
    circumstances of those incidents.

22. The Appellant deals with the first incident which occurred  on  8  June
    2019 in his statement dated 31 July 2019 ([SB2/7-8]).  He explains that
    he was playing football with friends in a park, then  went  back  to  a
    friend's house and they decided to go  to  the  shops  for  food.   The
    Appellant and his friend were stopped by police and questioned about  a
    robbery earlier in the day.  They said that they had not  been  in  the
    area and were not involved.   A  search  revealed  a  small  amount  of
    cannabis in the possession of the Appellant and his friend. He and  his
    friend were taken to the police station for questioning. They continued
    to deny their involvement. They were released on bail on the  following
    day on condition that they did not enter Lambeth and  Southwark  (where
    the robbery took place).  The Appellant was released without  bail  and
    was given a "released under investigation form".

23. In relation to the second incident, the Appellant told me that  he  had
    been in a car driven by a next-door neighbour who he had  asked  for  a
    lift.  The police had followed and stopped the car and  found  a  knife
    inside.  When questioned, he explained that it was not  his  knife;  it
    belonged to the driver of the car.  He has  not  been  charged  and  he
    understands that the driver has been re-arrested.  He  understood  that
    the driver was carrying a knife because he has  some  problems  in  the
    local area.  I note that this is  apparently  the  area  to  which  the
    Appellant was recently moved by Social Services.

24. As to the reasons behind his offences, the Appellant says this  in  his
    statement dated 15 February 2019 ([AB/3-5]):

         "[7]     At the time of my GCSE's I started mixing with  the  wrong
         crowd.  I got caught up with a group who were involved in  criminal
         activities.  In 2015 I was attacked with a knife on my left arm  by
         an opposition gang.  This was the first time I became scared for my
         life and I realised I should be protecting myself more.

         [8]      On 30th March 2016, I was  convicted  at  Southwark  Crown
         Court for robbery and being in possession of a knife.  Due to  this
         incident I was sentenced to 18 months detention.  I did not  intend
         to harm anyone by carrying a knife, it was simply a way for  me  to
         mentally feel safer.  I never used the knife on anyone  and  deeply
         regret carrying one in the first place.

         [9]      On 3rd August 2017 I was convicted for having a knife in a
         public place and sentenced  to  10  months  detention  in  a  young
         offender's institution.  This incident I was randomly  searched  by
         police officers and they found a knife in my bag.  Again, I had  no
         intention to use it, but I thought I needed it for safety.

         [10]     The area I was living in, it was common for  boys  my  age
         and older to carry knifes and I regrettably joined that, and I know
         that was a mistake and do not have any intention to do that  again.
         I understand now that carrying a knife was the  wrong  decision  to
         feel safe and instead, I needed to withdraw myself from the crowd I
         was associated with.  Which I have done since leaving prison.

         [11]     I am truly sorry for my criminal activities.  I  have  had
         so much time to think about the impact of my crime, on  myself,  my
         family and on society at large.  I have two young siblings  in  the
         UK as well from my Father's current relationship and I want to be a
         role model to them.  I know the UK is open  to  many  opportunities
         for me to grow as an adult, more than I can expect in Angola."

25. In his second statement, he says the following:

         "[9]     I do not excuse my past crimes; I pleaded guilty to  them,
         and continue to take full responsibility for my actions.  I want to
         change and be better, more reliable and responsible.  I was a young
         boy when I committed my crimes and made many mistakes but  hope  to
         be given the chance to change my outcome for the better.  I want to
         set an example to my younger siblings and the young  people  in  my
         community.  I ask the honourable Judge to allow my appeal and allow
         me to remain with my family in the UK and make a substantial change
         in my life with all the positive  opportunities  available  in  the
         UK."

26. I have already referred to the  evidence  in  the  Pre-Sentence  Report
    about the family's inability to control the Appellant's offending.  His
    father has provided a written statement dated 8 February  2019  ([AB/6-
    9]).  He refers to the Appellant getting in with older  boys  and  "the
    wrong crowd" and to a change in his attitude.  The  Appellant's  father
    says this about the circumstances which lay behind and  impact  of  the
    Appellant's convictions:

         "[5]     In 2015 Edmar was attacked with a knife on his left arm by
         an opposing gang.  I was  contacted  by  the  hospital  about  this
         incident.  I became very concerned for my son's safety  and  I  was
         unaware that my son was associating with the  wrong  people  during
         this time.  He was used by other people due to  his  vulnerability.
         On one occasion after school Edmar was arrested for possession of a
         knife.  He told me that he carried the blade for his own security.

         [6]      On 28th July 2016  my  son  was  sentenced  to  18  months
         imprisonment for robbery and possession of  a  blade/sharp  pointed
         article in public place.  This was a very distressing time for  me.
         I knew that my son was a good boy but had fallen in with the  wrong
         crowd.  He carried a knife for his own safety as  there  were  many
         attacks and killings happening in our area.

         [7]      I did not know everything about the situation as Edmar did
         not tell me everything.  The police told me most of the things that
         he did.  I was not called when he was at the police  station  being
         interviewed.

         [8]      I felt devastated that he was sentenced for 18 months.  It
         began to affect my mental state.  I am his only parent  and  should
         be protecting him and keeping him away from danger, I felt  like  I
         hadn't done that.  I went to visit him on many  occasions.   I  did
         not want him to feel more alone.  I asked him why he  did  what  he
         did and he told me that he had been forced and threatened.  I  told
         him that he should have come to me, he was very sorry for  what  he
         had done and that what he did was not expected from him as my  son.
         He said he didn't want to endanger anyone.  He told me that he felt
         trapped and could not come out of the situation.  He told  me  that
         he regrets what he did.

         [9]      Edmar was released early and  was  supported  by  personal
         support workers and parole officers.  In accordance with his  early
         release conditions he resided elsewhere.  However he  came  to  see
         myself and his siblings often.  I  could  see  a  small  change  in
         Edmar's attitude and he was building close relationships  with  his
         siblings again as they had missed him a lot.  I also began to build
         my relationship with my son again.

         [10]     In the summer of 2017 my son was shot at in the back  with
         pellets.  He had to remain in hospital for over a week due to  this
         incident.  After this incident Edmar was sentenced in July 2017 for
         possession of a knife.  He was very scared of going anywhere  after
         being shot at.  I feel that prison also made him very paranoid that
         he was in constant danger.  He was released after 5 months although
         he was sentenced to 10 months.

         [11]     As a father I believe that my son  has  learnt  from  this
         mistake.  Since he has been released from prison he is a  different
         person.  He is more caring and calm.  He has many plans  if  he  is
         allowed to remain in the UK.  He  is  being  supported  by  support
         workers and probation officers who are helping him to continue  his
         studies and find gainful employment.

         ...

         [15]     I believe in my son and I have seen a big  change  in  his
         outlook in life.  I believe he has had a period to reflect and  his
         imprisonment has been both embarrassing and painful to him.  He  is
         aware that he must start arranging work  for  himself  so  that  he
         feels part of society and he has something to build upon."

    I note that the Appellant's father fails to explain  why  he  considers
    his son has  changed  his  ways  given  that  the  second  offence  was
    committed so soon after the first or to deal with why  the  Appellant's
    motivation following release on this occasion is different from when he
    was released after his first period of detention.

27. For completeness, I note  that  the  Appellant  relies  on  letters  of
    support from Fernando Paulo Pedro (dated 20  February  2019)  and  Evan
    Glove (dated 19 February 2019) ([SB1/1-2]).  Both  say  that  he  is  a
    changed character and should be given a second chance.   Unfortunately,
    neither individual gives any indication of who they  are,  much  detail
    about how they know the Appellant and the degree of  their  interaction
    nor explain why they consider that he has changed for the better  after
    the 2017 conviction.  The letters run to no more than ten  lines  each.
    More importantly, neither individual attended the hearing to have their
    evidence tested or to provide support to the Appellant.

28. It is  appropriate  at  this  point  to  record  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's support worker which deals with an  incident  on  1  August
    2019 when the Appellant was apparently attacked.  He  suffered  a  stab
    wound to his arm, dislocated shoulder and slash wound to his head.  The
    incident was reported to the police who  continue  to  investigate  and
    have made  two  arrests.   As  the  Appellant  confirmed  in  his  oral
    evidence, he has produced no  medical  evidence  or  police  report  in
    support of this incident.  However, I have no reason to doubt what  the
    support worker says.  She  also  says  that  "Mr  [G]  has  since  been
    relocated to a new address  in  order  to  reduce  the  possibility  of
    ongoing conflict against him or vice versa".  That is  consistent  with
    what the Appellant said in his oral evidence  that  he  has  just  been
    moved to West Drayton (which is also according to  his  evidence  where
    the latest incident on 9 August took place).  The  Appellant's  support
    worker says that he will be re-engaged with the association  for  which
    she works as soon as they can find a training centre within  reasonable
    distance of his new accommodation.

29. The Appellant remains supported by Social Services under  the  Children
    Leaving Care Act  2000.   His  personal  adviser,  Junior  Shabazz  has
    written a letter dated 13 February 2019 ([AB/13]) in which he says that
    "Edmar has stated that he is firmly committed to changing his life  and
    leaving his criminal past behind".   He  says  that  the  Appellant  is
    polite and "a pleasure to work with".  However, he  does  not  indicate
    whether he believes that the Appellant  is  a  reformed  character  nor
    provide any information in support of the Appellant's statement that he
    has committed to change.

30. The Appellant has convictions in the past for  cannabis  use.   I  have
    already noted that he had been cautioned for possession  for  one  such
    offence.  He admitted in his second statement that, when he was stopped
    for the suspected offence in June 2019, the police found a small amount
    of cannabis in his possession which he confirmed was for his  own  use.
    The Pre-Sentence Report at [3.6]  indicates  that,  certainly  at  that
    time, the Appellant used cannabis daily and  that  his  "motivation  to
    address his cannabis use is low as he cannot see  how  it  affects  his
    life or those around him".  It is  said  that  he  had  spoken  to  the
    substance misuse workers whilst on remand but that he "finds it  boring
    and cannot see any benefits to engaging".  Although the extent  of  his
    current use of cannabis is not dealt with in evidence, it is clear that
    he has not stopped using it altogether.   He  told  Judge  Buckwell  in
    March 2019 that he had not used it since  his  release  from  detention
    ([44]).

31. Finally, under this heading, I note that the Appellant has included  in
    his bundle a document entitled "Contributing to the Community" ([AB/25-
    36]).  The document is undated, but I infer is one which was  completed
    by the Appellant during one or other of his two periods of detention as
    part of his education towards changing his behaviours.   The  Appellant
    indicates that he  wants  to  change  by  getting  a  job  and  college
    education so that he can "start living a formal life".  He says that he
    is ready to change.  He looks to his family for support and  recognises
    the negative influence of his old friends and area.  He  expresses  his
    interest in football and says that involvement  in  this  activity  may
    help him, but he recognises that if he plays football with  "the  wrong
    people" he would follow them  and  that  this  option  would  not  work
    because "[he is] in the gang".

The Appellant's Family and Private Life

32. The hearing before me  was  attended  also  by  Olivia  Bates  who  the
    Appellant informed me is his girlfriend of nine months.   There  is  no
    mention of her in either of the two statements which the Appellant  has
    signed within that period.  There is no  statement  from  her  nor  any
    letter in support.  There was no request for her to give oral  evidence
    but, in any event, I would not have permitted  her  to  do  so  without
    having given some notice of the nature of her evidence. I  accept  that
    she attended the hearing in order to offer support to the Appellant and
    I am prepared to accept his indication that she is his girlfriend  but,
    given the lack of evidence about the relationship, I am  not  persuaded
    that it is one of any permanence.  Certainly, there  is  no  suggestion
    that the Appellant lives with her  or  that  they  have  any  children.
    There is no evidence of any committed relationship.

33. There is reference in a covering letter to an earlier application dated
    19 June 2017 to the Appellant having a  wife  and  children  ([AB/64]).
    Although that letter gives some detail about  the  wife  and  children,
    this information cannot relate to the Appellant as it states  that  the
    Appellant had been living with his wife and children since  2014.   The
    Appellant was then aged fifteen years and for him to have  married  and
    fathered three children by that age would  be  surprising  to  say  the
    least.  There is no mention of any wife  or  children  in  any  of  the
    witness statements and I infer,  therefore,  that  notwithstanding  the
    detail there given, this is an error made by the  solicitors.   It  may
    arise because the Appellant's father had made an earlier application on
    the Appellant's behalf.  He was in a relationship with  a  partner  and
    had three children for whom he was responsible.

34. Turning then to the family life on which the Appellant relies, that  is
    his life with his father and his father's new  family  (stepmother  and
    two half-siblings).  The Appellant confirmed in oral evidence  that  he
    has not lived with that family since 2016/2017 due  to  his  offending.
    His father  says  that,  due  to  his  early  release  conditions,  the
    Appellant was not permitted to live  with  the  family.   However,  the
    Appellant says in his statements that he still maintains a  very  close
    relationship with his father and wishes to be  a  role  model  for  his
    siblings.

35. The Appellant's father says this  about  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his family and his future here and in Angola:

         "[12]    He has a strong relationship with  his  younger  siblings.
         He has been trying to change his life and I believe  given  another
         chance my son will be a great asset to the society.  He has no  one
         in Angola, all his family are here.

         [13]     My wife regards Edmar like her own child, we  are  a  very
         close family unit and want to support my son in every way.   If  my
         son is forcibly removed from the UK he will have no one to rely  on
         in Angola.  I have to remain in the UK and look after the  rest  of
         my family and I want my son to be a part of that.  I am very scared
         what will happen to him if he was deported to  Angola.   I  do  not
         have the finances to support him while  he  is  there.   If  he  is
         granted stay in the UK I know that he will get a job and become  an
         upstanding member of the community.

         [14]     ... There are no assets or property  for  him  in  Angola.
         His life is here and I ask that he is allowed to remain in  the  UK
         with us, his family.  He has been here since he was  12  years  old
         and does not recall anything from Angola."

36. Notwithstanding the expression of support contained in  his  statement,
    as I have already noted, the Appellant's  father  did  not  attend  the
    hearing to provide support to his  son.   That  was  in  spite  of  our
    indication at the error of law stage that it would be helpful  to  hear
    from him.  Nor did he provide  any  further  statement  to  update  the
    Tribunal as to changes made by the Appellant since his release from his
    second period of detention.

37. I am not willing to accept at face value  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant and his  father  about  the  closeness  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his family.  The author of  the  Pre-Sentence
    Report in 2016, noted that he had  tried  to  contact  the  Appellant's
    family but in spite of a number of phone calls, had been unable  to  do
    so.  He also indicated that the  family  had  struggled  to  "implement
    solid boundaries" and that the Appellant's stepmother admitted that she
    felt that she had no control over him.  Tellingly,  he  says  at  [4.1]
    that "[a]ccording to Edmar,  an  agreement  has  been  reached  between
    himself and his family that should he return home, he will need  to  be
    attending education or have a job to occupy his  time".   That  perhaps
    explains why the Appellant has not lived at home since and why he is so
    keen to get a job or education.  The fact remains,  however,  that,  in
    spite of the concerns which the Appellant's family  may  have  for  the
    Appellant's "safety and upbringing", he has not lived with  the  family
    since his first period of detention and has recently been moved out  of
    the area where they live by Social Services  to  avoid  involvement  in
    further conflict.

38. However, also in the Pre-Sentence Report,  the  author  refers  to  the
    Appellant living with his family prior to his first detention and  that
    he was "very caring" towards his  younger  siblings  and  had  a  "good
    relationship" with his father and stepmother.   There is  very  limited
    evidence about the Appellant's  two  half-siblings.   The  Pre-Sentence
    Report indicated that they were at that time aged two  and  six  years.
    The eldest was about to turn seven as the Appellant  expressed  concern
    that he would miss his brother's seventh birthday if he were  detained.
    The Pre-Sentence Report is dated 28 July 2016 and so the  children  are
    now aged about five and nine/ten years.

39. As to his own future, the Appellant has this to say:

         "[13]    I am pleading that the Honourable Immigration Judge  allow
         me to remain in the UK to live an  honest,  reformed  and  peaceful
         life with my father and my siblings.  Since being sent to prison, I
         realised just how much I must lose, and I am terrified of  my  past
         ruining my chances of a normal and happy life.  I want to  be  able
         to further my education and obtain a job through that.

         ...

         [16]     On page 5 of the Home Office refusal it states that I have
         not shown any evidence that I a making  positive  contributions  to
         society.  I have been working closely with  my  Probation  officers
         and social workers weekly to improve my life since being  released.
         I am currently enrolled on a course which will help me learn  about
         ways of getting a job, I started this a couple of weeks ago.  I  am
         interested in the mechanical field and wold like to pursue that.  I
         have contact with my probation officers weekly and  we  talk  about
         the dangers of carrying a  knife  and  other  criminal  activities.
         This is helping me to realise  my  mistakes  and  how  I  can  move
         forward and be a positive member of the society.

         [17]     I ask the Honourable Immigration Judge to take  my  length
         of UK residency into consideration.  I arrived here when I  was  11
         years old.  I do not remember Angola - it was a difficult time  and
         I have all tried to forget it.  I don't have any family or  friends
         in Angola that I still hold a connection with.  If  I  were  to  be
         deported to Angola, I would have no financial assets or a place  to
         stay.  I would have no prospects of finding a job.  Currently I  am
         financially supported by my social worker Junior and my  dad,  both
         of whom will not be able to support me if I left the UK.

         [18]     If I were to be deported, I have no idea where I would  go
         or who I would meet.  I would end up on the street  and  am  scared
         that I would be vulnerable to abuse and violence.  I don't know the
         customs or culture.  I would stick out and become a target.  I have
         no money and nowhere to stay.  I fear for my life."

40. The Appellant says elsewhere in his statement that he does not know the
    whereabouts of his elder brother, Wilson.  The Appellant's father  says
    that "as far as [he is] aware" the Appellant's mother has passed  away.
    Although this  appears  to  be  corroborated  to  some  extent  by  the
    Appellant's account that she had passed away when he was very young, it
    is inconsistent to the extent that the Appellant says that  his  father
    told him that she was murdered by his stepfather which is not mentioned
    at all in his father's statement.  Unfortunately,  as  I  have  already
    noted, the Appellant's father did not  attend  the  hearing  to  enable
    questions to be asked of him.  I also note that, at [3.2] of  the  Pre-
    Sentence Report, it is said that the Appellant was getting  in  trouble
    in his hometown and that his mother sent him to live with his father as
    a result.  That would be inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  statement
    that his mother died when he was very young  and  his  evidence  before
    Judge Buckwell that he was aged "three or four years old" at  the  time
    ([45]).

41. The Appellant's statement says  that,  after  his  mother's  death  and
    before he came to the UK, he was living  with  his  paternal  uncle  in
    Angola.  It is not said where he is now.  There is a suggestion in  the
    Pre-Sentence Report to which I have previously referred that the family
    remaining in Angola had moved to Portugal, but this is not mentioned in
    the statements of the Appellant or his father.  When he was asked about
    this at the hearing before Judge Buckwell, he said that he did not know
    the details ([45]).  He also there said that his  uncle  with  whom  he
    lived in Angola had died and that all his family are in the UK, most in
    Manchester, and that his  father's  relatives  are  in  Manchester  and
    London.  There is no evidence from those persons.

42. The Pre-Sentence Report records that the Appellant had maintained  good
    contact with his family in Angola until they  had  moved  to  Portugal.
    The Appellant's father was said to be on holiday  in  Portugal  at  the
    date of the hearing before me.  It is not clear whether he has  contact
    with family members who have moved there nor why he  could  not  resume
    contact if he has not already done so.  If he was able to do so, it may
    be that those family members would be able  to  provide  the  Appellant
    with contact details for persons to whom he could turn for  support  on
    return due to their more recent association with Angola.

43. The Appellant has had some  education  in  the  UK.   The  Pre-Sentence
    Report refers to him completing two GCSEs in Art and English.  That  is
    confirmed by the examination results at [AB/142].  According  to  those
    results, he also took examinations in  Mathematics  and  Principles  of
    Applied Science, as well as Drama.  According to his CV at [AB/52], the
    Appellant has a GCSE in Physical Education and  Sports  as  well  as  a
    Level 1 in Maths.  It is also there noted that he has some limited work
    experience as a shop assistant and helping his  father  who  is  a  DHL
    delivery driver.

44. Although the Appellant told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  he  had
    no education in Angola, it is recorded in the Pre-Sentence Report that,
    when he arrived, he spoke fluent Portuguese.  As is there recorded, his
    English skills in particular had "progressed exceptionally well" and he
    can read, write and speak English.  According to his own CV  ([AB/52]),
    the Appellant can speak three different languages.

45.  The  Appellant  has  expressed  an  interest  in  studying  mechanical
    engineering at college.  However, due to  his  immigration  status,  he
    confirmed that he has, as yet, been unable to enrol for the course.

46. One of the reasons why we found an error of  law  in  Judge  Buckwell's
    decision was the emphasis he placed on the Appellant's  stammer.   That
    he has a stammer was evident from the giving of his  evidence.   Whilst
    Mr Coleman did ask me to place some weight on his vulnerability arising
    from this speech impediment, as we indicated at [25] of  our  error  of
    law decision, this  is  something  of  a  double-edged  sword  for  the
    Appellant because if  that  has  been  a  contributory  factor  to  his
    perceived need to protect himself  by  carrying  knives  and  involving
    himself in gangs, whilst his stammer persists, that may  indicate  that
    he is unlikely to  reform.   The  Pre-Sentence  Report  identified  the
    Appellant as  a  candidate  for  speech  and  language  assessment  for
    treatment but stated that  the  Appellant  would  not  admit  that  his
    stammer had an effect on his self-esteem.  There is no indication  that
    any treatment has been sought or indeed offered to assist him  in  this
    regard.

FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

47. I can deal very briefly with any claim  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  British  citizen  partner
    which would entitle him to  remain  in  the  UK.   In  fairness  to  Mr
    Coleman, he did  not  seek  to  suggest  that  this  would  enable  the
    Appellant to succeed under the relevant exception.  Given the  lack  of
    evidence about the relationship, including the impact on  Ms  Bates  if
    the Appellant were deported, I am satisfied that it could not do so.

48. The second exception which might potentially apply is that relating  to
    the Appellant's private life.  Once again, though, it cannot  apply  in
    its entirety because the Appellant has not lived in the UK lawfully for
    half his life.  He came here aged eleven, nearly  twelve.   He  is  now
    aged twenty years. He has not been here lawfully for half his life. His
    situation has always been precarious  (he  was  being  granted  limited
    leave in line with his father).  It is also appropriate to consider the
    extent to which he could otherwise  meet  that  exception  as  that  is
    relevant to whether there are very compelling reasons  over  and  above
    the exceptions which would entitle the Appellant to succeed.

49. I begin with the degree of social and cultural integration.   I  accept
    that the Appellant has learnt English and can now speak, read and write
    in that language, having arrived with little  if  any  command  of  the
    language.  I also accept that he has been  educated  in  this  country.
    Whether or not he received any  formal  education  in  Angola,  he  has
    completed his secondary education in  this  country  and  has  attained
    some, limited qualifications in a few subjects.

50. On the other hand, though, as Mr Melvin pointed out, the Appellant  has
    been in trouble with the police since February 2015, under  four  years
    after he arrived.  He has been in detention for two periods since then.
     Moreover, he accepts that he has been involved with  gangs  of  youths
    who have been a bad influence on him.  As a result,  not  only  has  he
    been convicted of two offences involving knives, but he has also on two
    occasions at least been the victim of knife crime and a shooting.

51. That involvement in gang culture is, as the Court  of  Appeal  said  in
    Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    551 (citing from the Upper Tribunal decision), "the antithesis of being
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK".   The  Court  of  Appeal
    cited from Bossade [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) concerning  the  qualitative
    nature of the test of integration as follows:

         "[24]    ... The term integration imports a  qualitative  test:  in
         order to assess whether  a  person  "is"  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the UK, one is not  simply  looking  at  how  long  a
         person has spent in the UK or even at whether that period comprises
         lawful residence: but the fact that an applicant has spent some  or
         all of his time in  the  UK  unlawfully  may  be  of  relevance  in
         deciding whether he has integrated in these two ways."

    The Court of Appeal went on to say the following:

         "[55]    Membership of a pro-criminal  gang  tells  against  rather
         than for social integration.  In this context,  social  integration
         refers to the  extent  to  which  a  foreign  criminal  has  become
         incorporated within the lawful social structure of  the  UK.   This
         includes various incidents of society  such  as  clubs,  societies,
         workplaces or places  of  study,  but  not  association  with  pro-
         criminal peers.

         [56]     Similarly, cultural integration refers to  the  acceptance
         and assumption by the foreign criminal of the culture  of  the  UK,
         its  core  values,  ideas,  customs  and  social  behaviour.   This
         includes  acceptance  of  the  principle  of  the  rule   of   law.
         Membership of a pro-criminal gang shows a lack of such  acceptance.
         It demonstrates disdain for the rule of law and  indeed  undermines
         it.

         [57]      Social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  UK  connotes
         integration as a law-abiding citizen.  That is why it is recognised
         that breaking the law may involve discontinuity in integration."

52. Although I accept therefore that the Appellant has integrated  to  some
    limited extent as shown by his educational  achievements,  adoption  of
    the English language and some, very  limited,  work  experience,  I  am
    unable to accept that he has become socially and culturally  integrated
    here.  That is not simply because of his convictions and detention  but
    his involvement in gangs and his continued use of drugs.  I  appreciate
    that he is not using hard drugs nor dealing in drugs but  his  attitude
    towards the use of Class C drugs also indicates  a  disregard  for  the
    rule of law.

53. I turn then to what is probably the strongest factor in the Appellant's
    favour and that is what will become of him if he is deported to Angola.
     As I have already indicated, there are inconsistencies in the evidence
    as to what has happened to the Appellant's mother.  On one version  (of
    the  Appellant's  father),  she  may  have  died.   On  another,   (the
    Appellant's) she was murdered when the Appellant was  very  young.   On
    another, (the Pre-Sentence  Report),  she  was  still  alive  when  the
    Appellant left Angola as she sent him here  to  live  with  his  father
    because he was already in trouble in his hometown.  Although  there  is
    no evidence that she is not alive, I am prepared to accept that she  is
    now dead.  Again, although there is no supporting evidence of  this,  I
    also accept that the Appellant's uncle with whom he  is  said  to  have
    lived before he came to the UK, is no longer living in Angola.  Even if
    those family members are not dead, there is  some  evidence  that  such
    family as was living in Angola previously has now moved to Portugal.  I
    of course accept that  the  Appellant's  father  and  his  partner  and
    children live in the UK and, even though  there  is  no  evidence  from
    other relatives, it may well be the case that there are other relatives
    living here although there is no evidence that the  Appellant  has  any
    contact with them.

54. Much was made previously by the Respondent of the Appellant  having  an
    older brother, Wilson, who it was said may still be living  in  Angola.
    The Appellant said previously that he did not know where he was. Whilst
    I would have been assisted by hearing  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    father  about  the  other  family  members  and  their  whereabouts,  I
    recognise that I have no evidence that Wilson is still in  Angola.   He
    may be part of the family which has since relocated to Portugal.  I  am
    though prepared to accept that the Appellant does not have  any  family
    members in Angola.

55. As I have already noted, it may be that the Appellant's  father  is  in
    contact with those family members now in Portugal or could resume  such
    contact and that those family members could, at the very least, provide
    contact details of persons who might be able to assist the Appellant on
    his return.  However, I accept that I have no evidence that this is the
    case (and it was not possible to explore this due  to  the  Appellant's
    father's absence from the hearing).  I therefore proceed on  the  basis
    that the Appellant would have no family or friends living in Angola who
    could support him on return.

56. However, the test is no longer whether there are any ties to country of
    origin but whether a person can relocate to his home country.  That  is
    a broader, evaluative test which was described by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ
    813 thus:

         "[14]     In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
         "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that  he  be
         deported, as set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a
         broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job  or
         to sustain life while living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
         appropriate to treat the statutory  language  as  subject  to  some
         gloss and it will usually be sufficient for  a  court  or  tribunal
         simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen  to
         use. The  idea  of  "integration"  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life."

57. The Appellant was born and lived in Angola until  the  age  of  eleven,
    nearly twelve years.  Whilst he  says  that  he  was  not  educated  in
    Angola, he is said to have spoken Portuguese fluently when  he  arrived
    in the UK.  His father was also from that country and also still speaks
    that language (a Portuguese interpreter was requested for  the  hearing
    if the Appellant's father was to  give  evidence).   According  to  the
    Appellant's CV he speaks three languages of which two  are,  I  assume,
    English and Portuguese.  Whilst he may not have been educated in Angola
    and may therefore not read or write in that language as well as he does
    in English, I do  not  accept  that  he  will  not  still  be  able  to
    communicate in Portuguese which is the  official  language  of  Angola.
    Moreover, he has shown by his speedy adoption of the  English  language
    that he is not unintelligent and will be able to pick up  the  language
    to the extent that he may have forgotten some of  it.   Portuguese  was
    his mother tongue and I do not accept therefore that he will be  unable
    to communicate using that language now.

58. The Appellant will also know something of life in Angola  having  lived
    there for over ten years  of  his  life.   Little  is  said  about  his
    circumstances there.  As  I  have  already  indicated,  there  is  some
    inconsistency in the evidence about this period.  However, he will have
    grown up with an awareness of the country's customs and  way  of  life.
    He has spent less than half his life in the UK.  I do not  accept  that
    he will have forgotten all he has learnt of the Angolan way of life.

59. The Appellant says that he would have  nothing  in  Angola  by  way  of
    family, friends, financial assets, a place to stay or a  job.   I  have
    been prepared to infer that he does not have family  there  as  I  have
    already explained.  I also accept that, due to the age he was  when  he
    left,  he  may  not  have  made  friends  with  whom  he  could  resume
    friendships.  However, he has shown himself to be able to make  friends
    when he arrived in the UK notwithstanding  that  he  was  coming  to  a
    country which was entirely strange to him.  I accept that some of those
    associations were not a good influence on him but  the  fact  of  being
    able to make friendships in a strange country shows that  he  could  do
    the same on return to his home country.

60. The Appellant is supported in the UK by Social Services.   He  has  not
    lived with his family since  before  his  first  period  of  detention.
    Although he is supported by a social worker, that is not a  person  who
    is living with him.  It is not clear whether and to what extent  he  is
    in supported accommodation but, from the evidence, he is living a  life
    independently of his family and with little support.

61. I accept the Appellant's evidence that he is receiving  some  financial
    support from his father as well as from Social Services.  Clearly,  the
    Social Services support would cease if the Appellant were  deported  to
    Angola. As Mr Melvin pointed out, the Appellant would be entitled to up
    to 1500 if he opted to  return  to  Angola  voluntarily.   I  have  no
    evidence about the cost of living in Angola nor therefore how far  that
    money would  go.   I  also  accept  based  on  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father is unlikely to be able to provide  much  by  way  of
    additional support to plug the gap between what the Appellant  receives
    now from Social Services and what  he  would  receive  if  returned  to
    Angola.  According to the evidence of his father's  earnings,  he  does
    not have much  spare  income.   However,  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's father would not be able to provide some financial  support
    as he is doing currently.  It is likely that  the  cost  of  living  in
    Angola is cheaper than in the UK,  particularly  in  the  areas  around
    London.  The Appellant is single and has no family commitments  of  his
    own.

62. I have been provided with no information about the employment situation
    in Angola.  I accept that the Appellant has little  by  way  of  formal
    education and qualifications and I am prepared to accept  that  he  was
    not educated in Angola and has no  qualifications  from  that  country.
    However, the Appellant is a young man who is healthy.  I see no  reason
    why he could not find unskilled work which would enable him to  survive
    whilst he establishes himself.  The Appellant speaks, reads and  writes
    English which may even be a benefit to him in  finding  employment.   I
    accept  that  his  stammer  may  be  a  minor  impediment  to   finding
    employment, but I do not accept that this would prevent him finding the
    sort of unskilled work to which he would  currently  be  suited  if  he
    remained in the UK.

63. Although I accept that the Appellant may  well  find  it  difficult  to
    integrate in Angola, particularly given the lack of  family  ties,  and
    whilst there are some obstacles  to  integration  as  indicated,  I  am
    satisfied that those are not very significant  to  the  high  threshold
    which applies and as the test is explained in  Kamara.   The  Appellant
    will be enough of  an  insider  to  be  able  to  live  in  Angola  and
    participate in the society there.

64. For those reasons, I am satisfied that neither  of  the  exceptions  in
    Section 117C is met.  I therefore move on to consider whether there are
    very compelling reasons over and above those exceptions.  In so  doing,
    I adopt my findings about the  Appellant's  life  in  the  UK  and  the
    situation he will face in Angola.  I do not repeat  what  I  have  said
    already.

65. The one element of the Appellant's life in the UK which I have not  yet
    considered     is his relationship with his  father  and  his  father's
    family which includes his half-siblings.   Although  there  is  limited
    evidence about that relationship and although the  Appellant  does  not
    now live with that family, I am prepared to accept that he is very fond
    of his father and his father's family, particularly his  half-siblings,
    and that this fondness is reciprocated.

66. As I have already indicated, there is little  evidence  about  the  two
    children other than their ages.  There is little evidence of the extent
    and nature of the contact which the Appellant has with his family.  The
    Appellant told Judge Buckwell that he saw his father twice  weekly  but
    does not say where or for how long ([42]).  He also says that  he  sees
    his two half-siblings "sometimes".  He told  the  author  of  the  Pre-
    Sentence Report that he was concerned that he would  miss  his  younger
    brother's birthday.   There  is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that
    deportation of the Appellant would have any effect  on  the  children's
    best interests.  Due to the lack of evidence, the extent of  disruption
    which would be caused to the relationship is unclear.

67. The Appellant is living independently of  his  family.   That  decision
    appears, at least in part, to have been as a result of his  father  and
    stepmother being unable to control the Appellant.  There  may  also  be
    some concerns about the children, particularly  as  the  Appellant  has
    himself been targeted by rival gangs.  He has been moved away from  the
    area where his family live to avoid his  involvement  in  conflict.   I
    accept that the Appellant remains dependent  on  his  father  in  part,
    although mainly if not exclusively for money rather than other support.
     I say that because, if the relationship were as strong as suggested, I
    cannot accept that the Appellant's father would not have  come  to  the
    hearing to support his son or at the very least have provided a further
    statement to explain his absence.

68. Whatever the reason why the Appellant is living apart from his  family,
    I am unable to find that the evidence about  the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his family in  the  UK  shows  more  than  the  usual
    emotional and other ties which form a normal part of the  bond  between
    blood relatives.  For that reason, I am unable to conclude that  family
    life exists between the Appellant and those family members.

69. I  accept,  however,  that  the  relationship  is  still  part  of  the
    Appellant's private life.  I accept that deportation will  disrupt  the
    relationship so far as face to face contact is concerned.  However, the
    Appellant could maintain some contact with his family  in  the  UK  via
    Skype and telephone.  There is no evidence that the Appellant's  father
    and his family could not visit the Appellant in Angola.  Although Judge
    Buckwell was told that the  Appellant's  father  had  claimed  and  was
    granted asylum, that is inconsistent with documents in the Respondent's
    bundle which show that he claimed asylum on arrival  in  2003  but  was
    still subject to limited leave to remain in  2011  when  the  Appellant
    arrived (and indeed when the Appellant was granted his second period of
    leave in line with his father in 2014).

70. I  have  already  dealt  with  the  lack  of  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's relationship with Ms Bates.  Even accepting that  they  may
    be in a relationship which has lasted for a number of months, there is,
    as I have observed, no evidence that it is one of any  permanence.   It
    is likely that deportation will  bring  that  relationship  to  an  end
    unless Ms Bates is willing to go with the Appellant which  is  unlikely
    but there is no evidence that this  would  cause  anything  other  than
    minor upset to either partner.

71. As I have already indicated, there is no evidence  that  the  Appellant
    could not find employment, albeit unskilled in Angola.  I  accept  that
    deportation will disrupt his plans to enter into further  education  to
    pursue  his  ambition  to  obtain   a   qualification   in   mechanical
    engineering. I accept that although  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has done other than indicate this as  an  ambition,  this  is
    because he cannot enrol  in  college  because  he  has  no  immigration
    status.  However, the formal qualifications  which  the  Appellant  has
    obtained in the UK to date are limited and might circumscribe the level
    to which he could pursue  that  ambition  in  any  event.   I  have  no
    evidence about what further education might or might not  be  available
    in Angola.

72. Adopting the balance sheet approach advocated in Hesham Ali and  having
    set  out  the  interference  which  deportation  will  cause   to   the
    Appellant's private life, I turn to consider  the  public  interest  in
    favour of deportation.

73. The Appellant has been convicted now of two offences involving  knives.
    I accept that he has not been convicted of using the knives.   However,
    the offences remain serious and are exacerbated by his  involvement  in
    gangs.  I have also already pointed to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    continues to use drugs albeit only cannabis.

74. As Mr Melvin rightly  accepted,  I  cannot  place  any  weight  on  the
    incidents in June and  August  2019  as  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    convicted of and does not admit to any offence (other  than  possession
    of cannabis for his personal use).  However, as  Mr  Melvin  submitted,
    the fact of the  Appellant  being  stopped  and  being  prevented  from
    entering the London Borough where the robbery of which he was suspected
    to be involved took place does  indicate  continuing  concerns  by  the
    police.  I also place weight on the letter from Ms Vidale who says that
    the Appellant has been moved out of  the  Croydon  area  "in  order  to
    reduce the possibility of ongoing conflict against him or vice  versa".
    The Appellant cannot be blamed for becoming the victim  of  crime,  but
    that statement does indicate  a  continuing  concern  by  the  relevant
    authorities that, however much he might wish to do  so,  the  Appellant
    has not yet extricated  himself  from  the  gangs  which  have  been  a
    significant contributing factor to his convictions in the past.

75. I also cannot ignore that the Appellant committed the second offence of
    which he was convicted so soon after he was  released  from  the  first
    period of detention.  He says that he had no  intention  of  using  the
    knife he was carrying on either occasion, but the fact is that  he  was
    carrying a knife when he knew what trouble that  might  cause  him  and
    when he had already been  warned  that  he  might  be  deported  if  he
    committed further offences.  The Judge sentencing the Appellant on that
    second occasion was not prepared to accept that the Appellant  carrying
    a knife to defend himself amounted to mitigation and neither am I.  The
    fact of that second offence so soon after his first release and  whilst
    he was still on licence and indeed under supervision for the  first  as
    well as the continued concerns about his involvement in gangs leads  me
    to conclude that, however genuine the Appellant might be in his  stated
    intention to change, he has not done so.   There  is  no  updated  risk
    assessment since the pre-sentence report in 2016 so I have no  evidence
    about the level of his current risk, but I find that he  does  continue
    to pose a risk of further offending.

76. Risk is of course also not the only  reason  why  the  public  interest
    favours the deportation of foreign criminals.  Deterrence of others  is
    an additional factor as is the public perception of the ability of  the
    authorities to deal  with  crimes  like  gang  and  knife  crime.   The
    increased incidence of such crime in the UK is a matter of great public
    concern.  As was said by Lord Wilson at [70] of the judgment in  Hesham
    Ali, whilst it may be too emotive to refer to the  public  interest  in
    terms of society's revulsion of certain crimes,  public  confidence  in
    the authorities' response is still a matter of public interest.

77. In addition to the factors in Section  117C  which  apply  because  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal, I am also bound to have regard to  the
    factors in Section 117B which apply in all cases.  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant speaks English and is better able to integrate in the UK as a
    result.  The Appellant has had recourse to public funds in the form  of
    Social Services support due to his inability to live with  his  family.
    I accept that he is entitled to that support by statute and because  of
    his age, but the fact remains that he is accommodated and supported  by
    public funding which tells against him.

78. I am also only able to give the Appellant's private life little  weight
    because he has only ever had  a  precarious  form  of  leave.   I  have
    already explained that he does not meet the first of the exceptions  to
    Section 117C based on his private life as he has not shown that he  has
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK and he has not established
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in
    Angola.

79. Whilst I accept that there will be some disruption to  the  Appellant's
    private life in the UK and in particular with his relationship with his
    father and his father's family here, and that he will face difficulties
    on return to Angola (which I have set out in some detail  above),  none
    of those factors are of  a  magnitude  to  amount  to  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the exceptions set out in Section 117C and
    the Rules which apply.

80. Weighing the interference with the Appellant's private life against the
    public interest which is significant due to his criminal offending  and
    the continued risk that he will reoffend, I am satisfied that  although
    deportation to Angola is likely to be  harsh  for  the  Appellant,  the
    consequences  are  not   unjustifiably   harsh.    Deportation   is   a
    proportionate response.

CONCLUSION

81. The Appellant has failed to show  that  he  meets  either  of  the  two
    exceptions to deportation under Section 117C or the Rules which  apply.
    He has not shown that very  compelling  circumstances  exist  over  and
    above those exceptions to outweigh the public interest in  deportation.
    The consequences of  deportation  are  not  unjustifiably  harsh.   The
    decision to deport is  proportionate  and  does  not  therefore  breach
    Section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.  The appeal is dismissed.



DECISION

Deportation of the Appellant is not a breach of Section 6 Human  Rights  Act
1998.  I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 3 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/08523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 25 June 2019              |                                     |
|                                     |...3 July                            |
|                                     |2019........................         |

                                   Before

           MRS JUSTICE THORNTON SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  EDMAR [G]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
solicitors


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For ease of reference, we refer below to the parties as  they  were  in
    the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department is technically the Appellant in this particular appeal.  The
    Respondent appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell promulgated on 12 April 2019  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  dated  29  March
    2018 refusing the Appellant's human rights claim in the  context  of  a
    decision to deport the Appellant to Angola.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK during April 2011 to join his father, then
    aged  approximately  twelve  years.   He  says  that  his  mother   was
    previously murdered in Angola.  He was granted leave to remain  as  his
    father's dependent in November 2013 to 5  May  2014.   That  leave  was
    extended to 23 June 2017.  He made an application for further leave  to
    remain on 19 June 2017. The Appellant is now aged twenty years.

 3. In the meanwhile, the Appellant was convicted, on 30 March 2016, of  an
    offence of robbery and for the possession in public of a  sharp  object
    (a knife).  He was sentenced  on  29  July  2016  to  eighteen  months'
    detention with a training order.  Within months  of  his  release,  the
    Appellant was again convicted, on 3 August 2017,  for  the  offence  of
    having a blade in a public place.  He  was  sentenced  to  ten  months'
    detention in a Young  Offenders'  Institution.   Mr  Bramble  drew  our
    attention to an updated PNC record which shows that  the  Appellant  is
    again under investigation and is currently bailed to 4 July 2019 with a
    condition that he should not enter the London Borough  of  Lambeth  and
    Southwark.  The nature of the investigation is  not  apparent,  but  we
    need say no more about that in any event as the hearing before us is to
    determine whether there is an error of law in the Decision.   That  may
    become relevant, though, in the event that we find an error of law  and
    need to re-make the decision.  For the sake of  completeness,  we  note
    that the PNC record shows also that the Appellant was cautioned  on  13
    February 2015 for possessing a weapon  in  a  public  place  and  on  9
    November 2015 for possession of cannabis.

 4. Due to his age at the time of the index offences, the Appellant is  not
    liable to automatic deportation.  Section 32 UK Borders Act  2007  does
    not apply where the person to be deported is under eighteen at the date
    of conviction (section 33(3)). The deportation  decision  is  therefore
    under sections 5(1) and 3(5) Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that the
    Appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive  to  the  public  good.
    Crucially  for  our  purposes   though,   Section   117C   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") does  apply.   Section
    117D defines a "foreign criminal" as a person who has been sentenced to
    a term of imprisonment of twelve months or more (Section 117C (2)) and,
    as is made clear by Section 117C (4)  that  includes  detention  in  an
    institution  other  than  a  prison  including   a   young   offenders'
    institution. Similarly, the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") relating to
    deportation of a foreign criminal (notably A398  to  A399D).  In  brief
    summary, those paragraphs of the Rules  and  the  statutory  provisions
    create two exceptions to  deportation  based  on  Article  8  ECHR  (in
    relation to family life and  private  life  respectively)  and  provide
    that, where those exceptions are not met, a foreign criminal may  still
    succeed where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
    the exceptions.  In that regard, the statutory provisions are not clear
    in relation to the application of that subsection (Section 117C (6)) to
    a medium offender (that is to say one sentenced to a period  of  twelve
    months to under four years); the statute refers only to those sentenced
    to four years or more.  However, as the Court of Appeal concluded in NA
    (Pakistan) and another v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662 ("NA (Pakistan)"), the provision applies equally to
    medium offenders (see [24] to [27] of the judgment).

 5. Judge Buckwell accepted that the Appellant could not meet either of the
    exceptions but for reasons we will come to below, concluded at [101] of
    the  Decision  that  "there  are  sufficiently  compelling  reasons  to
    outweigh here the public interest which  otherwise  would  support  his
    removal".   He  believed  that  "there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant and  for  his  family  members  in  this
    country if he were to be removed."

 6. We will deal in greater detail below  with  the  Respondent's  grounds.
    For present purposes, we note that  the  grounds,  in  essence,  are  a
    challenge to what is said to be an inadequacy of reasoning coupled with
    the taking into account of irrelevant  considerations  and  not  taking
    into account matters which were relevant.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge ID  Boyes
    on 7 May 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in concluding that
         there were sufficiently compelling reasons such as to outweigh  the
         public interest.

         3.  Having  considered  the  grounds  the  permission  request   is
         arguable, the Judge seemingly accepts that having a  stammer  would
         impede the appellant's life to such a deleterious degree however it
         did not stop the appellant robbing a person at knife point.

         4. It is arguable that the reasoning is weak, the basis upon  which
         the appeal was allowed flawed and the outcome incorrect.

         5. Permission to appeal is granted."

 8. The matter comes before us to determine whether the Decision contains a
    material error of law and if we so find, to  re-make  the  decision  or
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

THE DECISION

 9. The Judge's findings and reasons are lengthy, and we do not consider it
    necessary to set those out in full.  We have  cited  only  those  which
    require further analysis.  However, in order to understand why we  have
    reached the conclusion that we have below that there is indeed an error
    of law in the Decision, it is necessary to set out the structure of the
    Decision.

10. We begin with the section of the Decision dealing with the  law.   That
    appears at [74] to [77] of the Decision. At [74], the Judge records the
    Appellant's concession that  he  could  not  meet  either  of  the  two
    exceptions applying the Rules and statutory provisions which  apply  in
    deportation cases.  That is obviously correct.  The Appellant does  not
    have a qualifying partner or child in  the  UK.   He  has  some  family
    members as we will come to, but those relationships do  not  bring  him
    within the family life exception.  He  cannot  meet  the  private  life
    exception either as he has not been in the UK lawfully for most of  his
    life.  He has been here for about eight years and was aged twelve  when
    he arrived.  Although most of the period has been spent here  lawfully,
    therefore, he cannot qualify for temporal reasons.  He would also  need
    to show that he had integrated into the UK socially and culturally  and
    that there are "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration  in
    Angola.

11. Although he cannot meet the exception, as we explain below, the failure
    of the Judge thereafter to take that exception into account at all  may
    well have led him into the errors he has made. We  note  also  at  this
    juncture the Judge's reference to the need  to  establish  "exceptional
    circumstances" with reference to the Rules in order to  succeed.   That
    is a misquotation  of  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the  Rules  which
    continue to require, as we have already noted, that a person show  that
    there are "very compelling circumstances over and above" the exceptions
    in order to succeed (paragraph 398).  That  too  in  our  judgement  is
    where the Judge has begun to fall into  error.  We  accept  nonetheless
    that the Judge is right to note that whether a decision  to  deport  is
    proportionate depends  on  a  balancing  exercise  between  the  public
    interest and the family and private life factors (applying the  Supreme
    Court's judgment in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 ("Hesham Ali"). The  Judge  also  records  at
    [77] of the Decision that Section 117C (and Section  117B)  apply.  The
    Judge also correctly records the burden and standard of proof  at  [78]
    of the Decision (on the Appellant to the balance of probabilities).

12. Turning then to the findings, the Judge sets out the evidence beginning
    with a record of the statement from the Appellant's father.  The  Judge
    had by this stage already recorded the Appellant's own  evidence.   The
    Appellant's father had provided a statement but did not attend to  give
    evidence.   The  Judge  noted  that  failure  but  that  there  was  no
    application to adjourn the hearing. He recorded that the failure of the
    father to attend to give evidence meant that this evidence could not be
    tested. Nonetheless, he summarised the witness  statement  at  [80]  to
    [84] of the Decision.  That  evidence  included  that  the  Appellant's
    offending was due to him falling in with "the  wrong  crowd",  that  he
    considered the Appellant to be reformed, that the Appellant had  nobody
    in Angola to whom he could turn and who could support him and  that  he
    expected that his son would be able to find employment  if  allowed  to
    remain in the UK.

13. At [86] to [88] of the  Decision,  the  Judge  deals  with  the  public
    interest, accepting that this must be given "great weight".  He  refers
    to relevant case-law.  Again, however, he refers to the  need  to  show
    "exceptional  circumstances"  by  reference  to  the  Supreme   Court's
    decision in Agyarko and  Ikuga  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11 ("Agyarko"), a removal  and  not  deportation
    case.  We accept though that he does state that the issue  is  "whether
    the  Appellant  has  established  sufficiently  compelling  reasons  to
    outweigh the public interest" which  is  a  correct  statement  of  the
    general principle.

14. At [89] to [97] of the Decision, the Judge deals with  the  Appellant's
    offences, the reasons behind them and the continuing risk based on that
    offending.  The Judge refers to the fact that the second of  the  index
    offences was committed only  a  few  months  after  the  Appellant  was
    released from detention for his  first  offence  and  whilst  still  on
    licence ([90] of the Decision).  He accepts that the  sentencing  Judge
    considered that this was "an aggravating feature".

15. The Judge then goes on to consider the reasons the Appellant  gave  for
    his offences.  He said that he feared for his  personal  safety.   That
    was not accepted in mitigation when the Appellant was convicted ([91]).
     The Appellant said that he was "pressured within the gang which he had
    joined" ([92]).  He had also been the victim of an attack and had  been
    shot with pellets.  As the Judge noted at [92] of  the  Decision,  that
    led the sentencing Judge  to  note  that  the  Appellant's  reason  for
    carrying knives "may well be one which can be understood" due to  fears
    for his own safety.

16. The Judge then goes on to consider at [94]  to  [95]  of  the  Decision
    whether the Appellant has rehabilitated.  He  accepts  quite  obviously
    that the Appellant  was  not  rehabilitated  after  the  first  offence
    because he committed the second offence almost immediately  thereafter.
    However, in relation to the position following the second offence,  the
    Judge found as follows:

         "[95]    The circumstances as they now present do, I find,  show  a
         significant and meaningful change in the attitude of the Appellant.
          I find that he now has a genuine desire to reform.  I believe that
         to be genuine.  The Appellant now has the support of  a  particular
         person, Zarina, who is making arrangements  for  the  Appellant  to
         progress to training in  the  field  of  engineering  at  Greenwich
         College by way of a mechanics  course.   Hopefully  thereafter  the
         Appellant  can  progress  to  a  form  of  employment  and  further
         training.  I do find the Appellant to be genuine in his  commitment
         to a positive series of life choices.   I  do  not  find  that  the
         Appellant was in equivalent circumstances upon his release from the
         period of youth custody in April 2017.   I  find  on  the  evidence
         matters to be very significantly different now."

17. The Judge then goes on to take into account a further factor which,  we
    note, did not form part of  the  Appellant's  case  (and  on  which  Mr
    Plowright in the Appellant's Rule 24 response did  not  seek  to  place
    weight) - the  Appellant's  stammer.   The  Judge  made  the  following
    observations in this regard:

         "[96]    Of course an appeal gives an opportunity for the  Tribunal
         potentially to have evidence brought forward which was  not  before
         the Secretary of State.  I find  that  to  apply  in  one  somewhat
         significant sense in terms of the evidence which was before me.  In
         that regard, and expressing considerable surprise that  the  matter
         has not previously been  raised  or  otherwise  been  obvious,  the
         additional fact before me was the speech challenges from which  the
         Appellant clearly has.  He has a very serious stammer and in giving
         evidence before me found it difficult to  be  able  to  conclude  a
         single sentence without a stammer occurring.  This Tribunal has  no
         particular  or  specialist  knowledge  of  the  condition   and   I
         appreciate that as  this  appeal  does  not  concern  a  claim  for
         protection, there is no evidence that the Appellant was subject  to
         interview on by the Home Office.  Had there been an interview  then
         no doubt the issue of  the  Appellant's  stammer  would  have  most
         clearly have been noticed.  I am also  not  aware  of  any  medical
         evidence submitted in relation to the Appellant's condition.

         [97]     It was only myself who asked questions at the hearing with
         respect to the stammer.  The Appellant indicated that he  had  been
         made fun of by his peers because of the  stammer.   I  accept  that
         evidence.  It perhaps  very  well  has  relevance  as  to  why  the
         Appellant  believed  that  he  would  benefit  from  some  form  of
         protection, albeit misguidedly, from membership of a  gang.   I  do
         find  that  the  Appellant's  stammer  goes  towards  some  further
         explanation for his feeling of past insecurity.  That evidence  was
         seemingly not before the Respondent."

    We will  come  back  to  those  findings  below  when  considering  the
    Respondent's individual complaints about the Decision.

18. The Judge then turned at [98] to [99] to the factors in the Appellant's
    favour in the balance between the impact on his private life  (and,  so
    far as relevant, family life) and the public interest as follows:

         "[98]    In terms of his family unit, the Appellant clearly has the
         support of his father and I have referred to the witness  statement
         from him, above.  The Appellant also has a  relationship  with  his
         step-siblings although  great  detail  was  not  provided  in  that
         respect beyond what the Appellant and his  father  stated.   It  is
         also the reality that the Appellant is an adult although he clearly
         has financial dependence upon his father, particularly  because  of
         his current precarious immigration status.

         [99]     I accept the evidence of the Appellant that he  would  not
         have family members to assist him if he  returned  to  Angola.   Of
         course it is always possible for family members to  make  financial
         remittances but the Appellant would not have direct assistance from
         any family member who also resides in Angola."

19. Based on the above reasoning, the  Judge  then  reached  the  following
    conclusion:

         "[100]   Taking into account all the evidence presented and all the
         matters to which I have  referred,  I  must  conclude  whether  the
         Appellant has established exceptional circumstances.  I agree  with
         Mr Plowright that my approach should be on a cumulative basis.   My
         decision is made on that basis."

20. The Judge's conclusions are expanded upon at [101] to [102] as follows:

         "[101]   For the reasons to which I have referred above I find that
         in the particular circumstances the Appellant has just  established
         that, considered in the round, there  are  sufficiently  compelling
         reasons to outweigh here the public interest which otherwise  would
         support  his  removal.   I  do  believe   that   there   would   be
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  Appellant  and  for  his
         family members in this country if he were to be removed.  However I
         have no doubt whatsoever that  if  the  Appellant  remains  in  the
         United Kingdom as a consequence of  this  decision  and  thereafter
         proceeds to commit a further offence of significance, it is  highly
         unlikely that the Appellant would succeed in resisting any  further
         decision that he  should  be  removed  to  Angola.   The  Appellant
         therefore has every reason  to  ensure  that  he  is  appropriately
         motivated to show by his actions and deeds  that  he  is  reformed,
         that his rehabilitation can  be  meaningfully  progressed  in  this
         country - in contrast to an  unlikely  opportunities  for  that  in
         Angola - and  that  he  can,  as  he  professes  his  wish  to  be,
         contribute positively to society in the UK in the future.

         [102]    Accordingly the Respondent's  decision  is  found  not  to
         accord with the requirements of section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
         1998.  Exceptional circumstances with reference to  the  provisions
         of the Immigration Rules are  found  to  subsist.   Further,  on  a
         consideration otherwise of  Article  8  ECHR  private  life  rights
         outside the Immigration Rules, Article 8(1) ECHR  is  found  to  be
         engaged.  The Appellant would face unjustifiable harsh consequences
         on return.  It would be disproportionate in all  the  circumstances
         for the Appellant to be removed and therefore  the  Respondent  may
         not rely upon Article 8(2) ECHR in response to  the  engagement  of
         Article 8(1) ECHR."

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

21. In addition  to  the  Respondent's  grounds,  we  received  a  skeleton
    argument from the Respondent on 22 May 2019.  We  received  a  rule  24
    response/skeleton argument on behalf of the  Appellant.   We  have  had
    regard to those documents.  We also received oral submissions  from  Mr
    Bramble and Mr Plowright which are reflected in  the  discussion  which
    follows.

22. We begin with  the  individual  complaints  made  about  the  Decision.
    First, it is suggested in the grounds that the Judge was  not  entitled
    to rely on the absence of  financial  support  if  the  Appellant  were
    deported given that his father's evidence  was  untested.   Mr  Bramble
    submitted that the Judge ought to have adjourned to take oral  evidence
    from the father.   We  reject  that  submission.   No  adjournment  was
    sought. The weight to be attached to the father's evidence was a matter
    for the Judge.  He noted that the evidence was  untested.   We  observe
    that there is no explanation why the Judge found  as  he  did  in  this
    regard given the father's financial support for  the  Appellant  whilst
    the Appellant has been in the UK.  Nonetheless, we conclude  that  this
    ground is not made out.

23. Nor do we accept the submission that the Judge has  quoted  selectively
    from the sentencing Judge's remarks.  We  were  taken  to  those.   The
    Judge made reference to the comment that  the  reason  for  carrying  a
    knife was said by the sentencing Judge to be understandable.   However,
    the Judge also notes at [90] of the Decision that the sentencing  Judge
    had found the commission of the second offence  so  shortly  after  the
    first offence to be an aggravating feature  and  thereafter  the  Judge
    takes that into account.  When paragraphs [90] to [92] of the  Decision
    are read together, we consider that the Judge has  accurately  recorded
    and had regard to the remarks of the sentencing Judge.

24. We accept however the complaint made about the Judge's reliance on  the
    Appellant's stammer.  As is evident from  the  passage  cited  at  [17]
    above, the Judge took  this  point  of  his  own  volition.   That  the
    Appellant himself did not seek to  rely  on  it  is  evident  from  its
    omission from his witness statement and that Mr Plowright did not  seek
    to rely on it.  His submission in that regard is that this was not  the
    sole basis for the Judge finding as he did.  We accept that, but it  is
    difficult to downplay the reliance  which  the  Judge  placed  on  this
    factor given the Judge's own reference to it  as  giving  rise  to  the
    "significant" need to have regard to it notwithstanding the failure  by
    the parties to raise it.

25. The Judge also says that this factor may very well be relevant  to  the
    Appellant's membership of a gang.  As we observed at the hearing,  that
    is something of a double-edged sword for the Appellant because if  that
    was part of his motivation and in circumstances where he  continues  to
    suffer this affliction, it potentially contradicts the Judge's view  of
    the continuing risk which the Appellant poses.

26. For those reasons, whilst we accept that whether the  Appellant  has  a
    stammer might be relevant to his ability to cope on  his  own  both  in
    this country and in Angola (although not a  factor  relied  on  in  the
    latter regard), it is not a factor which the Judge was entitled to rely
    on as a point in his favour as mitigation of the Appellant's offending.



27. Furthermore, as Mr Bramble points out, even if the Judge  was  entitled
    to rely on it in that regard, the Judge has failed to refer to the pre-
    sentencing report when assessing risk.  Admittedly that relates only to
    the first offence after which the Judge accepted that the Appellant was
    not rehabilitated but that report, somewhat  presciently  records  that
    the Appellant is at a high risk of reoffending and  a  medium  to  high
    risk of serious harm to the public.  As we say, that report only refers
    to the position at the  time  of  sentencing  for  the  first  offence.
    However, it is relevant to the Appellant's motivation to  rehabilitate.
    It also records relevant information such as the increase in the  level
    of the Appellant's violence even during his custody.  That was relevant
    to the question of rehabilitation.

28. In reply, as a factor in favour of the finding that the  Appellant  had
    rehabilitated, Mr Plowright was only able to point us to the additional
    support of a person who was assisting  the  Appellant  to  get  onto  a
    college course.  As he accepted,  the  other  support  network  of  his
    family members cannot be relied upon in this  regard  as  that  network
    existed at the time of commission of the index offences.   The  support
    which that network can give is also somewhat limited by the  fact  that
    the Appellant is not allowed to live with his family household  due  to
    his past offences.

29. That then leads to the Respondent's complaint that the Judge has relied
    on rehabilitation as a factor at all or at least to the extent that the
    Judge does.  Reference was  made  to  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT  00123
    (IAC) as follows:

         "[33]    As a more general point, the fact that an  individual  has
         not committed further  offences,  since  release  from  prison,  is
         highly unlikely to have a material bearing, given that everyone  is
         expected  not  to  commit  crime.   Rehabilitation  will  therefore
         normally do no more than show that the individual has  returned  to
         the place where society expects him  (and  everyone  else)  to  be.
         There is, in other words, no material weight which ordinarily falls
         to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality  balance  (see
         SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56).  Nevertheless, as so  often  in
         the field of  human  rights,  one  cannot  categorically  say  that
         rehabilitation will never be capable of playing a significant  role
         (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2018] EWCA Civ 1225).  Any judicial departure from the norm would,
         however, need to be fully reasoned."

30. In this case, the Judge has, we conclude, placed considerable weight on
    the  Appellant's  rehabilitation.   He  has  done  so,   moreover,   in
    circumstances where the Appellant had shown a propensity to reoffend by
    committing a second offence whilst  on  licence  for  the  first  index
    offence and when the pre-sentence report referred  to  the  Appellant's
    violent behaviour even when in custody.   The  Appellant  was  released
    from custody for the second offence only just over a  year  before  the
    hearing before Judge Buckwell.

31. It is impossible to read  the  Decision  as  not  placing  considerable
    reliance on the prospect of rehabilitation when, as we have set out  at
    [14] to [18] above, the focus of ten of  the  twelve  paragraphs  which
    include the Judge's findings leading  to  the  balancing  exercise  are
    concerned with that and mitigation of  the  Appellant's  conduct  which
    would in any event form part of the sentencing for  the  offences.   We
    recognise that the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  both  aspects  into
    account, but they should not have been given the weight that they  were
    when leading to the Judge's conclusions on proportionality.

32. We also accept the Respondent's  point  that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation based on criminal offending includes more than  simply  the
    risk of reoffending.  As is made clear by the Court  of  Appeal  in  OH
    (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    694, that public interest includes  also  the  need  to  deter  foreign
    nationals from committing serious crimes and  the  building  of  public
    confidence in treatment of  those  foreign  citizens  who  commit  such
    crimes (see [15] of the judgment).

33. Although we accept that  some  of  the  individual  challenges  to  the
    Decision are made out which is sufficient for us to find  an  error  of
    law in the  Decision,  we  consider  it  necessary  to  deal  with  the
    Respondent's more general complaint that the Judge has failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusion   that   the   deportation   is
    disproportionate  and  has  minimised  the  public  interest.   As  the
    Respondent says in his grounds, it appears from the Decision  that  the
    deciding factors are "the  appellant's  stammer,  a  desire  to  reform
    alongside changes, a lack of support if deported and that the appellant
    was  pressurised  into  joining  a  gang  and  carrying  a  knife   for
    protection".  It  is  said  that  those  factors  cumulatively  do  not
    establish that the  appropriate  threshold  is  met  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

34. In reaching the conclusion that this ground is made out, we do not  set
    great store on what is said about the Appellant's  support  in  Angola.
    It is said that he has a brother there, Wilson, who is ten years  older
    than him, but the Appellant is  recorded  as  saying  that  he  had  no
    contact with Wilson ([47]  of  the  Decision).   It  may  be  that  the
    Appellant's father's evidence  about  this  would  assist  further  but
    beyond that we can discern no error in the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant has no family support in Angola.

35. However, as we have already indicated, we have concluded that the Judge
    has not applied the right  test  when  balancing  the  factors  in  the
    Appellant's favour against the public interest and for that reason  has
    failed to give adequate reasons to explain how the very high  threshold
    is met.

36. We accept that the Judge has said that he gives "great weight"  to  the
    public interest.  However,  the  question  whether  he  has  reached  a
    conclusion thereafter which is lawful depends  on  the  application  of
    that threshold with reasons why that level of public  interest  is  met
    and not simply a bare assertion as to the weight which that  should  be
    given.  In that regard, as we have already recorded, we  are  concerned
    that the Judge's continued  reference  to  the  need  for  "exceptional
    circumstances" discloses that the wrong threshold has been used.   That
    is particularly so because the Judge says that this  is  the  threshold
    which paragraph 398 says is to be applied. It is not (see [11]  above).
    The Judge also refers, when dealing with Article 8 more  generally,  to
    the Supreme Court case of Agyarko which is a case dealing with removal,
    and not a criminal deportation case.

37. We accept that in Hesham Ali the Supreme Court also concluded that  the
    test is whether, balancing the factors in an appellant's favour against
    the public interest, deportation would be "unjustifiably harsh" as  the
    Judge concludes is the test met here ([101] of the Decision).  However,
    the judgment in Hesham Ali pre-dates the coming into force  of  Section
    117C and accordingly there is no consideration of the regard which  the
    Tribunal is obliged to have to the public interest as there stated.

38. In short summary, reading the Decision as a whole,  we  are  unable  to
    conclude that the Judge was aware that the threshold to be met in  this
    case is whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances"  above  the
    relevant exceptions.   His  conclusion  that  there  are  "sufficiently
    compelling reasons" at [101] of the Decision has to  be  read  in  that
    context.  We are unable to conclude that the Judge recognised the level
    which would be sufficient.

39. That leads us on to  the  observation  we  made  at  [11]  above  that,
    although the exceptions are not and cannot be met in  this  case,  they
    continue to be relevant to whether the Appellant has  established  that
    there are very compelling circumstances  above  those  exceptions.   We
    accept Mr Plowright's submission that not to  set  out  and  apply  the
    exceptions which could be relevant even if not met is not an  error  of
    law in itself.  However, as he accepted, it is a useful discipline when
    looking at the circumstances beyond  those  exceptions  to  start  with
    consideration whether any part of the exceptions can be met.

40. The interrelationship of those exceptions with  what  amounts  to  very
    compelling circumstances above those exceptions is explained further by
    the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) as follows:

         "[29]    ... The phrase used in section 117C (6), in para.  398  of
         the 2014 rules and which we have held is to be  read  into  section
         117C (3) does not mean that a foreign criminal  facing  deportation
         is altogether disentitled from seeking to rely on  matters  falling
         within the scope of the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and
         2  when  seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very   compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2".  As we have indicated above, a foreign criminal is entitled  to
         rely upon such matters, but he would need to be able  to  point  to
         features of his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and
         in paras. 399 or 399A of  the  2014  rules),  or  features  falling
         outside the circumstances described in those Exceptions  and  those
         paragraphs, which made his claim  based  on  Article  8  especially
         strong."

41. That point is reiterated in relation to a medium offender  at  [32]  of
    the judgment where the Court of Appeal observed that "if all  he  could
    advance in support of his Article 8 claim was a  "near  miss"  case  in
    which he fell short of bringing himself within either  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2, it would not be possible to say that  he  had  shown  that
    there  were  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2".  He would need to have a far stronger
    case than that by reference to the interests protected by Article 8  to
    bring himself within that fall back protection."

42. We refer also to [37] of the judgment which makes the point we do above
    that it  is  often  sensible  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  the
    exceptions are met even if they  cannot  be  met  before  going  on  to
    consider circumstances outside those  exceptions.   If  the  Judge  had
    carried out that exercise in this case, he would  have  recognised  the
    need to consider whether the Appellant could be said to  be  integrated
    in the UK and, most importantly, whether the factors in this case  such
    as the Appellant's age when he came to the UK and lack  of  support  in
    Angola amounted to "very significant obstacles" to integration there.

43. We accept of course that, in general, what is  under  consideration  in
    this case is whether the decision to deport is disproportionate.   That
    is the crucial question.  However, that has to be informed by a correct
    statement and application of the public interest and reasons given  for
    the conclusion reached.  Whilst it might appear at first blush that the
    Judge has given adequate reasons for reaching his  conclusion  in  this
    case, when the surface of the passage  setting  out  the  findings  and
    reasons is scratched, it is evident that the Judge has failed to  apply
    the correct test or explain how the very high threshold  which  applies
    is met and outweighed.

44. For those reasons, we accept that the  Respondent's  grounds  are  made
    out.  There is an error of law in the Decision which we  therefore  set
    aside.

45. Mr Plowright asked that, if we so concluded, there should be a  further
    hearing before re-making the decision.  He accepted  that  the  resumed
    hearing could take place  in  this  Tribunal  and  did  not  require  a
    remittal.  However, he said that it would be helpful for  the  Tribunal
    to hear evidence from the Appellant's father who is  no  longer  unwell
    and could therefore attend as well as from the Appellant  himself.   We
    agree.  Further, as we have recorded at [3] above, there is an  updated
    PNC record which suggests that the Appellant is being investigated  for
    a further offence and a re-making of the decision will require  further
    information about that.  We have therefore given directions  below  for
    further evidence and a resumed hearing.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law. We  set
aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated  on  12
April 2019.  We make the following  directions  for  the  re-making  of  the
decision:

DIRECTIONS

 1. Within 28 days from the date when this  decision  is  promulgated,  the
    parties shall file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  opposing  party
    any further evidence on which he relies. The Tribunal would be assisted
    by evidence relating to the investigation referred to  in  the  updated
    PNC record.

 2. The appeal will be relisted for a hearing before Judge Smith to re-make
    the decision on the first available date after 28 days from  when  this
    decision is promulgated.  Time estimate  day.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 1 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

