
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08335/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 March 2018                           |On 3 April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                              INDRANI BHASKARAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 4 October 1941.   She
    applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her  private  and
    family life with her  daughter,  son-in-law  and  grandchildren.   This
    application was refused in a decision dated 23  January  2016  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin on 11 April 2017 at Harmondsworth.  In a
    decision and reasons  promulgated  on  20  June  2017  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal in-time to the Upper Tribunal
    on the basis of six  grounds  of  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker in  a  decision
    dated 15 January 2018 in the following terms:-

         "2.  The grounds assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had
             erred in law as she had failed to remain impartial in entering
             into the arena; material errors had  been  made  in  the  fact
             finding which amounted to  an  error  of  law  and  which  had
             tainted the credibility findings; and failed to put points  to
             the appellant which she subsequently held against her.

         3.   The appellant herself did not give evidence at the hearing but
             oral evidence was given by her son in law and daughter.  There
             was no Home Office Presenting Officer present.

         4.   The issues raised by the appellant had  not  been  before  the
             respondent at the time of application and therefore the issues
             relating to her treatment in Sri Lanka  from  the  authorities
             should have been referred to the respondent as a  new  matter.
             Findings were made at [21] of the judgement but such  findings
             are insufficiently reasoned.  The comment  at  [25]  that  the
             appellant's  daughter  had  returned  in  2014,  a  fact   not
             volunteered but "extracted in  cross  examination"  does  give
             some substance to the grounds.

         5.   Accordingly the decision  and  reasons  document  disclose  an
             arguable error of law."

     Hearing

 3. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Bazini  on  behalf
    of the appellant.  He sought to rely predominantly but not  exclusively
    on grounds 1 and 5 of the grounds of appeal.  In respect of  ground  1,
    Mr Bazini's central point is that the judge had  behaved  unfairly  and
    had entered into the arena contrary to the judgment in  MNM  (Surendran
    guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya [2000] UKIAT 00005 which appends the
    Surendran Guidelines.  He submitted that it is clear  that  it  is  not
    rare that the Home Office was not represented.  It is clear from [5] of
    those guidelines that if there are matters of credibility these matters
    should be pointed out to the representative  and  asked  that  they  be
    dealt with either in examination-in-chief or in submissions.  [6]   and
    [7] of the guidelines state:-

         "6.  It is our view that it  is  not  the  function  of  a  Special
             Adjudicator to adopt an inquisitorial role in  cases  of  this
             nature.  The system pertaining at present  is  essentially  an
             adversarial system and the Special Adjudicator is an impartial
             judge and assessor of the evidence before him.

         7.   Where, having received the evidence or submissions in relation
             to matters  which  he  has  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
             representatives,    the    Special    Adjudicator    considers
             clarification is necessary, then he should be  at  liberty  to
             ask questions for the purposes of seeking  clarification.   We
             would emphasise that it is not his function to  raise  matters
             which  a  Presenting  Officer  might  have  raised  in  cross-
             examination had he been present."

 4. Mr Bazini submitted that  it  is  clear  from  [25]  and  [27]  of  the
    determination that the judge considered his questioning  to  constitute
    cross-examination.

         "25. I reject that evidence  completely.   The  fact  is  that  the
             Appellant's daughter has returned to Sri Lanka in 2014 (a fact
             not mentioned in her evidence in chief but  was  extracted  in
             cross examination).

         27.  Only in cross examination, the daughter  elaborated  that  her
             mother had threatened to take an overdose of tablets if she is
             returned.  There is no mention of this in the expert report."

    And also at [16]:-

         "16. I am conscious that the  Appellant's  evidence  has  not  been
             tested in cross examination as she chose not to give evidence,
             relying on a conclusion reached by the  expert  that  she  was
             unfit to give evidence."

 5. Mr Bazini submitted that at no point was it appropriate for  the  judge
    to refer to cross-examination and that it  raises  issues  of  apparent
    bias and unfairness of which there was a real danger in this particular
    case.  Moreover a medical expert had found the appellant not to be  fit
    to give evidence; therefore it was not her choice not to do so.

 6. In respect of ground 5, this ground of appeal asserts  that  the  judge
    materially erred in that his assessment of Article 8 outside the  Rules
    was fatally flawed by failure to make any reference to or consideration
    of the best interests of the appellant's minor  granddaughter  pursuant
    to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 7. Mr Bazini submitted that at [11] of  the  judge's  decision  the  judge
    noted that there was a witness statement from BS (granddaughter of  the
    appellant) dated 5 January 2017 but stated that  neither  she  nor  the
    grandson gave evidence but had provided written  statements.   That  is
    factually incorrect in that, in fact, the appellant's granddaughter did
    give evidence.

 8. At [37] the judge accepted that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant, her daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren but  failed  when
    assessing  proportionality   to   give   any   consideration   to   the
    granddaughter's best interests which were clearly  engaged  given  that
    the granddaughter and grandmother share a room and have lived  together
    for the last ten years and the granddaughter assists in  looking  after
    her grandmother.

 9.  Mr  Bazini  submitted  that   the   proportionality   assessment   was
    fundamentally flawed as a consequence  of  these  errors.   He  further
    sought briefly to rely on the further grounds of appeal viz the judge's
    approach to the psychiatric evidence, the judge's approach to the  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka of the son-in-law  in  light  of  the  newspaper
    report at page 28 of the supplementary bundle and the failure  to  take
    account of material considerations in  respect  of  the  visit  by  the
    appellant's daughter Sri Lanka on her British passport in 2014.

10. In her submissions, Ms Ahmad accepted that it is clear from the judge's
    decision that he referred to his questions to the appellant  as  cross-
    examination but sought to rely on the  judgment  of  the  court  in  SW
    (Adjudicator's questions) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00037 at  [30]  to  [36]
    where the Upper Tribunal found that the root question was  whether  the
    hearing was unfair.  She submitted that new issues had been  raised  by
    the appellant i.e. any risk on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  at  the  appeal
    hearing and it was open to the judge  to  ask  questions  in  order  to
    clarify those issues.  She made the same point in essence that  it  was
    open to the judge to seek clarification in relation  to  the  issue  of
    apparent bias and referred to [29] of the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in CD (DRC) [2011] EWCA Civ 1425 which provides:-

         "Lord Bingham said that the test was whether all the  circumstances
         of the case would lead a  fair  minded  and  informed  observer  to
         conclude that there a real possibility that the Tribunal was bias."

11. In respect of ground 5, Ms Ahmad accepted that the judge did  not  make
    any specific findings on Section 55 of  the  BCIA  2009  and  the  best
    interests of the appellant's minor granddaughter.

12. In his reply, Mr Bazini accepted that it was open to the judge to  seek
    clarification but what is quite clear from the  jurisprudence  is  that
    the judge is not entitled to  cross-examine  because  in  so  doing  he
    stepped into the arena and the judge expressly framed his questions  as
    cross-examination and therefore there was no debate about  his  actions
    in this particular case.

     My findings

13. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin such that the  decision  cannot  stand.   This  is  for  the
    reasons set out in the extensive grounds of appeal particularly  ground
    1, which concerned the approach of the  judge  to  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of a Home Office Presenting Officer  and  procedural  fairness.
    There are a number of errors in the decision highlighted by Mr  Bazini.
    Whilst I do not go so far  as  to  say  that  the  faint  assertion  of
    apparent bias is made out I do find that there was both procedural  and
    substantive unfairness for the following reasons:-

    (i)  The judge's reference at [16] to the  appellant's  choice  not  to
         give evidence and the fact that any evidence had not been tested in
         cross examination given (a) the absence of a Presenting Officer and
         (b) a psychiatric report from Dr Dhumad saying that  the  appellant
         was not fit to give evidence due to her mental health condition.


    (ii) In asserting at [11] that the appellant's  granddaughter  did  not
         give evidence but had only provided a statement when  it  is  clear
         from the judge's record of proceedings that he heard oral  evidence
         from the appellant's granddaughter but failed to determine or  make
         any findings of fact in respect of that evidence which was  clearly
         material to the proportionality assessment and the  granddaughter's
         best interests.


    (iii)    In making further references to cross-examination at [25]  and
         [27] which I find was a consequence of the judge  clearly  stepping
         into  the  arena  in  contravention  of  the  Surendran  Guidelines
         appended to the judgment in MNM (op cit).

14. Whilst the additional grounds of appeal i.e.  2,  3,  4  and  6  raised
    further arguable errors, in light of my findings in respect of  grounds
    1 and 5, it is not necessary for me to determine those and  I  did  not
    hear full argument from the parties upon them.  I  accept  Mr  Bazini's
    submission that the matters raised in ground 1 of the grounds of appeal
    are fatal.

15. Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Amin  and  remit  the
appeal for a hearing de novo before a different judge.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed: Rebecca Chapman                      Date: 29 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
