
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08111/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th October 2019                 |On 21st October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               H M Murshed nur
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He arrived in the  UK  as  a
    student in January 2008 with leave  valid  until  3rd  March  2011.  He
    secured further leave to remain as a student until 24th February  2015.
    However, on 25 April  2014  his  leave  to  remain  was  curtailed.  He
    remained in the UK unlawfully.  On  2nd  September  2014,  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain  on  private  life  grounds,  but  that
    application was refused on 3rd July 2015. Most recently, on 11th  March
    2019, the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM of the immigration rule on the basis  of  his  family  life
    with his partner Syeda Sayma Begum. That application was refused by the
    respondent for the reasons set out in a decision dated 18th April 2019.


 2. In her decision, the respondent accepts that the application for  leave
    to remain does not fall for refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability.  The
    respondent accepted  that  the  eligibility  relationship  requirement,
    eligibility financial  requirement  and  eligibility  English  language
    requirement is met by the appellant. The respondent concluded that  the
    appellant could not meet all of the eligibility requirements of section
    E-LTRP of  Appendix  FM,  because  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
    eligibility immigration status requirement.  The  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
    British  partner,  but  there  was   no   evidence   that   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  his  partner  continuing
    their family life together outside the UK in Bangladesh.


 3. The decision of 18th April 2019 gave rise to an appeal that  was  heard
    by FtT Judge Geraint Jones  QC  on  14th  June  2019.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed for the reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on  25th
    June 2019. It is that decision that is the subject of the appeal before
    me.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson on 20th August 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC


 4. At the hearing of the appeal, it was accepted by the appellant that  he
    is unable to meet the requirements in Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM for
    limited leave to remain as a partner. The applicant accepted that he is
    unable to meet all the requirements of Section E-LTRP.   That  is,  the
    eligibility for leave to remain as a partner, because on any view,  the
    immigration status requirement could not be met by the  appellant.   It
    was accepted by the appellant that in the circumstances, to succeed  in
    an application under the immigration rules the appellant would have  to
    rely upon Section EX.1.(b) and establish that  he  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner, and  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.


 5. There was an application made by  counsel  for  the  appellant  for  an
    adjournment.  That  application  was  made  on  the  basis   that   the
    appellant's wife suffers from ill-health  and  in  determining  whether
    there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his wife continuing outside the UK, it would  assist  the
    Tribunal to have  medical  evidence  relating  to  the  health  of  the
    appellant's wife. The judge referred to the limited evidence  regarding
    the health of the appellant's wife that was in the appellant's  bundle,
    and in the absence of any clarity as to  the  medical  evidence  to  be
    sought, refused the application for an adjournment for the reasons  set
    out at paragraphs [6] to [10] of the decision.


 6. The appellant and his wife gave  evidence.   The  judge  sets  out  the
    evidence received by the Tribunal at paragraphs [12]  to  [22]  of  the
    decision. The judge's findings of fact are set out at paragraph [23] of
    his decision.  The judge acknowledged,  at  [25],  that  relocation  to
    Bangladesh for the appellant's wife would necessarily involve a  degree
    of hardship, involving her giving up her present job and living  remote
    from her family members, but was  far  from  persuaded  that  any  such
    hardship reaches the comparatively high threshold required to establish
    very significant difficulties which could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship for the  applicant  or  his  partner.   At
    paragraph [26], the judge stated that he has not  ignored  any  medical
    issues, but it was not claimed that any medical treatment  required  by
    the appellant's wife would not be available and/or accessible to her in
    Bangladesh.


 7. At paragraph [27] of the decision, the judge concluded as follows:


         "It was also submitted that this is a Chikwamba situation. In other
         words it was said that if the appellant has to return to Bangladesh
         to apply for settlement from outside the United Kingdom, that would
         be a mere formality and unnecessary inconvenience because any  such
         application  would  be  bound  to  succeed.  Although  there  is  a
         certificate dated 28 September 2018  at  page  22  in  the  bundle,
         showing that it emanates from Trinity College London, there  is  no
         evidence whatsoever to demonstrate that the Entry  1  Speaking  and
         Listening examination that the appellant passed, comes  within  the
         requirement in E-ECP4.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM.  It  also  cannot  be
         assumed that the appellant will be found to satisfy the suitability
         requirements, given that he has flouted and abused the  immigration
         laws of this country (S-EC.1.5). It is not for me to decide whether
         he would or would not satisfy any of those requirements; it is only
         if I am satisfied that he is  almost  bound  to  do  so,  that  the
         Chikwamba line of reasoning applies.".


The appeal before me


 8. Mr Biggs submits the judge erred at paragraph [27] of his  decision  in
    proceeding upon the  basis  that  the  evidence  from  Trinity  College
    London, does not demonstrate that the Entry 1  Speaking  and  Listening
    examination that the appellant passed, comes within the requirement  in
    E-ECP4.1(b) of Appendix FM.  Furthermore the judge erred in  proceeding
    upon the premise it cannot be assumed that the appellant would be bound
    to satisfy the suitability requirement.  In the  respondent's  decision
    of 18th April 2019, the respondent accepts  that  the  application  for
    leave to remain does not fall for refusal on grounds of suitability and
    accepted the eligibility English language requirement  is  met  by  the
    appellant. He submits that following  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Hayat -v- SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1054  there  is  no  sensible
    reason for requiring the appellant to return to Bangladesh to  make  an
    application  for  entry  clearance,  notwithstanding  his   immigration
    history.


 9. The appellant claims the judge also erred in refusing  the  application
    for an adjournment. It is said that the submission made  on  behalf  of
    the  appellant  was  that  the   appellant's   wife   has   undiagnosed
    medical/health ailments that are under investigation.  The  appellant's
    wife had already had blood tests and had  been  informed  that  further
    investigation was necessary, but it never  occurred  to  her  that  her
    undiagnosed illness was relevant until the conference on the morning of
    the appeal hearing. The appellant claims the judge failed to  determine
    whether there was a good reason  for  requesting  an  adjournment,  and
    whether the appeal could be justly determined, without an adjournment.


10. Mr Walker, rightly in my judgement, accepts that the Judge erred in his
    approach to the determination of the Article 8 claim and in particular,
    the application of the effect of C (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2008]  1  W.L.R.
    1420 together with subsequent Court of Appeal cases in which that  case
    had been considered.  He accepts that the respondent  accepted  in  the
    decision of 18th April 2019 that the application for  leave  to  remain
    does not fall for refusal on grounds of suitability. The judge erred in
    proceeding upon the basis  that  it  could  not  be  assumed  that  the
    appellant will be found to satisfy the  suitability  requirements.  The
    respondent also accepted that the eligibility relationship requirement,
    eligibility financial  requirement  and  eligibility  English  language
    requirements were met by the appellant. The  respondent  had  concluded
    that the appellant could not meet all of the  eligibility  requirements
    of section E-LTRP of Appendix FM, because the appellant cannot  satisfy
    the eligibility immigration status requirement.


11. In light of that concession, it is clear that the decision of  the  FtT
    Judge is infected by a material error of law and the decision  must  be
    set aside.  Mr Biggs submits the remaining ground of  appeal  regarding
    the refusal of the  application  for  an  adjournment  is  relevant  to
    disposal because the appellant was essentially denied  a  fair  hearing
    and should have had the opportunity to adduce medical evidence. The FtT
    judge considered the application for an adjournment to  be  speculative
    and he submits,  that  was  not  a  rational  characterisation  of  the
    application. There was uncertainty about the health of the  appellant's
    wife and there was ongoing investigation.  The  disclosure  of  medical
    records on their own would not have assisted the Tribunal because  they
    would not shed light  on  an  undiagnosed  condition.  He  submits  the
    appropriate course is to remit the matter for hearing afresh before the
    FtT, because it may be necessary for further findings to  be  made  and
    for the Tribunal to consider whether there is a sensible reason for the
    appellant to make an application for entry clearance in  light  of  the
    health of the appellant's wife.


12. Mr Walker accepts that there was some medical evidence before  the  FtT
    judge that the appellant's wife had ongoing  medical  problems  and  in
    light of the particular facts of  this  case,  he  would  not  seek  to
    persuade  me  that  there  is  a  sensible  reason  for  requiring   an
    application for entry clearance to be made by the appellant.


13. In light of the sensible concessions made by Mr Walker, I do  not  need
    to address the remaining ground of appeal and there is no reason why  I
    should not remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal.


Remaking the decision


14. The only ground of appeal  available  to  the  appellant  is  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellant to show,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  he  has
    established a family life with his partner, and that his  removal  from
    the UK as a result of the respondent's decision, would  interfere  with
    that right. It is then for the respondent to justify  any  interference
    caused. The respondent's decision must be in accordance  with  the  law
    and must be a proportionate response  in  all  the  circumstances.   If
    Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at  the  extent  to
    which an appellant is said to have failed to meet the  requirements  of
    the rules,  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise that must follow.


15. As I have already set out, in her decision, the respondent accepts that
    the application for leave to  remain  does  not  fall  for  refusal  on
    grounds of suitability. The respondent accepted  that  the  eligibility
    relationship  requirement,  eligibility   financial   requirement   and
    eligibility English language requirement is met by the  appellant.   It
    is however uncontroversial that the appellant is unable to satisfy  all
    the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a  partner  as  set  out  in
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.


16. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11
    confirms that the fact that the immigration rules cannot be  met,  does
    not absolve decision makers  from  carrying  out  a  full  merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate  issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between  the  individual  and
    public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.


17. As to the human rights claim on Article 8 grounds, I adopt the approach
    set out by Lord Bingham  in  Razgar  [2014]  UKHL  27.   I  must  first
    determine whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If  Article
    8 is engaged, I should go on to  consider  the  remaining  four  stages
    identified in Razgar.


18. The respondent accepted that the eligibility  relationship  requirement
    is met by the appellant and I find that the appellant is in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship  with  his  wife.   Article  8  is  plainly
    engaged.  I also find that the decision to refuse the  appellant  leave
    to remain may have consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.  I accept that the  interference  is
    in accordance with the law, and that the interference is  necessary  to
    protect the legitimate aim of immigration control and the economic well-
    being of the country.  The issue in this appeal, as is often the  case,
    is whether the interference is proportionate to the  legitimate  public
    end sought to be achieved.  The  appellant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
    immigration rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but is capable of being a weighty,  though  not  determinative  factor,
    when deciding whether such refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim of enforcing immigration control.  I find that the appellant cannot
    satisfy the requirements for leave to remain as the partner set out  in
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.


19. I remind myself that section 117A Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 requires that in considering the public interest  question,  I
    must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    section  117B.   I  acknowledge  that  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest. I also  acknowledge  in
    particular that little weight should be given to a relationship  formed
    with a qualifying partner that is established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  Factors  such  as
    the appellant's ability to speak English and financial independence, do
    not weigh in favour of the appellant, but are neutral.


20.  In  considering  whether  the  refusal   of   leave   to   remain   is
    disproportionate, I note that the only requirement for leave to  remain
    as a partner set out in Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM  that  cannot  be
    met by the appellant is the immigration status requirement.   In  Hayat
    -v- SSHD, the Court of Appeal held that the effect of Chikwamba is that
    (a) where an applicant lacked lawful entry clearance, the dismissal  of
    his Article 8 claim on the procedural  ground  that  he  should,  as  a
    matter of policy, have made the application from his own  state,  might
    constitute a disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
    Article 8; (b) where Article 8 was engaged, it was  a  disproportionate
    interference with family or private  life  to  enforce  such  a  policy
    unless there was a sensible reason for doing so;  (c)  whether  it  was
    sensible to enforce that policy was fact-sensitive; (d) where Article 8
    was engaged and there was no sensible reason for enforcing the  policy,
    the  decision-maker  should  determine  the  Article  8  claim  on  its
    substantive merits, notwithstanding that the applicant  had  no  lawful
    entry clearance; (e) it  would  be  a  very  rare  case  where  it  was
    appropriate for the Court of Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower
    tribunal had disproportionately interfered with  Article  8  rights  in
    enforcing the policy, to make the substantive Article  8  decision  for
    itself; (f) nothing in Chikwamba was intended  to  alter  the  way  the
    courts should  approach  substantive  Article  8  issues;  (g)  if  the
    secretary of state had no sensible reason for requiring the application
    to be made from the home  state,  her  failure  to  do  so  should  not
    thereafter carry any weight in  the  substantive  Article  8  balancing
    exercise.


21. More recently in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 Lord Reed said:


         "50. ... As the instruction makes clear, "precariousness" is not  a
         preliminary hurdle to be overcome. Rather,  the  fact  that  family
         life has been established by an applicant  in  the  full  knowledge
         that his stay in the UK was  unlawful  or  precarious  affects  the
         weight to be attached to it in the balancing exercise.


         51.  Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision  in  Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."


22. I have carefully considered the limited  medical  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal regarding the health of the appellant's  wife.  There  is  now
    evidence that she requires  close  monitoring  and  abnormalities  were
    found in her blood, relating to abnormal  liver  function,  and  raised
    platelet counts, for which she is currently  under  investigation.  The
    abnormalities put her at a higher risk of stroke  or  a  heart  attack.
    Since the hearing before the FtT and  the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the
    appellant's wife has also been found to have had an  ectopic  pregnancy
    that is life-threatening. There is evidence that the  appellant's  wife
    is suffering physically and emotionally, and needs the support from her
    husband whilst further investigations are being carried out.  Mr Walker
    accepts that on the particular facts here, the  appellant  is  able  to
    establish that the requirements for entry clearance as  a  partner  are
    met by the appellant, and in light of the evidence regarding the health
    of his wife, there is no sensible reason for requiring  an  application
    for Entry Clearance to be made by the appellant from Bangladesh.


23. In my judgement on the particular facts of this  case,  notwithstanding
    the appellant's immigration history, and even acknowledging that little
    weight should be given to a relationship that was  established  by  the
    appellant at a time when he was is in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully,
    the public interest does not  require  the  removal  of  the  appellant
    because any application for entry  clearance  made  by  the  appellant,
    would succeed.  The disruption caused to the Article 8  rights  of  the
    appellant and his wife in particular, would in  the  circumstances,  be
    entirely disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.
     The decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD and  subsequent
    decisions of the Court of Appeal and Supreme  Court  that  I  have  had
    regard to, establish that where there is evidence that  an  application
    for entry clearance from abroad is likely to succeed, then  the  weight
    to be accorded to the requirements of obtaining  entry  clearance  from
    abroad is reduced.


24. In my judgment having taken all the evidence into account, the  refusal
    of leave to  remain  is  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    enforcing immigration control.  It follows that the appeal is allowed.





Notice of Decision


25. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Geraint Jones QC is
    allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Geraint Jones QC is set aside.


26. I remake the decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Signed   Date 18th October 2019

    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal, but only after a  careful  consideration  of  the
medical evidence relation to the health of the  appellant's  wife  that  was
not before the SSHD and I therefore decline to make a fee award

Signed   Date 18th October 2019

    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

