

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08265/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 21st November 2017              |On 27th November 2017                   |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                              OM BHAKTA BANTAWA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (New Delhi)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
(19-20 Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. The appellant, a Nepalese national born  17th  May  1988  applied  for
      entry clearance to settle in the UK as the dependant adult son of  Tej
      Bahadur Bantawa, a former Gurkha soldier. The application,  which  was
      made on 14th February 2016 when the appellant was aged 27, was refused
      on 22nd February 2016.


   2. The appellant's father and mother were issued  with  settlement  entry
      clearance on 3rd January 2013 and arrived in the UK on 3rd April 2013.
      They  are  both  present  and  settled  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's
      application for entry clearance was refused on the  grounds  that  the
      money transfer receipts covered the period  02/09/2015  to  14/01/2016
      with no evidence of funds sent prior to September 2015 and that  there
      was no evidence to show a continuing and dependant relationship on his
      mother/father. The ECO also considered, and refused,  entry  clearance
      on a discretionary basis and on Article 8 grounds.


   3. First-tier Tribunal judge Khawar heard the appeal on  26th  June  2017
      and dismissed it for reasons set out in his  decision  promulgated  on
      18th July 2017. Permission to appeal was granted on the  grounds  that
      it was


                  "...arguable that the foundations for the conclusions  set
                  out by the judge in the context  of  financial  dependency
                  before reaching a consideration of whether there would  be
                  a breach of Article 8 outside the Rules has led  to  error
                  in construing the fact  of  dependency  in  the  financial
                  context regardless of cause.
                  ...arguable that the  judge's  findings  in  this  context
                  should have been taken into account in  embarking  upon  a
                  proportionality  exercise  which  was  not  embarked  upon
                  because at paragraph 36 of the decision the judge took the
                  view that the appellant failed at the  very  first  hurdle
                  under Razgar.
                  ...arguable that at paragraph 35 of the decision the judge
                  has taken into account factors which are extraneous to the
                  central issue of dependency given factors referred  to  by
                  the judge at paragraph 35 of the decision.
                  ..arguable that the judge's construction of the  available
                  evidence in relation to financial support  has  had  other
                  ramifications and consequences in relation to findings  in
                  respect of where the appellant lived and  the  timing  and
                  collection of money."


   4. Before me  Mr  Balroop  identified  the  three  critical  matters  the
      appellant relied upon. Firstly, that the First-tier Tribunal's adverse
      decision regarding the  money  transfers  as  determinative  that  the
      appellant was not living at the family home in Itahari but with one or
      other of his sisters in Pokhara or Kathmandu was based upon  an  error
      of fact. The judge in paragraph 25 refers to the receipts being in the
      name of the appellant  and  not  his  sisters,  thus  the  appellant's
      evidence that his sisters collected the money on  his  behalf  and  he
      collected it from  them  was  not  sustainable.  Mr  Balroop  drew  my
      attention to 5 receipts that were in the name of a sister.


   5. All the other receipts name the appellant as beneficiary. His  sisters
      lived, according to the oral evidence, some 14  to  15  hours  journey
      away from Itahari. None of the receipts relied upon by  the  appellant
      whether naming him as beneficiary  or  not  were  to  his  address  in
      Itahari. Although Mr Balroop also submitted that the judge had  failed
      to have  regard  to  the  whole  of  the  evidence  in  reaching  that
      conclusion -which his third matter addressed - the judge did  consider
      all  the  evidence  including  the  letter  from   the   Itahari   sub
      Metropolitan City Office in reaching his conclusion.  The  finding  by
      the judge that the appellant was not living at the family home  was  a
      finding that is not dislodged by the judge mistakenly referring to all
      the receipts being in his name. It was plainly open to the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge to draw  the  conclusion,  having  considered  all  the
      evidence  and  not  merely  the  money  transfer  receipts,  that  the
      appellant was not living in the family home.


   6. Secondly Mr Balroop submitted  that  although  the  finding  that  the
      appellant was unemployed by choice when the  consideration  was  under
      Annex K policy, that finding  cannot  simply  be  transferred  to  the
      consideration under Article 8. There  had  to  be  an  answer  to  the
      question of whether, for dependency to be established and, in  effect,
      that Article 8 was engaged, there was real,  committed  and  effective
      support to the appellant from his family. Whether he was  not  working
      through choice was only one element of that assessment and  the  judge
      had failed to make the correct assessment; the  judge  had  restricted
      his consideration to the finding that he was not living in the  family
      home and he was not working through choice.


   7. Thirdly, Mr Balroop submitted (and this links with the  conclusion  by
      the First-tier Tribunal judge that the appellant  fell  at  the  first
      hurdle  of  Razgar  and  thus  there   was   no   need   to   consider
      proportionality), the judge failed to assess the evidence relied  upon
      by the appellant that he travelled to his sisters to collect the money
      but merely reached a conclusion that the appellant was not  living  in
      the family home. Mr Balroop submitted that the case was put  that  the
      appellant was in the family home  and  the  evidence  to  that  effect
      should have been considered. As I have referred to above, that finding
      was open to the judge.


   8. Mr Balroop also submitted that the particular circumstances of  Gurkha
      adult  dependants,  the  historic  injustice  and  the  inability   to
      successfully apply for entry clearance were all matters that should be
      considered when assessing whether there was family  life  such  as  to
      engage  Article  8.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed,  in
      concluding that Article 8 was not  engaged,  to  assess  the  evidence
      correctly. He submitted that even if the appellant  were  living  with
      his sisters that did not mean that there was not real,  effective  and
      committed support in the particular circumstances for this appellant.

         9. The issues of historic injustice, inability to apply previously
            for entry clearance  are  not  matters  that  are  relevant  to
            assessing whether there is, in Article  8  terms,  family  life
            such that it is necessary to then go on to consider  the  other
            Razgar questions and in particular the proportionality  of  the
            decision. It is at that stage  that  the  inability  to  apply,
            historic injustice and the fragmentation  of  the  family  come
            into play. The question of whether there is real effective  and
            committed family life such as to engage  article  8  is  to  be
            determined on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
            judge. In this case, there were money receipts  commencing  two
            years after the mother and father had moved to the UK. Although
            there was oral  evidence  that  money  had  been  sent  through
            relatives in the previous two  years,  there  were  no  witness
            statements to support that contention. The judge  was  entitled
            to  reach  a  decision  that  there  had  been  no  such  money
            transfers. There were no witness statements from  the  sisters.
            There was no documentary evidence of travel between the  family
            home  and  Pokhara  or  Kathmandu.  The  judge  considered  the
            evidence and  reached  a  conclusion  based  on  the  oral  and
            documentary evidence that the appellant was not living  at  the
            family home, that he was not working through choice and that he
            was not dependant. An adult may of course move in  and  out  of
            dependency for example if a person was independent and then had
            a serious accident requiring greater help and support.  But  in
            this case, there was no evidence  of  any  mental  of  physical
            disabilities suffered by the appellant, very little evidence of
            detailed contact with his mother/father and what  such  contact
            as there was consisted of, no documentary evidence of financial
            support for the first couple of years the family was  separated
            and the initial evidence from his mother was that he chose  not
            to work.


        10. In paragraph 35 the judge considered the evidence  before  him,
            not just the financial  dependency.  He  considered  issues  of
            where  he   lived,   contact,   work,   financial   dependency,
            educational  qualifications,  and   reached   the   sustainable
            decision that the appellant did not  have  a  protected  family
            life with his mother/father for the purposes of Article 8.

        11. There is no perversity in the decision by the judge. He reached
            rational sustainable and reasoned conclusions on  the  evidence
            before him. There is no error of law.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge dismissing the appeal stands.




                                    Date 23rd November 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
