
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08621/2018
                                                               HU/08623/2018
                                                               HU/08628/2018
                                                               HU/08630/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2019                              |On 07 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Abraham [R] (first Appellant)
                        Jincy [G] (second Appellant)
                           [T R] (third Appellant)
                          [H R] (fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Badar, counsel, instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of India, dates of birth respectively 28  May
    1978, 17 February 1981, 15 March 2007  and  4  October  2008  appealled
    against the decision of the Respondent to refuse the application of the
    First Appellant on whom his family are effectively his  dependants  who
    similarly appealed against decisions made refusing rights to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A  K  Hussain  who,
    on 21 December 2018, dismissed their appeals.  Permission to appeal was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer  on  15  January  2019.   The
    Respondent made a Rule 24 response on or about 27 March 2019.

3.   The representations made at the First-tier Tribunal were by counsel  Mr
    Plowright, instructed by other  solicitors  but  before  me  Mr  Badar,
    Counsel, instructed by Connaught Law made his submissions in support of
    Mr Plowright's grounds of appeal to which Mr D Clarke replied.

4.   The substance of the refusal of the original application was  based  on
    the Secretary of State's assessment that the First Appellant had used a
    proxy test taker to  take  the  ETS  TOEIC  test.   The  Appellant  had
    disputed the point.

5.   At the hearing of  the  appeal  Mr  Plowright  had  accepted  that  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the evidential burden  to  show  that
    there was at least a case made out to support the allegation  of  fraud
    in the use of the proxy test taker.

6.   It therefore fell upon the  First  Appellant  to  provide  an  innocent
    explanation as to the circumstances  of  his  having  taken  the  test.
    Essentially the Appellant gave a bare denial and  some  particulars  of
    his recollection six years on or so since the date  he  had  taken  the
    test.

7.   The Judge for reasons given concluded  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
    was unreliable and that an innocent explanation had not been  provided.
    The  Judge  went  on  in  detailed  grounds  to  look  at  the  broader
    considerations that arise bearing in mind it was a human  rights  based
    appeal which  had  been  argued,  rather  than  simply  one  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  Judge  considered  the  bases  raised  by  the
    Appellants of difficulties on  return  to  India,  problems  the  First
    Appellant claimed to face and in effect the preference  for  the  First
    and Second Appellants to remain in the United Kingdom.  The Judge  also
    considered any very significant  obstacles  to  return  and  the  wider
    issues, including best interests of the children and the issues arising
    under Section 117B of the NIAA 2002.

8.   The Respondent's position in these appeals, put by Mr  Clarke,  started
    from the premise that even if, taken at its highest,  the  first  three
    grounds of appeal were to succeed  it  would  still  make  no  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeals because the Judge's    adverse
    findings and conclusions  referring  to  the  claimed  difficulties  on
    return were simply unchallenged and  substantively  had  addressed  the
    human rights position in terms of proportionality and the assessment of
    the difficulties of return in all material respects. Having  heard  the
    parties submissions I agree with Mr Clarke.

9.   If, however Mr Clarke's submissions  were  wrong,  it  was  essentially
    argued that the complaints about the Judge's approach to the assessment
    of the  evidence  were  misconceived  and  that,  on  the  evidence  as
    presented to the Judge, he entitled to have reached some  view  on  the
    sufficiency of the innocent explanation proffered of the events.  There
    may well be a factual error, which  I  simply  cannot  resolve,  as  to
    whether or not there were some documents provided which showed that the
    tests were taken, as appeared to be the case, on  two  successive  days
    rather than all been heard on one day.  To this extent I agree that the
    error was an error in all likelihood, in the Judge's understanding that
    all components of the two tests were taken on  the  same  day,  but  it
    seemed to me that that was not ultimately material to  the  outcome  of
    the decision.

10.  I therefore concluded  that  the  potential  importance  of  the  point
    rested, if at all, were the issue  would  be  held  against  the  First
    Appellant were he to seek to return to the UK.

11.  To this extent therefore whilst I agree  there  is  an  aspect  of  the
    decision which does appear to have the potential for  error  overall  I
    concluded that the generic evidence was sufficient,  as  was  conceded,
    and that the evidence of innocent  explanation  even  if  it  had  been
    accepted would still, looking at all the evidence in  the  round,  have
    enabled the Respondent to argue  that  the  first  Appellant'  case  of
    innocent explanation  had not been made out in relation  to  the  TOEIC
    test.

12.  Therefore I cannot resolve some of the factual issues which  relate  to
    the evidence that was  before  me:  To  that  extent  there  remains  a
    potential of uncertainty which I cannot sort out, the fact was that the
    evidence in relation to the human rights based issues did not show that
    either the Judge had failed to properly take into account the interests
    of the Appellants as a whole, bearing in mind  the  children  had  only
    been in the United Kingdom a  short  period  of  time.   There  was  no
    argument, as I understood it, that it would be unreasonable for them to
    leave the United Kingdom.

13.  The evidence as filed, recited by the Judge, again  did  not  take  the
    matter forward in relation to  the  children  to  show  either  through
    education, health or personal circumstances, there were  aspects  which
    would  fall  for  consideration  under  paragraph  276ADE   under   the
    Immigration Rules leading to the conclusion that they could not  return
    or  that  there  would  be  obstacles  to  return  which  rendered  the
    Respondent's decisions unreasonable and disproportionate.

14.  The Judge in granting permission to appeal in the  time  available  for
    such consideration was led to grant permission  it  was  clear  that  a
    wider view provided a somewhat different picture.

15.  I concluded that there was no substance in the appeal in substance.


Decision

The appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity Order

No anonymity order was sought nor is one required.

Fee Award

The appeals have been lost, no fee award was appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 14 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

