
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/08907/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th October 2018                   | On 7th November 2018                 |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                 amina begum
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         the Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Kamar, Solicitor advocate instructed on
behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision  of  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gumsley)  who,   in   a   determination
       promulgated on the 23rd  April  2018  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
       Appellant against the decision of the ECO to refuse  entry  clearance
       as a partner on the 30th December 2015. Mr Kamar appeared  on  behalf
       of the Appellant. There had been no application  made  either  before
       the FTTJ for an anonymity order  and  no  grounds  were  relied  upon
       before the Upper Tribunal.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  She married the sponsor on
       the 28th February 2014 and made an application for entry clearance as
       a partner under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  8th
       October 2015.

    3.  The application was refused in a decision made on the 30th  December
       2015.  The  reasons  given  for  refusing  the  application  can   be
       summarised as  follows.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereinafter
       referred to as the "ECO") considered the application under  paragraph
       EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The ECO  considered
       the basis of the application which was for the Appellant to settle in
       the United Kingdom with her husband but was not  satisfied  that  the
       relationship with the sponsor was  genuine  and  subsisting  for  the
       following stated reasons: -

          . "in your application, you state that you met in  Bangladesh  on
            21/2/2014, and you got married within a week  on  28/2/2014.  I
            must be satisfied that you intend to  live  with  your  sponsor
            permanently as husband and wife once you are in the UK.

          . I note your sponsor is  18  years  older  than  you  and  is  a
            divorcee. Such marriages are culturally  unusual  to  occur  in
            Bangladesh were it to be an  arranged  marriage.  However,  you
            have provided no satisfactory evidence or even  any  indication
            of where your relationship began and in what  circumstances  or
            how your relationship progressed to the stage of marriage.

          . Your sponsor's visit to Bangladesh when you got married in 2014
            is the only time that you have met  him  in  person.  You  have
            therefore met each other on only one occasion in the course  of
            the  relationship  which  you  state  has  been  in  place  for
            approximately two years. Your sponsor is a British citizen  who
            has been issued with a Visa to India; there  appears  therefore
            to be no restrictions on his  ability  to  travel  between  the
            United Kingdom and India to  meet  you.  The  lack  of  contact
            between you is not consistent  with  that  of  a  couple  in  a
            genuine and subsisting relationship.

          . In your application form, you state that you live  together  in
            Bangladesh  for  a  period   after   marriage.   However,   the
            photographs you have submitted only appear to show you together
            at the wedding ceremony and a staged photography  session.  You
            have not submitted any other evidence of time  that  you  spent
            together after your marriage, and this leads me to  doubt  that
            you have a genuine subsisting relationship.

          .  Given  all  of  the  above,  I  am  not  satisfied  that   you
            relationship the sponsor is genuine and subsisting, or that you
            intend to live together permanently  in  the  UK.  I  therefore
            refuse application and paragraph EC - P.1.1 (d) of Appendix  FM
            of the Immigration Rules (E - ECP.to.6 and 2.10).

    4. Thus the application was  refused.  It  is  common  ground  that  the
       Appellant submitted an appeal in time on 29 January 2016. However  as
       the judge stated at paragraph [6]  for  reasons  that  are  not  made
       clear, the application was lost  in  the  system  and  it  was  after
       enquiries were made that a further appeal was submitted on 21  August
       2017 which in the circumstances was allowed to proceed.

    5. There was an ECM review undertaken on the 14th  February  2018  which
       considered the documentation submitted with the appeal  noting  "call
       track  record,  for  photographs,  passport  copies,  and  call  card
       copies." It was noted that the Appellant provided  chat  records  and
       phone calls as evidence that the parties  were  in  contact  and  the
       marriage was subsisting but the ECM considered that the  chat  record
       was dated but did not identify the recipient or the caller. In regard
       to the phone cards, they again did not identify  the  caller  or  the
       recipient. The photographs appeared to be of the  Appellant  and  the
       sponsor at an engagement or wedding function rather than photos  post
       wedding over a series of time. The ECM considered that the  documents
       did not establish the relationship was subsisting. The ECM noted  the
       error regarding the Appellant and the sponsor visiting each other  in
       India  (when  it  should  have  been  Bangladesh).  However  the  ECM
       considered that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  sponsor  from
       visiting  the  Appellant  in  Bangladesh.   Having   considered   the
       additional documentation, the ECM upheld the decision to  refuse  the
       application.

    6. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
       entry clearance came before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Gumsley)
       on the 3rd April 2018.  In a determination promulgated  on  the  23rd
       April 2018, Judge  Gumsley  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds, having considered that issue in the light of the Appellant's
       compliance with the Immigration Rule in question.

    7. The Respondent appealed against  that  decision  and  permission  was
       granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Simpson) on the  18th  June
       2018.

    8.  Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  The  Appellant  was
       represented by Mr Kamar and the  Respondent  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  Senior
       Presenting Officer.

    9. Mr Kamar submitted that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  his
       decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  He  submitted  that  there   was
       sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the relationship was  genuine
       and subsisting and that the judge had ignored the evidence  that  had
       been provided. When asked to identify what  evidence  the  judge  had
       ignored when reaching the overall decision, Mr Kamar identified  that
       the judge had ignored the wedding photographs, the phone calls for  a
       two-year period and a statement from  people  who  had  attended  the
       wedding and that on the passport  the  Appellant  was  named  as  his
       spouse and vice versa. He also submitted that  the  judge  failed  to
       take into account the remittances and made reference to documentation
       that he had been handed by the sponsor. He was not able to  say  when
       those remittances may have been sent or whether they were provided to
       the Respondent for the application or for the appeal. He  noted  that
       the bundle submitted on behalf of the Appellant was "very brief"  but
       could not say whether those  documents  had  been  omitted  from  the
       bundle. The judge had made reference  to  one  money  transfer  dated
       January 2016 (see [25 vi].

   10. He further submitted that when reaching the findings of fact set  out
       at  [25  (i)-(xii)]  the  judge  was  demanding  evidence  that   was
       unreasonable to expect the Appellant and the sponsor to  provide  and
       that as the judge had accepted that they were  legally  married,  the
       marriage was subsisting. There was telephone  evidence  which  showed
       that they had had  contact  and  this  was  sufficient  to  meet  the
       requirements that this was a genuine subsisting marriage (relying  on
       the decision of Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) [2012] UK UTI
       011 (IAC) and that there were no countervailing factors.

   11. He submitted that the judge failed to take into account the sponsor's
       financial circumstances when reaching his decision that  the  sponsor
       had not sought to visit the Appellant in Bangladesh (see  finding  at
       [25(iii)]. In particular that the Appellant had spent all  his  money
       on the wedding and was in low-paid work. The judge's  assessment  was
       therefore  unreasonable.  Furthermore  the  judge  failed   to   give
       sufficient weight to the photographs as photographs are usually taken
       at weddings. He further submitted by  reference  to  the  finding  at
       (viii) that the sponsor statement was very short that it looks as  if
       the statement had not been well drafted and that it  was  clear  that
       the bundle had  not  been  properly  prepared.  He  stated  that  his
       instructions from the sponsor were  that  he  was  not  told  by  the
       solicitor that he needed a witness statement.

   12. As to the finding at (x) he submitted that the sponsor's evidence was
       plausible and they are legally married.  He  submitted  that  it  was
       insufficient to dismiss the appeal. He made reference  to  the  delay
       and that the appeal was reinstated in 2017 and  that  if  the  appeal
       have been heard in 2016 there would be no gaps in the evidence.  This
       was a point the judge had not considered.  In  any  event,  Mr  Kamar
       submitted that if the evidence was missing he could  have  asked  the
       sponsor to provide the evidence and granted an adjournment if crucial
       evidence was missing.

   13. He submitted that the refusal letter made reference to India  whereas
       the Appellant lived in Bangladesh. Thus he submitted that  the  judge
       did err in law in reaching his decision and that if the decision  was
       set aside new evidence could be  provided  to  demonstrate  that  the
       relationship was genuine and subsisting.

   14. Mr Diwncyz relied upon the rule 24 response which  was  filed  on  13
       September 2018. In that response it  was  submitted  that  the  judge
       directed himself appropriately and that the grounds of appeal were  a
       disagreement with the findings that were rationally open to the judge
       on the evidence. In particular, as there was a  direct  challenge  to
       the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the  sponsor,  it  was
       legitimate to expect a statement from the Appellant dealing with this
       issue and at [15] the judge was clearly postulating in the absence of
       a statement whether evidence could be given in another way.  In  this
       context the rule 24 response also made reference to  the  grounds  in
       which it was asserted that such a statement  could  not  be  provided
       because the Appellant is illiterate. However the  Respondent  queried
       how she would pass the English language requirement in the  light  of
       that disclosure.

   15. The response went on to state that it was open to the judge  to  find
       at [25 x] that the Appellant's account was not credible on the  basis
       of the Appellant would have been six years old and the  sponsor  left
       to come to the UK but it was his evidence that he knew before he left
       and kept in touch with thereafter. It was open the judge to find that
       was implausible.

   16. In summary, the rule 24 response submitted that the decision  by  the
       FTTJ was measured and balanced with the judge giving  limited  weight
       to certain factors and submissions which had been made on behalf  the
       ECO (see [25(vii)].

   17. In his oral submissions Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge had  only
       considered one money transfer because there were no other remittances
       other than one dated January 2016. The judge had properly  considered
       all of the evidence and dealt with the issues  for  and  against  the
       Appellant and was entitled to find that due to  the  paucity  of  the
       evidence concerning the relationship and a complete absence  relating
       to the future plans of the couple, that the marriage was not  genuine
       and subsisting or that they intended to live together permanently.

   18. By way of reply, Mr Kamar submitted that having taken instructions on
       the issue raised in the rule 24 response  at  the  hearing  from  the
       sponsor, that the solicitor had misunderstood the sponsor and that it
       was not  the  Appellant  who  was  illiterate  but  the  sponsor.  He
       reiterated that there was a material error of law  in  assessing  the
       evidence. He accepted that certain evidence would have been  provided
       but that the sponsor and the Appellant were never  asked  to  provide
       the evidence by the solicitors  and  that  looked  like  a  plausible
       explanation given the small bundle that had been provided.

   19. At the conclusion that submissions I reserved my decision which I now
       give.

   20. I have carefully considered the respective submissions made on behalf
       of each of the advocates. The issue set out in  the  decision  letter
       related to whether the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the
       sponsor was genuine and subsisting and whether there was an intention
       to live together permanently. In the written grounds and in his  oral
       submissions, it was submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  the
       judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusion
       that the parties had  not  demonstrated  that  the  relationship  was
       genuine and subsisting. In particular, Mr Kamar relied on the written
       grounds in which it was submitted that it was unreasonable to  expect
       certain evidence to be provided and also that the judge  ignored  the
       evidence that in fact was before him.

   21. I have carefully considered the written  grounds  and  the  grant  of
       permission alongside the oral submissions of the parties. Having done
       so,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  judge  does  not
       demonstrate the making of an error of on a point of law. I shall  set
       out my reasons for reaching this conclusion.

   22. As to the evidence before  the  judge,  he  had  the  opportunity  of
       hearing the sponsor give evidence and in the  decision  set  out  the
       summary of that evidence at [17 - 23]. In addition to this the  judge
       made reference to the documentary evidence throughout the decision.

   23. Having considered the evidence the judge set out his findings of fact
       at paragraph [25 (i)-(xii)]. Those  findings  can  be  summarised  as
       follows:-

          . he was satisfied that there was a legal marriage but  that  the
            marriage must exist in substance as well as in a legal form.

          . He was satisfied the telephone records showed  that  there  was
            regular contact for one year between the beginning of 2015  and
            the beginning of 2016. There was no evidence of contact between
            2010 - 2014 a time when it was said by the sponsor that he  was
            in contact with the Appellant two or three times a day for four
            years. There was no evidence of contact in  2014  or  post  the
            beginning of 2016.

          . Whilst accepting the costs involved in visiting Bangladesh (and
            see paragraph 19), there was no visit by  the  sponsor  between
            2010 and 2014 to see the  Appellant.  Similarly  there  was  no
            visit from 2014 to 2018. The judge found the explanation  given
            by the sponsor that he was putting his  affairs  in  order  for
            years prior to marriage and then again for  two  years  between
            marriage and the application seem to be "wholly unconvincing".

          . The judge did not accept the submission made by the  Respondent
            as to the differing ages of the parties and found that the  age
            gap was of no significance.

          . There was only one written communication put in  evidence  sent
            in April 2014. The judge took  into  account  the  decision  of
            Goudey (as cited) and that there was no  requirement  that  the
            parties write or text each other but in  this  case  there  was
            effectively no evidence of any contact of any kind for seven of
            the eight years of "courtship" or marriage.

          . The only evidence financial  support  was  one  money  transfer
            dated January  2016.  The  judge  stated  that  he  would  have
            expected to see more evidence  of  financial  assistance  in  a
            genuine and subsisting relationship with the Appellant  who  at
            the time of the application was not employed.

          . The judge gave no weight to the  Respondent's  submission  that
            the wedding photographs appeared  posed.  However  despite  the
            Appellant  and  the  Respondent  living  together  after  their
            marriage in 2014 there were no other photographs of their  time
            together. The judge gave that only limited weight.

          . The sponsor statement was very short and was lacking in  detail
            in particular there was a complete absence of any detail of any
            future plans the couple had. There  was  similarly  a  complete
            absence of any statement from the Appellant or  application  to
            seek to introduce evidence from her in any other way. There was
            no  evidence  as  to  how   the   relationship   started,   the
            communications with between her and sponsor,  and  their  plans
            intention. Given the importance of  the  matter  the  sponsor's
            accounted spoken to her and so that was sufficient as far as he
            was concerned, the judge found to be "unconvincing".

          . At (x) the judge found the evidence provided by the sponsors to
            why  and  how  he  had  chosen  the  Appellant's  wife  to   be
            implausible in a number of ways.

          . He also considered  the  timing  of  the  recent  visit  to  be
            coincidental with the timing of the appeal hearing.  The  judge
            considered the expense the sponsor said he had to expend to  go
            to Bangladesh and the years he suggested  he  had  to  organise
            matters and save money to enable them to travel but he had only
            stayed for less than three weeks and in the light of having not
            seen his wife for 4 years and in the light of  the  photographs
            the judge found that that was an attempt to create evidence  of
            a relationship that was, in reality, not subsisting or genuine.

          . The answers given by the sponsors to why he would not  want  to
            live in Bangladesh made no reference to his wife  at  all.  The
            judge found this to be "telling".

   24. Mr Kamar submitted in  reaching  those  findings  are  judge  ignored
       evidence and in particular the wedding photographs,  telephone  calls
       and the remittances. It is plain in my judgement that the  judge  did
       not ignore any of that evidence. In respect of the  photographs,  the
       judge  expressly  considered  them  at  [vii].  In  the  Respondent's
       decision letter it had been stated that the photographs  appeared  to
       be posed. However the judge fairly considered that they were  wedding
       photographs and the Respondent's point had no merit and did not  take
       it as a point against the Appellant. However it was open the judge to
       find that there were no other  photographs  of  the  couple  together
       despite the evidence that they lived together in 2014 for a period of
       time. The judge, in any event, gave that only limited weight.

   25.  As  the  evidence  telephone  contact,  the  judge   set   out   his
       consideration of the evidence at [ii]. Whilst he was  satisfied  that
       the  telephone  records  showed  regular  contact  between  a  number
       attributed to the Appellant and to the sponsor, it was  open  to  the
       judge to find that the contact was limited to one  year  between  the
       beginning of 2015 and the beginning of 2016. There was no evidence of
       contact between 2010 - 2014. Whilst it was submitted that the parties
       did not marry until February 2014,  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
       consider the documentary evidence in the context of the sponsor's own
       evidence concerning the relationship. In particular, the sponsor  had
       given evidence stating that he had been in contact with the Appellant
       2-3 time per day for four years but the judge found  no  evidence  of
       contact in 2014 or post the beginning of 2016.

   26. Whilst it is submitted that the judge failed to consider the timeline
       of the appeal, I do not consider that that  undermines  the  findings
       that were made by the judge. It is common ground that  the  Appellant
       made the application on 8 October 2015 and the  decision  letter  was
       dated 30 December 2015. The parties were married on 28 February 2014.
       However when the appeal was submitted in January  2016,  it  was  not
       until enquiries were made and further appeal allowed  to  proceed  in
       August 2017 that it then came  before  the  court.  As  the  original
       application was made in October 2015, it was open  to  the  judge  to
       consider the evidence concerning contact between 2010 - 2014  and  in
       particular the evidence from the sponsor who expressly stated that he
       had been in contact with the Appellant for 2 to 3 times per day for 4
       years. It was open the judge to  find  that  in  the  light  of  that
       evidence there was no supporting evidence of contact in  2014.  Again
       looking at the chronology, irrespective  of  the  later  appeal,  the
       judge found that there was no evidence of contact after the beginning
       of 2016 either. The appeal was heard in 2018 and it  was  clear  from
       the decision letter that the issue of the genuineness and subsistence
       of the marriage was the central issue and that it was therefore  open
       to the parties to provide any evidence that they thought relevant. It
       is important to remember that the burden of demonstrating  that  this
       was a genuine and subsisting relationship lay on the Appellant on the
       balance of probabilities.

   27. It was not simply the lack  of  contact  relating  to  the  telephone
       calls. The judge also took into account that there had been no visits
       made from 2014 - 2018 save for a recent visit made in  February/March
       2018. It is submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  judge
       failed to  consider  the  sponsor  circumstances  and  the  "economic
       constraints" when reaching that finding of fact.  However  the  judge
       expressly did consider the issue of the sponsor's  circumstances  and
       his explanation which is set at [19] and [25 (iii)]  in  relation  to
       the costs involved in visiting Bangladesh. It was open to  the  judge
       to consider the sponsor's explanation as to the delay in visiting the
       Appellant which was stated to be on the basis that he needed  to  put
       his affairs in order. The judge  found  that  the  explanation  given
       during  his  evidence  to  be  one  that  he  described  as   "wholly
       unconvincing". That was a finding that was open to him to make.

   28. Mr Kamar also made reference to the remittances. At  the  hearing  he
       made reference to a number of other  documents  which  he  said  were
       remittances sent by  the  sponsor  to  the  Appellant.  At  first  he
       submitted that they were before the ECO but the  judge  had  made  no
       reference to them but that later stated that he could  not  say  when
       they had been produced but that they had  not  been  put  before  the
       judge. It is plain from reading the determination that they had  only
       been one money transfer  dated  January  2016  in  the  documentation
       before the FTTJ (see finding at [25 (vi)]. This was exhibited in  the
       Respondent's bundle. The judge considered the documentation  at  [14]
       and made reference to the Appellant's representative considering that
       there would have been further information submitted at  the  time  of
       the  original  application  but  he  was  unable  to  say  what   the
       information was. The judge noted  that  if  there  was  such  further
       information neither the Appellant or the Respondent  seem  to  be  in
       possession of it. It does not appear that this evidence was sent with
       the appeal as the ECM set out what evidence had been produced and  no
       reference was made to the remittances. The burden of  proof  is  upon
       the Appellant. It was therefore open to the judge take  into  account
       the lack of financial remittances in the circumstances.

   29. Mr Kamar also submitted that it was unreasonable the judge to make  a
       criticism of the lack of evidence in the sponsor's witness  statement
       at [25(viii)]. In my view, there  was  nothing  unreasonable  in  the
       judge making reference to  the  lack  of  cogent  evidence  from  the
       sponsor. The witness statement provided  was  short  and  lacking  in
       detail. Given the  issue  relating  to  the  genuine  nature  of  the
       relationship and the subsistence of it, it was open to the  judge  to
       consider that the witness  statement  failed  to  set  out  any  real
       evidence to support the factual account of their relationship. Whilst
       Mr Kamar appeared to be  submitting  that  this  may  have  been  the
       solicitors fault on the  basis  that  the  case  did  not  look  well
       prepared, there has been no evidence put  before  the  Tribunal  that
       this is the case; there has been no evidence given of  any  complaint
       made against the solicitors in question by either  the  Appellant  or
       the sponsor.

   30.  Furthermore, it is wrong in my view to consider this  issue  without
       considering the  other  findings  that  were  made.  The  Judge  also
       observed that there was no statement of evidence whatsoever from  the
       Appellant (see [25 (ix)]. In this  respect  the  written  grounds  at
       paragraph 4 made reference to the judge failing to take into  account
       the practicalities of the Appellant giving evidence and  states  "the
       IJ has also failed to consider  that  the  Appellant  herself  speaks
       Bengali and is illiterate, also having never been in  employment,  so
       she would be unlikely to be  in  a  position  to  provide  a  witness
       statement, as is often the case in entry clearance  appeals."  It  is
       clear from the judge granting  permission  that  she  considered  the
       Appellant's stated lack of literacy to  give  the  grounds  "arguable
       force". However in the Rule 24 response, the  Respondent  raised  the
       point that  that  was  inconsistent  with  the  requirements  of  the
       Appellant have passed the English language  requirement  at  standard
       A1. In any event the application form set out at question 83 that she
       had met the  English  language  requirement  in  ESOL.  Having  taken
       instructions, Mr Kamar submitted that the  solicitors  when  drafting
       the grounds had misunderstood the evidence and that it  was  not  the
       Appellant who was illiterate. If that is  the  case,  the  submission
       made in the written grounds could not succeed on the basis as  it  is
       now conceded that the Appellant is not  illiterate.  However  I  have
       considered the alternative submission made that the judge placed  too
       higher weight on the fact that she had not provided evidence herself.
       Entry clearance appeals are by their  nature  conducted  without  the
       Appellant being in the United Kingdom. I take into account that there
       is no requirement that an Appellant provide a  statement  but  it  is
       important to remember  that  the  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the
       Appellant to set out the factual matters upon which  the  application
       is based. It is often the case  that  witness  statements  are  often
       provided  by  Appellants  from  overseas  and  even  if   they   have
       difficulties speaking or writing English, statements can be taken  in
       their first language and translated and  certified  for  the  use  in
       proceedings. In this particular appeal it was open to  the  judge  to
       find that there was a complete absence of any statement and  that  he
       would have expected some evidence from the Appellant, setting out how
       the relationship started, the communications between herself and  the
       sponsor and their plans and intention. As the central issue  was  the
       genuineness and subsisting nature of the relationship, it was open to
       the judge to find that the sponsor's account that as he had spoken to
       her and so that was sufficient, was "unconvincing". Thus it  was  not
       simply the absence of a statement but that  it  was  the  absence  of
       evidence that went to the issue that the judge was having to  decide.
       It is also clear that the judge did not simply rely on the absence of
       a  document  but  considered  it  in  the  light  of  the   sponsor's
       explanation.

   31. Mr Kamar also challenges the finding of fact set out  at  [25(x)]  on
       the basis that it was not relevant to the issues. However it was open
       to the judge to consider the evidence given by the sponsor as to  how
       the Appellant and his wife had met and married. He properly took into
       account the documentation which showed that they came from  the  same
       village. However the judge had the opportunity to hear the  sponsor's
       oral evidence as to how he had come to know the Appellant when he was
       in Bangladesh and how he had kept in contact with her when  he  moved
       to the United Kingdom. The judge gave his reasons as to  why  he  did
       not accept that evidence  and  it  was  open  to  him  to  reach  the
       conclusion for the reasons set out at (X) that he was  not  satisfied
       that the sponsor was telling the truth and therefore it was an  issue
       that undermined his general credibility.

   32.  The judge had the opportunity to  hear  the  oral  evidence  of  the
       sponsor as well as considering the documents and that evidence to  be
       the subject of cross-examination. In this context I remind myself  of
       the importance of oral evidence.

   33.   In the well-known case of Piglowska v  Piglowski  [1999]  UKHL  27,
       Lord Hoffmann said this:

            "...the appellate court must bear in mind the  advantage  which
            the first instance judge had in  seeing  the  parties  and  the
            other witnesses.  This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
            credibility and findings of primary fact. But it  goes  further
            than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation  of  those
            facts. ..."

     Then there is a quotation from his own decision in Biogen Inc v  Medeva
Ltd [1997] RPC 1:

            "The need for appellate caution in reversing the trial  judge's
            evaluation of the facts is based upon much more  solid  grounds
            than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings  of
            fact, even by the most  meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
            incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon  him
            by the primary evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always
            surrounded  by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
            relative weight, minor qualification and nuance  ...  of  which
            time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may
            play an important part in the judge's overall evaluation."

   34. The judge had the opportunity to consider  all  of  the  evidence  in
       light of the issues raised. He properly considered the case  law  set
       out at [25 (v)] and the decision of Goudey, and properly  noted  that
       it was not disputed that there was a legal marriage but that  he  had
       to be satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that  this  was  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship. He took into  account  the  case
       law that there was no requirement the parties to  text  or  write  to
       each other and he distinguished the case on its facts because  whilst
       telephone calls might be sufficient to discharge the burden of  proof
       this is subject to there being no countervailing  factors  generating
       suspicion. It is clear from the facts as he found  them  to  be  that
       there were such countervailing factors.

   35. Furthermore I find no merit in the grounds where it  is  stated  that
       the judge  considered  it  from  a  Western  perspective.  The  judge
       expressly directed himself at [13] when considering the  issues  that
       he must consider the issues in light of cultural differences and  the
       individual preferences as to lifestyles. He was also mindful  of  the
       fact that it was difficult to prove intentions  and  the  genuineness
       and the subsistence  of  the  relationship.  Consequently  the  judge
       properly considered the evidence on its totality and reached findings
       that were open to him on the evidence that was before him.

 Decision:

  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose the  making  of
  an error of law; the decision of the  FTT  dismissing  the  appeal  shall
  stand.





Signed                              Date: 26/10/2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


