
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/08363/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                        |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 6th December 2017                  |           On 3rd January 2018        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                           EDEWEDE OJEABULU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, instructed on behalf of WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Shanahan) who, in a determination  promulgated  on
    the 9th February 2017 dismissed her appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave to remain in the
    UK on the basis of her family and private life.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 15 June 1981. The factual
    background  of  the  Appellant  is  set  out  in  the  papers  and  the
    determination at paragraphs 3 - 9. She entered the United Kingdom on 16
    August 2003 with entry clearance as a student with leave valid until 31
    October 2004. She was granted a further  two  periods  of  leave  as  a
    student  expiring  on  31  January  2009.  The  course  was  at  London
    Metropolitan University and when she had completed it she  went  on  to
    study for a degree course at a further University.  She  studied  there
    for approximately 4 � years but as a result of personal reasons did not
    complete the course.  When  her  Visa  expired  in  2009  she  had  not
    completed her degree but was awarded a certificate of higher  education
    in combined studies. She was then unable to secure employment  and  her
    sister advised her to return to Nigeria and bought her ticket.  However
    the Appellant not return because of the situation there time; there was
    serious political unrest, mass unemployment and her parents had  fallen
    on hard times. She decided to remain in the UK believing that she would
    apply for another visa only to discover that this was not possible.

 3. She went to live with her  sister  and  helped  her  design  a  website
    business. In or about August 2011 she moved to undertake  a  course  in
    computer networking.

 4. In or about July 2012 she met her partner. She had informed  him  about
    her immigration status but it was understood between them that this was
    something that she would have to sort out for herself. In or about July
    2013 she was unable to maintain her flat because  her  family  were  no
    longer able to support her and she moved  in  with  her  partner.  They
    remained there for a few months and then moved in with  other  friends.
    Eventually they moved into their own flat. During the  time  they  have
    been together they developed their relationship.

 5. On 25 November 2015 the applicant applied leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on a FLR application form and indicated  that  the  immigration
    route she wanted consideration under was the 10 year partner route  and
    the 10 year private life route.

 6. .In a decision letter dated the 15th June  2016  that  application  was
    refused. The Appellant's immigration  history  as  set  out  above  was
    summarised and her application was considered under the partner  route.
    The Secretary of State was not satisfied that  the  applicant  met  the
    eligibility requirements of paragraph R-LTRP1.1. This was  because  the
    applicant had not provided a certified copy of  her  partner's  British
    passport and it was not accepted as her partner was a  British  citizen
    as claimed.

 7. When considering GEN 1.2 the applicant was not married or engaged,  her
    partner and had not provided sufficient evidence to show that they  had
    been cohabiting with each other in a relationship akin to marriage  for
    at least two years. The applicant had given  no  details  of  when  she
    moved in with her partner and had stated that her relationship began in
    July 2012. The evidence of cohabitation provided was limited; with only
    three pieces of evidence in the partner's name dated  4  October  2014,
    April 2015 and May 2015 and  only  three  pieces  of  evidence  in  the
    applicant's name dated from September 2014 and  July  2015.  The  other
    evidence provided was in photo copied format and therefore could not be
    accepted as valid evidence as it was not from an official source.  Thus
    the Respondent  considered  that  the  applicant  could  not  meet  the
    definition of the term "partner" and could not be the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-LTRP1.2.

 8. She also could not meet paragraph E-LTRP1.2 as she  was  in  breach  of
    immigration laws- her last period of leave  to  remain  expired  on  31
    January 2009 and had  therefore  been  an  over  stayer  in  breach  of
    immigration laws since that date.

 9. The Secretary of State considered whether EX1 applied  and  as  to  the
    requirements of EX1(b), it was acknowledged that she had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her partner  but  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  had  not  seen  any  evidence  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles in accordance with paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM  which  means
    that very significant difficulties which would be faced by her and  her
    partner in continuing family life together outside the UK in Nigeria or
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the applicant and her partner.

10. Thus she failed to fulfil EX1 (b) of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and thus did not meet the  requirements  of  R-LTRP1.1.  and  the
    application was refused under D-LTRP 1.3.

11. The decision under private life was considered under paragraph 276  ADE
    (1) taking into account her claim that she  entered the United  Kingdom
    on the 16th August 2003 and thus had lived in the UK for 12 years.  She
    therefore could not satisfy paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii).   As  she  was
    over the age of 18 years and has not spent at least half  of  her  life
    living continuously in the UK she could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) or (v).

12. As to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) and the requirement for  there  to  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration into Nigeria, it was  not
    accepted that there would be such significant obstacles because she had
    spent the majority of her life there, including her formative years. It
    was noted that she would be able to integrate  into  the  way  of  life
    there by utilising the  knowledge  of  the  culture  and  language.  In
    addition, her siblings and father resided in Nigeria are set out in the
    application form and therefore would have family  support  upon  return
    and thus it was not accepted that she had lost all cultural, social and
    family ties to Nigeria.

13.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  whether  there  were  any
    circumstances that would give rise to a grant of leave outside  of  the
    rules but it was decided that there were no "exceptional circumstances"
    in her case and did not therefore fall for a grant of leave outside  of
    the rules.

14. The Appellant appealed that decision on the 22nd March 2016 and it came
    before the First-tier Tribunal in January 2017.  The  judge  heard  the
    evidence from the applicant and her partner both of whom  attended  the
    hearing. The evidence of the parties is briefly recorded at  paragraphs
    10  -  11  of  the  determination.  They  both  adopted  their  witness
    statements and answered questions cross examination.

15.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  30th  January  2017,   the
    Appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed.

16. The judge's conclusions are set out at paragraphs 15-38.  They  can  be
    summarised as follows:-

          a)  it  was  agreed  that  the  Appellant  met  the   suitability
             requirements under S-LTR but the issue was whether  she  could
             meet the provisions in EX1.

          b) To meet the requirements the applicant needed  to  demonstrate
             that she is a partner as defined in section  GEN1.2.   However
             the judge found that the applicant and her  partner  were  not
             married or civil  partners  nor  were  they  engaged  as  such
             therefore  she  needed  to  establish  that  she  could   meet
             subsection (iv) that she and her partner had been living in  a
             relationship akin to marriage for at least  two  years  before
             the date  of  the  application,  that  is,  23  November  2015
             therefore the applicant needed to provide  evidence  that  she
             and her partner were living together in  such  a  relationship
             from at least 23 November 2013.

          c) The judge found that they were in a genuine  relationship  but
             that the burden of proof was on the applicant  to  demonstrate
             that they were living  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
             marriage the two years before the  date  of  the  application.
             Having reviewed the evidence, he was not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant and her partner, was in a relationship, were  living
             together in a relationship akin  to  marriage  the  two  years
             before she made her application on 23 November 2015  therefore
             she could not benefit from section EX1.

          d) Dealing with private life under paragraph 276  ADE  the  judge
             found that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  her
             integration to Nigeria. The judge took into account the length
             of residence since 2003 but that she had lived all her life in
             Nigeria. She was familiar with the culture and language family
             members there (a father and sisters). In cross-examination she
             indicated that there were no reasons why she could not  return
             to Nigeria apart from her life with  her  partner.  The  judge
             found that she was educated woman and would be  able  to  find
             employment in the IT field and that she had family members and
             there was no evidence she would  not  be  provided  with  some
             initial support. The fact that she has a relationship  in  the
             UK was not relevant considering her ability  to  integrate  on
             return.

          e) The judge then considered the issue outside of the  rules  but
             reached  the  conclusion  that  there   were   no   compelling
             circumstances to consider the matter  outside  the  rules  but
             nonetheless went on to do so (see paragraph 27).

          f) The judge applied the five stage test in Razgar and the public
             interest considerations  under  Section  117.  The  judge  was
             satisfied that the applicant and her partner were in a genuine
             relationship and had family life and that the other  limbs  of
             the   test   was   satisfied   leading   to   the   issue   of
             proportionality.

          g) Applying the Section 117 public interest  considerations,  the
             judge found that section 117A was engaged as it  required  her
             to take into account of the matters set out in section 117B in
             considering the public interest. In this regard the  Appellant
             spoke English and have been supported by her  family  and  her
             partner. The judge found that those to  be  "neutral  factors"
             which did not entitle the Appellant leave to remain.  He  went
             on to consider  S117B(4)  in  the  light  of  the  immigration
             history noting that she came to the  UK  as  a  student  which
             expired in 2009 and remained unlawfully since that  date.  She
             had made no attempt to regularise her status until 23 November
             2015 almost 7 years after her  leave  expired.  He  found  her
             leave throughout to have been precarious  and  unlawful  since
             January 2009. He therefore satisfied that little weight should
             be attached to her private life and  the  relationship  formed
             with her partner. The judge found that the Appellant's partner
             was aware of her status from early on  in  their  relationship
             and neither could have had  any  legitimate  expectation  that
             without meeting the rules she would be allowed to remain.

          h) As to the public interest in maintaining  the  economic  well-
             being of the country, it had been argued that the  Appellant's
             partner's business was successful and employed 30 people.  The
             judge made reference at  paragraph  33  to  the  letters  from
             various people  in  support  of  that  it  would  be  counter-
             productive for the business to close if her partner  relocated
             to  Nigeria  and  it  was  not  proportionate  to  expect  the
             Appellant to return to Nigeria simply to make the  application
             from abroad. However the judge at paragraph 34 found  that  it
             was not suggested seriously that he should relocate to Nigeria
             but  that  he  and  the  applicant  wished  to  continue   the
             relationship she would be required to return and  it  will  be
             necessary for him to remain and to maintain  the  business  to
             support any entry clearance application made from abroad.

          i)  In  this  context,  the  judge  considered  whether  it   was
             proportionate to expect the Appellant to leave the UK to  make
             an application from abroad. The judge considered the case of R
             (on the application of Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix  F  -Chikwamba-
             temporary separation - proportionality) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  and
             cited paragraphs 39.

          j) The judge concluded at paragraph 37 that he was not  satisfied
             that there would be any significant  interference  with  their
             family life by temporary removal and was  not  satisfied  that
             the  evidence  placed  before  him  indicated  that  temporary
             separation  would  be  disproportionate  in  this   case.   In
             particular there were no children and the parties entered into
             the relationship in the  full  knowledge  that  the  Appellant
             status was unlawful and not simply precarious.  The  applicant
             herself said that there were no real reason she cannot  return
             and apply from Nigeria; a country where she has a  family  and
             her  partner  has  confirmed  that  he   would   support   her
             application.

17. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on 3 August
    2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro refused permission.

18. However on renewal of permission, at Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted
    permission on 17 October 2017 in the following terms:

    "the Appellant seeks permission to appeal, essentially, on the  grounds
    that the first-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider oral evidence and
    erred materially  in  his  factual  understanding  of  the  documentary
    evidence relied upon. It is arguable the judge failed to  consider  the
    evidence before him in the round including  the  oral  and  documentary
    evidence and fell into material error of law."

19. A Rule 24 notice from the Respondent was filed on 3 November  2017.  It
    submitted that the judge found that the  couple  were  not  married  or
    engaged or been living together in a relationship akin to  married  two
    years prior to the application. The judge gave clear reasons for  these
    findings and also finding no compelling circumstances the consideration
    outside of the rules. It is submitted that the judge  drew  sustainable
    conclusions on the facts presented in the grounds amounted to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the findings.

20. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. I  have  given  careful
    consideration to the submissions of each of the advocates.  I  have  to
    consider whether it has been demonstrated that the First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law when reaching its overall decision.

21. The first ground of challenge relates to the findings of fact  made  as
    to length and duration of the relationship. It is  submitted  that  the
    judge fell into error by reaching  the  conclusion  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the parties  had  provided  the  requisite  evidence  to
    demonstrate that they had been living together in a  relationship  akin
    to marriage for a period  of  two  years  preceding  the  date  of  the
    application.

22. The judges' findings on this issue can be summarised as follows:

          a) To meet the requirements the applicant needed  to  demonstrate
             that she is a partner as defined in section  GEN1.2.   However
             the judge found that the applicant and her  partner  were  not
             married or civil  partners  nor  were  they  engaged  as  such
             therefore  she  needed  to  establish  that  she  could   meet
             subsection (iv) that she and her partner had been living in  a
             relationship akin to marriage for at least  two  years  before
             the date  of  the  application,  that  is,  23  November  2015
             therefore the applicant needed to provide  evidence  that  she
             and her partner were living together in  such  a  relationship
             from at least 23 November 2013.

          b) The evidence that had been provided did not establish that she
             had lived with a partner for two years; it consisted of  three
             pieces of evidence her name and three in  her  partner's  name
             with the oldest being September 2014 and this  was  less  than
             two years. There was also a bank statement covering the period
             11th of June 2014- 10th of June 2015 but it  did  not  confirm
             that the applicant was living at the address on city  Road  in
             June 2014 but shows the most current address for the customer.
             The  evidence  submitted  to  the  Respondent  did  not   show
             residence at the address from 23 November 2013 (see  paragraph
             18-19).

          c) The judge considered the evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle.
             There were three mobile phone bills for  the  Appellant  dated
             October - December 2016, a  bank  statement  for  her  partner
             dated 29 December 2015 and a water rates bill dated 6  January
             2017.  None  of  these  demonstrates  living  together  in   a
             relationship akin to marriage for the  two  years  before  the
             application (paragraph 20).

          d) The judge consider the letters in support of paragraph 22 - 34
             of  the  bundle  which  confirmed  the  relationship  and  the
             business interests of the partner and the impact of the  local
             community of Chester but none of them provided evidence of how
             long the Appellant and her partner had been living together is
             required.

          e) The judge found that they were in a genuine  relationship  but
             that the burden of proof was on the applicant  to  demonstrate
             that they were living  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
             marriage the two years before the date of the application. The
             evidence the applicant was that she moved in with her  partner
             in or about July 2013 but she provided no  other  evidence  to
             substantiate this. The only evidence apart  from  the  witness
             statement dated back to September 2014 and did  not  show  the
             required two years prior to the date of the  application.  The
             judge found that in any event, the Appellant and  her  partner
             were living in a room in friends' houses initially  and  there
             is nothing to show that they  had  any  joint  commitments  or
             other matters indicative of a relationship akin  to  marriage.
             The judge also found there was no  evidence  when  they  moved
             into their current accommodation such as a tenancy  agreement;
             the only correspondence the letting agencies dated  2  October
             2014 and it does not indicate when the tenancy started.

          f) Having reviewed the evidence, he was not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant and her partner, was in a relationship, were  living
             together in a relationship akin  to  marriage  the  two  years
             before she made her application on 23 November 2015  therefore
             she could not benefit from section EX1.

23. Mr Pratt in his submissions made reference to the documents within  the
    bundle and  by  reference  to  oral  evidence  given  by  each  of  the
    respective parties. I have therefore considered the  documents  in  the
    light of the findings of fact. Whilst the judge  had  referred  to  the
    documents within the bundle at pages 22 - 34, there was  no  particular
    assessment of the contents of the documents set out at pages  25  -  26
    and 29. The letter at page  25  made  reference  to  the  author  first
    meeting  the  Appellant  in  2012/2013   and   described   the   close,
    affectionate and strong relationship between the parties. It also  made
    reference to them having cohabited  for  several  years  and  that  the
    parties had attended numerous functions together. At page 29 the letter
    made reference to the Appellant being his partner for "almost 5 years".
    Whilst Mr Bates submits that this does not demonstrate when they  first
    met, it seems to me that that evidence should  be  considered  "in  the
    round "when reaching an overall decision on the facts.  In  particular,
    the evidence given by the parties in their written statements that they
    had met in July 2012 and that they began living together at an  address
    in G Avenue before residing together in  the  property  that  they  now
    live. In addition, whilst the judge made reference to the  evidence  of
    the Appellant and her partner, there was no reference to the  terms  of
    that  oral  evidence  when  reaching  a   decision   on   the   factual
    circumstances  and  in  particular  the  length  and  duration  of  the
    relationship. Mr Pratt submits that the oral evidence given was to  the
    effect that they had been living together in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage from July 2013.

24.  The overall decision as to the duration and length of the relationship
    should be made on a consideration of the documentary evidence  and  the
    oral evidence of the parties. Whilst the judge was correct  in  stating
    that the documentary evidence (in the form of bills etc.) was  lacking,
    there was other evidence  which,  when  considered  in  the  round  did
    potentially demonstrate that they had been in a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage for a period in excess of two years. In any event, the date of
    the hearing there was no dispute that they have  been  living  together
    for over two years.

25. As Mr Bates submitted, there was no dispute that the parties were in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship. He therefore submits that even  if
    there was an error it was not material. Mr Pratt submits that the error
    is material because it led to the judge to reach the decision  that  it
    was not  necessary  to  consider  whether  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" under EX1 and that this was a necessary fact-finding  issue.
    Mr Bates submits that it is not material because in substance the judge
    considered at paragraphs  25  -  26  that  there  were  no  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration to Nigeria and  therefore  did  consider
    the issue of insurmountable obstacles.

26. I am satisfied that the error is a material one.  The  judge  expressly
    found at paragraph 23 that because they had not been living together in
    a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  the  two   years   preceding   the
    application, she could not benefit from EX1.

27. Appendix FM, "Family Members", begins with a  general  statement  which
    explains that it sets out the requirements to be met by  those  seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection (para GEN.1.1). It is said to reflect how, under Article  8,
    the balance will be struck between the right to respect for private and
    family life and  the  legitimate  aims  listed  in  article  8(2).  The
    Appendix nevertheless contemplates that the Rules will  not  cover  all
    the circumstances in which a person may have a valid claim to enter  or
    remain in the UK as a result of his or her Article 8 rights. Paragraphs
    GEN.1.10 and GEN.1.11 both make  provision  for  situations  "where  an
    applicant does not meet the requirements of this Appendix as a  partner
    or parent but the decision-maker grants entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter or remain outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds".



28. Section R-LTRP sets out the requirements for limited leave to remain as
    a partner. Certain requirements apply in all cases: for  example,  that
    the applicant meets suitability requirements relating to  such  matters
    as his or  her  criminal  record.  Other  requirements  depend  on  the
    applicant's circumstances. In particular,  under  paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1
    (d), the applicant must not be in the  UK  on  temporary  admission  or
    temporary release, or in breach of immigration  laws  (disregarding  an
    overstay of 28 days or less), unless paragraph EX.1 applies.

29. That paragraph applies if either of two conditions  is  satisfied.  The
    first applies to persons applying for leave to remain as  parents.  The
    second applies to persons, such as the Appellant, who apply  for  leave
    to remain as a partner and reads as follows:

    EX1"(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in the UK or
    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK."

30. EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
    means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
    applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."



31. One of the issues that the Tribunal had to decide  related  to  whether
    the Appellant could return to Nigeria accompanied by  her  partner  and
    whether there were "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life  being
    exercised in Nigeria under EX1(b) or  when  considering  the  issue  of
    family life outside of the rules (see the decision in   Agyarko  [2017]
    UKSC 11).


32. The Supreme Court considered insurmountable obstacles and Article 8 in
    the decision of R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11.


33. At paragraph 43 the court considered the European jurisprudence and
    that the "words "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a
    practical and realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for the family to live
    together in the country of origin of the non-national concerned".


34. However the Court went on to state: "Insurmountable obstacles" is,
    however, the expression employed by the Grand Chamber; and the court's
    application of it indicates that it is a stringent test. In Jeunesse,
    for example, there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles to the
    relocation of the family to Suriname, although the children, the eldest
    of whom was at secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had lived
    there all their lives, had never visited Suriname, and would experience
    a degree of hardship if forced to move, and the applicant's partner was
    in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and 119".


35.  Thus the Court found that the requirement of insurmountable obstacles
    is a stringent test to be met and this was not incompatible with
    Article 8.

36. In conclusion the Court held at [45] "By virtue of paragraph EX.1 (b),
    "insurmountable obstacles" are treated as a requirement for the grant
    of leave under the Rules in cases to which that paragraph applies.
    Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the same sense as in the
    Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally be granted in
    cases where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route
    was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless the applicant or
    their partner would face very serious difficulties in continuing their
    family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
    would entail very serious hardship".


37. When looking at the issue of Article 8 outside the Rules at paragraph
    [48] the Court stated:
    " [48]As has been explained, the Rules are not a summary of the
    European court's case law, but a statement of the Secretary of State's
    policy. That policy is qualified by the scope allowed for leave to
    remain to be granted outside the Rules. If the applicant or his or her
    partner would face very significant difficulties in continuing their
    family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
    would entail very serious hardship, then the "insurmountable obstacles"
    test will be met, and leave will be granted under the Rules. If that
    test is not met, but the refusal of the application would result in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences, such that refusal would not be
    proportionate, then leave will be granted outside the Rules on the
    basis that there are "exceptional circumstances". In the absence of
    either "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as
    defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be incompatible with
    article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and Instructions are
    therefore compatible with article 8. That is not, of course, to say
    that decisions applying the Rules and Instructions in individual cases
    will necessarily be compatible with article 8: that is a question
    which, if a decision is challenged, must be determined independently by
    the court or Tribunal in the light of the particular circumstances of
    each case".


38. Whilst Mr Bates submits that the judge did consider whether there were
    "very significant obstacles" to her reintegration as set out at
    paragraph 26 of the decision, this was not a consideration of
    insurmountable obstacles as it only considered the circumstances of the
    Appellant herself in isolation and not those of her partner; which is
    what the judge noted in paragraph 26 that her relationship with a
    partner was not relevant to the ability to integrate.


39. Furthermore the judge appears to state that the Respondent did not
    seriously suggest that the parties relocate to Nigeria (see paragraph
    34). However that was in fact what the decision letter had set out in
    terms was also a submission made by the presenting officer. Thus it is
    not clear whether the judge did in fact find that there were
    insurmountable obstacles on the facts of the case.




40. I am satisfied that the issue of insurmountable obstacles was an issue
    to be considered when reaching a decision as to whether the decision
    was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ( see section
    84 (1) (c) of the 2002 Act (as amended) ). It is further material on
    the basis of a further submission made by Mr Pratt. He submits that
    there was an element missing from the assessment which related to
    insurmountable obstacles. In this context he submits that there was
    evidence set out in the witness statement of the Appellant's partner
    (see paragraph 11) which gave rise to a level of support provided which
    went beyond normal love and affection. It is not known what finding was
    made in respect of that and there is no reference to the oral evidence
    given on this particular issue.


41. I have therefore considered whether the errors identified above are
    material given the judge's overall finding that the Appellant could
    return to Nigeria and make an application for entry clearance.

42. As the judge correctly observed, Appendix FM does not include
    consideration of the question whether it would be disproportionate to
    expect an individual to return to his home country to make an entry
    clearance application to re-join family members in the U.K. In this
    context the judge properly had regard to the decision of R (on the
    application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department)
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).



43. However what was missing from the assessment of proportionality was
    whether the parties circumstances were such that the requirement to
    leave would be disproportionate. This has been clarified now in the
    decision of the Supreme Court  in Agyarko at paragraph [51]

    "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled to
    remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance of this
    consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration control might
    otherwise be. For example, if an applicant would otherwise be
    automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the weight of the
    public interest in his or her removal will generally be very
    considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in
    the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter,
    at least if an application were made from outside the UK, then there
    might be no public interest in his or her removal. The point is
    illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department."

44. On the facts of this case it is submitted on behalf of the Appellant
    that the financial circumstances of the Appellants partner are such
    that the Appellant will be able to satisfy the requirements. However
    this was not an issue that was considered before the FTT in the way the
    case proceeded. The evidence of the Appellants' partner's business was
    alluded to in general but no specific findings were made in this
    regard.

45. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that this was an issue that was
    relevant to the public interest and the overall balancing exercise
    undertaken by the First-Tier Tribunal as set out in the decision of
    Agyarko.  Effective immigration control is considerably weakened if it
    can be demonstrated that the Appellant and her partner are able to
    support themselves in the United Kingdom at the requisite level as
    required under the rules. As set out in the decision of Agyarko at [51]
    (as cited) notwithstanding her residence in the UK as being unlawful,
    if otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter if an application
    were made, there might be no public interest in her removal. It is a
    factor of some weight which weighs in favour of the Appellant's removal
    being disproportionate when carrying out the balancing exercise. That
    was not an issue that was considered by the FTT when carrying out the
    balance required.

46. For those reasons I am satisfied that the errors made are material to
    the overall decision. As to the remaking of the decision I am satisfied
    that the correct outcome is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal so that further findings of fact can be made on the issue
    of insurmountable obstacles and the financial circumstances of the
    parties to reach an overall decision on the issue of proportionality.

DECISION:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; the  decision  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing in accordance
    with the Practice Direction.




[pic]
Signed                              Date: 30th December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds







