
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05166/2015
                                                               HU/08939/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                            |On 18 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                 HHJ STACEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, solicitor, Kesar & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we have maintained the anonymity order which remains in  place
since this decision refers to the circumstances of  young  children.  Unless
the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the original appellant. This direction applies to, amongst  others,
all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

In an 'error of law' decision promulgated on 27 November 2018, Andrews J
and UTJ Plimmer set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT')
(Judge Beach) issued on 16 December 2017, which allowed MJ's appeal on
Article 8 ECHR grounds and ordered the decision to be re-made by the Upper
Tribunal ('UT').

We now re-make the substantive decision whether MJ's appeal against the
Secretary of State for the Home Department's ('SSHD') decision issued on 16
December 2017 should be allowed or dismissed on human rights grounds.  MJ's
asylum application is no longer pursued and his appeal against the refusal
of his asylum claim is formally dismissed.

Preliminary Issues

The UT previously directed that up to date expert evidence in relation to
the matters set out below should be served by 25 October 2019:

          i) MJ's partner's (AJ) current mental health, treatment and the
             likely impact of MJ's deportation on her mental health and her
             ability to care for her children; and

         ii) An assessment of the children's current circumstances by an
             independent social worker ('ISW') addressing in particular the
             history of and current extent of the family and other support
             available to AJ to assist her generally and in caring for her
             children (in particular including interviewing AJ's mother
             regarding the history of and current arrangements for helping
             with the children).

Whilst the ISW's report was served in time in compliance with directions,
the report of Dr Halari was served the day before the hearing on 4 November
2019. Mr Smyth explained that Dr Halari had been delayed in completing her
report as she had been on holiday but his firm had been diligent in chasing
the doctor for the completed report. It had been forwarded to the SSHD as
soon as it had been received in his office yesterday. He apologised for the
delay and sought an extension of time pursuant to rules 5(3)(a) and 15 of
the Tribunal (UT) Procedure Rules 2008 (as amended). Ms Everett had no
objection to the extension of time requested to comply with the order.  She
explained that the SSHD was not prejudiced by the late service of the
report and she needed no adjournment or further time to consider it. In the
circumstances, we granted MJ permission to rely upon the medical report of
Dr Halari.

Background history

The background is succinctly set out in paragraphs 2-7 of the 'error of
law' decision. MJ, an Afghani national, who's date of birth is 2 January
1992, arrived in the UK as an unaccompanied minor on 1 November 2006 aged
14 and claimed asylum the next day.  He was granted discretionary leave to
remain ('DL') until January 2010 (given his status as a minor) and his
immigration status has been precarious at best thereafter.

MJ was granted DL following a human rights application, on the basis that
he had formed a relationship with a young woman British national, AJ, with
whom he has a child J-MJ (born in 2011).  This DL expired on 2 March 2014.
AJ has another child, E-RJ (born in 2013) for whom MJ has accepted parental
responsibility since her birth.

MJ was convicted of battery and sentenced to a community order which
expired on 26 September 2013.  On 18 March 2014 he was convicted of
harassment in the Magistrates Court and received a further community order
and was made subject to a restraining order. Both offences were connected
with AJ. He failed to comply with aspects of his community order and was
sentenced to 50 days imprisonment on 17 June 2014.

MJ's application for further leave to remain was refused by the SSHD on 11
March 2015 and his appeal to the FTT dismissed, but on appeal to the UT he
was successful in so far as the matter was remitted to the FTT.

Meanwhile however MJ pleaded guilty to offences of possession with intent
to supply class A (cocaine) and class B (cannabis) drugs and was sentenced
to an immediate custodial sentence of 20 months at Canterbury Crown Court
in August 2016.

Following a hearing in the UT on 19 June 2017, the UT directed that in the
light of new evidence produced by MJ and bearing in mind that he was now
potentially subject to deportation, the matter be remitted for re-hearing
before the FTT, which is how the matter came before Judge Beach.  MJ was
issued with a deportation order in accordance with s. 32(5) UK Borders Act
2007 as a foreign criminal sentenced to a custodial sentence of more than
12 months which was served at the same time as the decision dated 8 August
2017 refusing his human rights claim.

Judge Beach dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds, but allowed it on
Article 8 grounds. She held, having weighed all the evidence, that the
effect of MJ's deportation would be unduly harsh on the children: both J-MJ
and E-RJ. The FTT was particularly concerned about AJ's mental health
condition and her ability to cope with the children if MJ were to be
deported and the absence of support networks to assist her.

The SSHD's appeal against the finding of undue harshness was successful.
In its error of law decision the UT concluded that there was insufficient
information for the FTT to have concluded, as it did, that AJ's support
networks would not still be available were MJ to leave the jurisdiction and
the FTT had failed to take into account material considerations and weigh
them in the balance.

Issues in dispute

It was common ground that MJ and AJ have a genuine and subsisting, albeit
somewhat volatile, relationship and that AJ is a qualifying partner (as
defined in s.117D(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
('the 2002 Act')), and that J-MJ and E-RJ are both qualifying children as
defined in that section.

It was conceded by the SSHD that it would be unduly harsh to expect AJ and
the children to emigrate to Afghanistan. The issue was therefore narrowed
to s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act and Immigration Rule paragraph 399(b) and the
assessment of whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain
in the UK without MJ. It is only if the answer to this issue is resolved
against MJ that we need to consider whether the effect of MJ's deportation
would be unduly harsh upon AJ and alternatively s. 117C(6).

Although not expressly stated, it is apparent from the UT judgment that the
underlying facts found by the FTT were preserved. The material error of law
was limited to the FTT's conclusion that support networks that were
available to AJ whilst MJ was in prison, would no longer be available were
he to be deported, without a sufficient evidential basis for reaching that
conclusion. The UT judgment did not disturb the findings of fact made by
the FTT. Ms Everett did not seek to re-open the previous findings.

It is now exactly 2 years since the FTT decision was heard on 7 November
2017 (the decision being promulgated on 4 January 2018). The re-making of
the decision will therefore require findings of fact to be made on the
fresh evidence to ascertain the current position and the consideration of
the extent of the current support network available to AJ, if MJ is
deported to Afghanistan.

The legal framework

MJ is a foreign criminal sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 12 months
or more.  This requires a consideration of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of
the Immigration Rules.  These are reflected within section 117C of the 2002
Act, which states as follows:

The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater
is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest requires
C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

Exception 1 applies where-

(a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,

(b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the partner
or child would be unduly harsh.

In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period of
imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

The relevant test of "undue harshness" as set out in Exception 2 above is
broken down into two parts in paragraph 399(a)(ii), so that it applies
where:

"(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which
the person is to be deported; and

(b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
person who is to be deported."

In light of the SSHD's concession that it would be unduly harsh for AJ and
the children to relocate to Afghanistan, only the second limb of 399 set
out at (b) above, as reflected in s. 117C(5),  requires consideration, as
far as the children are concerned.

KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 sets out the correct approach to 399(b)
and s. 117C(5).  In the only judgment Lord Carnwath said this at [23]:

"One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would
necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
parent. What it does not require in my view (and subject to the discussion
of the cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of
severity of the parent's offence, other than is inherent in the distinction
drawn by the section itself by reference to the length of sentence."

Lord Carnwath also approved of the guidance given regarding the term unduly
harsh in MK Sierra Leone v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).  In that case the
then President said this.

"We are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable,
inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a
considerably more elevated threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes
something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis of pleasant or
comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an
already elevated standard still higher."

It is therefore now clear from KO that the assessment of "unduly harsh"
does not require a balancing of the relative level of severity of the
parent's offence.   The assessment solely requires a careful consideration
of whether the elevated threshold is reached from the point of view of
either the child or partner.  If that threshold is met then deportation
would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR and no further analysis is
required.

In BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357 the Court of Appeal concluded
that the Tribunal did not undertake a sufficient inquiry into whether there
was any other family member who could be able to care for his children and
emphasised the need to consider the extent to which social services would
be able to assist in reducing the adverse impact of the children losing
their father to deportation at [53].

"What the UT did in the course of their detailed and no doubt conscientious
decision was to accept KS's son's evidence that KS could not manage her
money and drank more that was good for her and made the inference that
without BL the family would descend into poverty and require the support of
social services. As against this, however, KS had looked after the family
while BL was in prison or immigration detention and the UT had not made any
findings that the family had then descended into poverty or required the
support of social services, or that if that were to happen, there would not
be adequate support services for these children. The UT were entitled to
work on the basis that the social services would perform their duties under
the law and, contrary to the submission of Mr Rudd, the UT was not bound in
these circumstances to regard the role of the social services as
irrelevant. The Secretary of State had made the point in the decision
letter that there was no satisfactory evidence that KS had not coped with
the children's upbringing in BL's absence and so the UT were aware that
this point was in issue. KS's son's evidence was an insufficient evidential
basis for the UT's conclusion on this point. His evidence was in reality
uncorroborated and self-serving hearsay on this issue."



It is for the MJ to prove that it would be unduly harsh for his children to
remain in the UK without him and thereby in breach of their Article 8
rights. In a case such as this, it is conducive to the public good and in
the public interest for foreign criminals to be deported unless the high
test of undue hardship is met, as far as Exception 2 is concerned. If,
after a careful evaluation of the consequences for the children, MJ can
establish that the elevated threshold in Exception 2 is met, his appeal
must be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

In the re-making of a decision our task is to consider the circumstances as
at the date of the hearing.

The hearing

At the beginning of the hearing both parties agreed that AJ should be
treated as a vulnerable witness in the light of Dr Halari's report, which
we refer to in more detail below.

We had before us a consolidated bundle, a supplementary bundle and the
medical report of Dr Halari dated 2 November 2019, following an assessment
on 19 October 2019 and the expert reports of the ISW Mrs Sue Justice dated
respectively 10 June 2019 and 9 October 2019.   Witness statements from MJ,
AJ and AJ's sister NJ were before us. MJ and AJ both gave evidence, and
both confirmed the accuracy of their witness statements of 28 February 2019
and 24 October 2019 (MJ) and 19 February and 23 October 2019 (AJ).  They
were both carefully cross examined by Ms Everett. Neither was in the
hearing room when the other gave evidence. MJ consented to the proceedings
continuing in his absence while AJ gave evidence so that he could look
after the children outside the hearing room and AJ was with the children
outside the hearing for the duration of the hearing apart from when giving
evidence.

Mr Smyth for the Appellant relied on his written skeleton argument and oral
submissions. The Respondent accepted that the facts had changed
considerably from the SSHD's decision letter of 8 August 2017, but
submitted that it remained relevant and she also made oral submissions.

We reserved our decision, which we now give with reasons.

Submissions

The SSHD continued to rely on her decision letter. Ms Everett accepted that
the relationship between AJ and MJ is genuine, but referred to the evidence
of the volatility in the relationship. Although MJ is fully involved in
family life, insufficient detail was provided to meet the high threshold of
undue hardship. MJ had little detailed knowledge of, for example, the name
of J-MJ's teacher at school and lacked focus as a parent. Dr Halari 's
report was holistic, rather than providing specific details and did not
address the effect of the volatility of the relationship. In summary
notwithstanding the impact MJ's absence will have, the elevated threshold
was not met. Ms H whilst not supporting AJ's relationship with MJ, would
support her daughter if needed in emergencies.

Mr Smyth submitted that there would be tremendous adversity if MJ was
deported. Both experts' clear and unambiguous professional opinions in 2019
were that the impact on AJ's ability to care for the children in the
absence of MJ was serious, which was  also consistent with the experts
instructed previously in 2017. AJ's fragile mental health meant that in
MJ's absence she would not cope and the effect of the subsequent
shortcomings in her parenting would be serious indeed, through no fault of
her own. The elevated threshold had been met.

He also argued that there were additional factors in the event that s.
117C(5) was not met and he was required to rely on very compelling
circumstances pursuant to s.117C(6).

Evidence

We note that the factual matrix up to November 2017 is as set out in the
FTT judgment. Since then, the relationship between AJ and MJ has continued
and she is now pregnant expecting her third child on 13 November 2019. She
has obtained a housing association flat in Kemsley, near Sittingbourne,
Kent which the family moved into from their previous address in Canterbury
in December 2018, 25 miles away. J-MJ moved to the infant school in the
village. E-RJ has not yet obtained a school place, although should be in
Year 1 and is therefore having to be home educated by AJ and MJ while a
place becomes available. J-MJ has behavioural and mental well-being issues
that are being diagnosed. She was accepted for referral to the Kent
Children and Young People's Mental Health Services (CYPMHS) in October 2018
and she was passed to the ADHD screening team. There was delay in the
screening assessment following the family's move to Kemsley which took
place in October 2019 and is awaited.

The move to Kemsley means that AJ is now 30 minutes' drive away from her
maternal grandparents in Canterbury, who previously provided considerable
support and who were closely involved in AJ's own upbringing. However she
is closer to Ms H, her mother's house. Ms H does not get on with MJ, but
she seeks to preserve a relationship with her daughter and grandchildren
and AJ and the children visit Ms H most weekends. Ms H, still works full
time and also cares for her husband who has recently undergone spinal
surgery and needs considerable care at home.

Dr Rozmin Halari, consultant clinical psychologist, BSc, MSc, PhD,
C.Psychol, DClinPsych, DClinHyp, AFBPS, examined AJ on 19 October 2019 and,
separately, interviewed MJ. We accepted her findings which were broadly
consistent with the opinions of the other expert witnesses in this case.
She noted that AJ remains under the care of the Swale community mental
health team and agreed with the diagnosis of emotionally unstable
personality disorder/borderline personality disorder. Using the
standardised assessment (the Hamilton depression and anxiety rating scale)
she found that AJ currently also fulfils the diagnostic criteria for
moderate to severe depression. She is said to be extremely vulnerable at
present because she is not taking any medication for her mental health
because of her pregnancy and is displaying symptoms of increased
tearfulness, poor sleep, poor appetite, negative thinking and constant
rumination about the current situation. She is also assessed at being at
risk of experiencing a further period of postnatal depression following the
birth of her newborn child.

Dr Halari concluded that AJ is highly reliant on MJ for support and
assistance in managing both her mental health symptoms and also with care
for the children. AJ described MJ as "brilliant" with the children and in
particular is able to manage the extreme mood swings of J-MJ who is
currently awaiting the outcome of an ADHD assessment. MJ has a close and
positive bond with both children and provides considerable emotional
support.

Dr Halari noted that AJ is very fearful indeed of how she will cope if MJ
leaves the jurisdiction. AJ described to Dr Halari that being with MJ has
provided with stability previously unknown to her and that if he left she
would break down and self-harm. She describes him as the only person that
understands her and without him would find it still harder to manage her
emotions. Dr Halari considers that AJ's fear that she would not be able to
care for the children alone is accurate. A deterioration in AJ's mental
health is likely to be precipitated by feelings of loneliness, rejection
and abandonment which would occur if MJ were to be deported. She would find
it very difficult to cope mentally, emotionally and psychologically. MJ has
the ability to develop a good understanding of AJ's difficulties and when
she displays low mood or mood swings or personality difficulties he has
developed appropriate and positive ways of managing this, for example, by
giving her space, taking care of the children and providing her with
emotional support.

The positive relationship which is characterised by mutual understanding
and respect has enabled AJ to develop an appropriate and therapeutic level
of insight into her difficulties which in turn is aiding her psychological
recovery. Disrupting this stable system is likely to have a significant
detrimental impact on AJ and her relationship with the children. Dr Halari
concludes that the relationship is serving as a protective factor for AJ
but that she would experience a significant deterioration in her mental
health were he to be removed from the jurisdiction, her symptoms of
depression and anxiety are likely to worsen and she would be at moderate to
high risk of self harm and destruction.  Dr Halari was concerned about the
impact this would have on the quality of the parenting that AJ would be
able to provide to her children. The exposure of the children to their
mother's poor mental health combined with their own inevitable significant
distress due to the absence of their father and the change in parenting,
would result in significant distress for the children.

AJ's half-sister, NJ remains supportive of her sister and this appeal. NJ
confirmed that MJ provides considerable help to AJ and he looks after the
children, for example taking them to the park and the beach, in order to
give AJ a rest and he helps around the home. NJ observed that MJ is the
only one who can calm down J-MJ when she gets upset. In her further
statement of 5 March 2019 she states that when MJ was in prison AJ found it
very difficult to raise the children, was extremely stressed and found it
difficult to cope. She is concerned that MJ's deportation would have a
serious effect on her sister's mental health and she noted the positive
change in mood when MJ returned to the family home after being released
from prison. AJ relies on MJ to help with the children and NJ considers
that MJ is genuine about the children. NJ is now living in London at
university and unable to provide the level of support to her sister that
she previously provided when she was at school and living nearby.

The ISW, Mrs Sue Justice, interviewed AJ, MJ and NJ separately in face to
face meetings and spoke to AJ's mother MSH over the telephone. She also
spent time observing MJ with the two children. Her assessment of AJ is that
she is currently feeling very stressed and under considerable pressure due
to a combination of factors, including being pregnant with her third child,
the financial worries of managing on just benefits and the uncertainty
caused by MJ's immigration status and the Tribunal proceedings. This is
compounded by needing to home educate E-RJ whilst she awaits a school
place. She noted that following the move to Kemsley, AJ no longer has her
maternal grandparents upon whom she relies considerably nearby and that her
main support is now from MJ. Like Dr Halari, Mrs Justice also considers
that AJ would be very significantly affected if MJ were to be removed from
the jurisdiction and her ability to care for the two children and the new
baby when born is likely to be compromised. She concluded that AJ has very
limited support available due to her mother working full time and her
sister being in London at University. Her opinion is that MJ's absence
would have an impact on AJ's ability to care for the children.

Mrs Justice considered that MJ has struggled in the past in knowing how to
be a parent, but is currently doing his best to be supportive of AJ and
helps out in practical ways such as cooking and taking the children out.

The assessment of Mrs Justice is that both the girls would be adversely
affected if MJ were to leave the jurisdiction. She believes they would
experience great distress and sadness at not seeing him and they have a
deep, close and loving relationship. They were distressed when separated
from him when he was in prison, but AJ took them to visit him twice weekly
which mitigated the effects of the separation.

Mrs Justice considered that AJ would require a much higher level of
practical and emotional support than the family would be able to provide in
MJ's absence. AJ's mother, Mrs H works full-time, NJ is now away at
university and the maternal grandparents are further away in Canterbury.
She considered that the letters of Dr Ana Draper of 12th of September 2016
and Dr James Hinksman of 6 September 2016 which also concluded that AJ's
mental health would be negatively impacted by MJ's absence remained true
today. AJ would be deprived of a practical source of support at a
particularly important time with the impending arrival of her third child.

Following completion of Mrs Justice's initial report on 10th of June 2019,
Mrs Justice spoke to Ms H, AJ's mother, by telephone. Ms H stated she stood
by her original letter and spoke of the volatility of the relationship
between AJ and MJ. She described them as always arguing and bickering and
referred back to the pilgrimage that MJ had undertaken shortly after J-MJ
was born. She described a further incident of domestic violence in February
2019 when AJ had called her saying MJ was trying to get back into the house
after he had left. She said that MJ was hardly ever at home and she did not
believe that he helped AJ when he was there, so that 80-90% of the time AJ
was looking after the children on her own. She said that she had always
provided support to her daughter and that included AJ and J-MJ living with
her when J-MJ was very young. Although working full time she would be able
to respond to requests for help when she was not working, were MJ to leave
the jurisdiction. She did not mention her caring obligations for her
husband.

Mrs Justice had a follow-up interview over the telephone with AJ in light
of the information provided by her mother. AJ explained that the pilgrimage
in 2011 had been planned for a long time and it was purely bad timing that
it happened when J-MJ was very young and she had supported MJ's pilgrimage.
She confirmed that they had had a big argument in January 2019 which was
due to how AJ was feeling at the time and the pressure she felt because of
the continuing immigration proceedings and all the uncertainty. There was
no physical violence between them and the police were not involved. They
have been together for a long time and wish to be together and be parents
to the two children and the new baby. MJ does play football and goes to
Canterbury to see his friends and sometimes he stays over with them. It
suits AJ, as she wants time to herself which is helpful with her struggles
with her moods. She was very content with the arrangements between herself
and MJ. She confirmed that she visits her mother weekly and MJ does not go
with her. Her mother would help if she had to, but she has a full time job.
AJ does not feel supported by her mother in the same way emotionally and
practically as she is by MJ.

In light of the further information, from Ms H and AJ, Mrs Justice
reconsidered her earlier report, but stated that her conclusions remained
the same: she remained very concerned about the impact on AJ's mental
health and ability to cope with the care of three children if MJ were to be
removed from the jurisdiction and she did not consider that Ms H would be
able to provide the level of support that AJ may need.

In AJ's further statement she described her precarious and fragile mental
health and explained that the only reason why she considers she is coping
well is because she had MJ with her most of the time and that he provides
the kind of support that cannot be replaced by occasional, short visits or
telephone calls from family. She re-iterated her anxiety about the
impending birth of her child and her ability to cope without him.  She also
referred to her mother's own caring duties for her husband (AJ's
stepfather) who is recovering from major neck surgery and is extremely
frail.

MJ's further witness statements reinforced a picture of a loving and
supportive partner who has a close bond with the children. In cross-
examination MJ provided further detail of the assistance he provides at
home doing all the cooking, especially now that AJ is pregnant and the
smell of food makes her nauseous. There is a routine in place whereby AJ
takes J-MJ to school while he stays at home looking after E-RJ. He helps
with the home schooling of E-RJ with online educational computer games.
Notwithstanding Ms Everett's probing cross-examination, we accept that MJ
is clearly fully involved in all aspects of the children's lives and
household tasks. He was familiar with the names of J-MJ's friends and spoke
of trips, for example to Howlett's zoo with the children. He was diffident
and anxious as a witness but became more relaxed and animated when talking
about the children, and was able to describe in detail the home routine in
which he is fully involved, down to M-JM's preference for packed lunches
made by AJ because of the way she cuts the bread. As the experts had noted,
he lit up when he spoke of the children.

AJ confirmed the extent of the help provided at home by MJ - the cooking
(apart from J-MJ's school packed lunches), washing up, hoovering, sorting
the children out and taking them out. She confirmed he played football and
went to see friends in Canterbury and sometimes stayed over but she enjoyed
the time to herself and space, especially since they spend so much time
together at home since he is prohibited from working and finances are very
tight.

In terms of support networks her mother is unable to provide day-to-day
help because of her full-time job and need to care for her husband, her
sister is now at university and unable to visit weekly as before and since
the family moved to Kemsley, Sittingbourne, she is now 30 minutes drive
away from her maternal grandmother who is less able to drive than before.

Discussion and conclusions: Evidential dispute

There is a dispute of fact between the evidence of Ms H as against the
evidence of AJ, MJ and NJ as to the extent of MJ's assistance with the
children and the quality of the relationship between AJ and MJ. Ms H is a
lone voice, whose evidence ran counter to that of all the other witnesses
who had first-hand knowledge of MJ's involvement with the children. NJ, who
we accept was unable to attend the hearing today because of her university
commitments, gives a clear and measured independent account in her
statement. She frankly explains that she tries not to have too much of an
opinion on MJ, so her first hand evidence that MJ is genuine about the
children and the reliance her sister places on MJ for help look after the
children is all the more powerful. She is also well placed to make the
assessment having spent so much time with the family over a number of
years.

Ms H, on the other hand, does not see MJ with the children, but only sees
AJ when she takes the children to see her. Ms H therefore has therefore had
limited opportunity to see AJ and MJ functioning as a family together with
their children or the couple's relationship together.

Ms H, for whatever reason, does not like her daughter's partner, and it is
noteworthy that in her telephone conversation with Mrs Justice she chose to
refer again to MJ's pilgrimage some 7-8 years ago, and she has been
selective in the examples she has provided which we do not find portray an
objectively accurate picture of the relationship over the last few years.
AJ's detailed account of the row the couple had had in January as only a
row, was convincing and we did not accept that it was violent, as alleged
by Ms H who was not a witness to the incident. NJ makes no mention of it in
her statement, although was present according to Ms H. We do not accept Ms
H's characterisation of it as accurate.

We found AJ to be an honest and genuine witness, She agreed that the
relationship with MJ was sometimes rocky and could be volatile, but she has
also consistently described it as supportive and stable and that they are
devoted to each other and the children and are both doing their best and
are largely succeeding. The common assault and harassment conviction of
2012 and 2013 is of course concerning, but we accept that this type of
behaviour has not been repeated, although they do still argue and have rows
from time to time.  The two experts were fully aware of MJ's criminal
history and his common assault of AJ from the information contained in
their letters of instruction. They have not drawn attention to any concerns
in this regard. We agree with the FTT's observations that MJ had been able
to reflect on his offending and the impact it had on others, social
services had no concerns and there had been no suggestion of any further
domestic abuse incidents. MJ has impressed the prison and probation
services with his progress in rehabilitation terms. The OASys assessment of
minimal risk of re-offending in the pre-sentence report has been borne out
by events. MJ's motivation to remain drug free and not to offend together
with his insight into the reasons for his offending have been maintained.
Having considered all the evidence in the round, including MJ's offending
against AJ in the past, we accept that he has demonstrated over a lengthy
period since that time, that he is a devoted father to and very positive
influence upon the two children and his partner to AJ.

MJ and NJ's evidence was consistent with that of AJ and the opinion of the
experts. We also note that the three combined factors of the uncertainty
surrounding MJ's status and the lengthy immigration proceedings; AJ's
pregnancy; and their straitened financial circumstances and MJ's
frustration at not presently being able to provide for the family
financially, will have placed additional strain on the relationship. The
relationship has been able to withstand these additional pressures over an
extended period and the relationship has lasted for a decade.

We therefore reject Ms H's assertion that MJ is rarely at home and her
account of a dysfunctional relationship between AJ and MJ.  We do not
accept Ms H's contention that that he does not support AJ or help with the
children. NJ's account of the change in her sister and the effect on her
when MJ was in prison was compelling. We accept the expert evidence from Dr
Halari and the Mrs Justice (ISW) and AJ's own evidence that AJ's mental
health is such that her ability to care for the children is significantly
improved by his presence at home. The fresh evidence before us was also
consistent with the evidence before the FTT.

We accept that Ms H seeks to be supportive of her grandchildren and
daughter (notwithstanding her views of MJ), but the constraints of her full
time job and the poor health of her husband (which it is interesting to
note she did not mention to Mrs Justice) mean that she has very limited
capacity to help.  We therefore accept that for varying reasons there is no
member of AJ's family able to provide the necessary support to either her
or the children to enable her to continue to parent them effectively.

Discussion and conclusion: evaluative exercise

It goes without saying that where, as here, AJ and MJ and the children
function well as a family unit and both girls have a close and significant
relationship with MJ, that the best interests of the children will be for
their father to remain a part of the family in the UK. But that is clearly
not enough to establish undue hardship: and it is by no means
determinative, see KO. More is required, something beyond what would
necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
parent. The grief and loss at being separated from their father (in E-RJ's
case not her biological father, but for all intents and purposes treated as
her father and she believes he is her father) will be accompanied by being
looked after by a mother whose mental health is likely significantly to
deteriorate. We note that AJ will be entitled to assistance from social
services, but this is not a case in which social services can provide any
obvious or easily implementable support in order to obviate the likely
significant deterioration in AJ's mental health, in the absence of MJ.

Even with the support of social services, the children are likely to be
caused significant upset and suffering as a result of the combination of
the absence of their father and their mother's mental health deterioration.
 In this case it is not just that MJ is the provider of stability,
security, emotional support to both children and AJ, but that without him
being present, AJ's ability to care for the children will be very seriously
compromised.

The expert reports of Dr Halari and Mrs Justice are united in their opinion
that the impact on the children of MJ's removal in the particular and
unusual circumstances of the case because of AJ's fragile mental health and
her extensive reliance on him for emotional and practical support, and the
consequent deterioration of her mental health that would follow if he were
deported would be devastating.

AJ has a lack of sufficient and viable support networks, and there is less
help available now than the support available when MJ was in custody for a
number of reasons. Firstly the ill-health of her step-father has further
limited the availability of her mother Ms H, secondly the absence of NJ now
away at university and, thirdly, the reduced availability of support from
AJ's maternal grandparents following the family's move to Kemsley.
Previously, the tri-partite assistance provided by the three generations of
family members together with the frequent prison visits and knowledge that
MJ would be released after serving up to 10 months of his sentence,
provided sufficient support for AJ to continue caring for her children
during the period of MJ's incarceration. The support network available
previously has therefore deteriorated markedly since 2017.

The difficulties will be compounded by the arrival of a third child due on
13 November 2019, when AJ will be the mother of three children under the
age of 9. A further relevant factor is the challenging behavioural needs of
J-MJ and MJ's skill at managing her suspected ADHD and anxiety.

We also find the effect on AJ would be unduly harsh. The likely significant
deterioration in her mental health will be increased by the stress and
anxiety of parenting on her own. We also note that given the evidence Ms H
has provided in these proceedings the relationship between mother and
daughter will become more strained, just at a time when AJ will most need
help. AJ will also endure seeing the suffering of the elder children that
will affect her further at a time when her attention to them will be being
shared with the new baby.

Our primary focus however is the devastating effect upon AJ's ability to
care for the children if MJ is deported, which will be far above and beyond
the obvious distress caused by the break up of a family.  Mrs Justice
explains that as with any young children, the loss of their father with
whom they have very strong emotional bonds will likely lead to their
feeling abandoned or deserted and that he no longer loves them as they are
too young fully to understand what is happening and AJ and MJ have been
careful to shield them and not tell them about these proceedings. But in
this case, that would be compounded by the highly likely significant
deterioration of AJ's mental health which would result in her ability to
care for her children being severely compromised, at a time both when her
support networks are considerably diminished and she will have just given
birth.

Balancing and carefully weighing all the relevant factors, we conclude that
the effect of MJ's deportation on the children is likely to be unduly
severe and bleak and reaches the elevated threshold demanded by the unduly
harsh test.

In the light of our conclusion on s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act, there is no
need to consider the matters raised by Mr Smyth in relation to s.117C(6).

We allow the appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

We re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed:                                          Date:  13 November 2019
HHJ Stacey
