
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/09350/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On: 24 October 2017                      |On: 06 November 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 MEMET KURT
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:            Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Swaniker promulgated on 12 May 2017, in which his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to issue him entry clearance under  the
    family reunion rules, to join his spouse in the United Kingdom  ('UK'),
    was dismissed on human rights grounds.

Background facts

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  His spouse ('the  Sponsor')  and
    their two children were granted leave to remain in the UK  as  refugees
    in September 2013.  This followed a successful appeal before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker.  Judge Walker's decision was promulgated  on  10
    January 2012.  He accepted the credibility of  the  Sponsor's  account,
    and made the following findings at [34]:


          i) The Sponsor and her family came from a Kurdish area with links
             to the PKK;
         ii) The Sponsor and this Appellant are both Kurds who provided
             food and shelter to the PKK;
        iii) They were both arrested and then convicted on 24 March 2011,
             of aiding and abetting the PKK;
         iv) They were both sentenced to over six years imprisonment but
             lodged appeals;
          v) The Appellant remained in custody from the time of the arrest
             but the Sponsor was released on bail during the criminal
             proceedings and pending appeal, but left Turkey in 2011, with
             her children before the criminal appeal was determined;
         vi) If returned to Turkey the Sponsor faces a real risk of
             persecution.


 3. The Appellant claims to have been released from prison in 2014 and made
    the application for entry clearance to join his wife  and  children  in
    the UK in an  application  submitted  online  on  24  June  2015.   The
    Respondent refused to grant him entry clearance on the  basis  that  he
    had been convicted of an offence in relation to which he  was  given  a
    custodial sentence of  at  least  four  years,  and  his  exclusion  is
    conducive to the public good for the purposes of para  320(19)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and there would be no breach of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention  on  Human  Rights  ('ECHR').   This  decision  was
    maintained by the entry clearance manager,  and  in  grounds  dated  20
    October 2015 the Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.


 4. The  bundle  before  Judge  Swaniker  contained  an  'updated'  witness
    statement from the Sponsor.  This  repeated  much  of  the  information
    already summarised above in Judge Walker's decision, save that  instead
    of relying upon the initial claim that she fled Turkey whilst on  bail,
    pending appeal, the statement says this (our emphasis):


         "In 2010, I and my husband faced accusations which lead to criminal
         charges for aiding and abetting the PKK.  My husband was  sentenced
         to 6 years and 3 months however I was cleared and fled Turkey  with
         my two sons arriving in the UK in July 2011."

First-tier Tribunal hearing

 5. The Sponsor's evidence before Judge Swaniker is summarised  at  [7]  to
    [8] of the decision.  The Sponsor gave oral evidence through a  Turkish
    interpreter.   She  confirmed  that  she  remembered  saying  what  was
    contained in her witness statement, it was translated to  her  and  she
    was happy to rely upon it.


 6. Judge Swaniker summarised the evidence  provided  by  the  Sponsor,  as
    translated by the interpreter in the following  manner.    The  Sponsor
    was referred to her witness statement and asked the date that  she  was
    "cleared".  She gave an answer that tended to  indicate  her  name  was
    cleared in 2011 and she then came to the UK, but was  then  asked  what
    she meant by her name being cleared.  The response to this is difficult
    to follow.  The Judge then asked the Sponsor to clarify  what  happened
    to her case in Turkey, given that she had said she  was  cleared.   She
    then said there was an appeal to a higher court and she came to the  UK
    before that concluded.


 7. After this, Judge Swaniker records the interpreter as  having  "advised
    that there may be a problem with the Turkish  word  'tem'  which  meant
    'clean', but when spelt/expressed with a 'y' could also mean 'appeal'".
     There is nothing to indicate that the judge took any steps  to  ensure
    that the Sponsor and the  interpreter  fully  understood  one  another,
    after the interpreter identified  this  'problem'.   The  sponsor  then
    repeated her claim that before her appeal was concluded she came to the
    UK.


First-tier Tribunal findings


 8. Judge Swaniker concluded that the  sponsor's  overall  credibility  was
    tainted  and  undermined  by   her   inconsistent   accounts   of   her
    circumstances in Turkey before coming to the  UK  and  her  evasiveness
    regarding the outcome of the case against  her  [14].   In  particular,
    Judge Swaniker was concerned that the evidence in the witness statement
    and the initial oral evidence was to the effect that the Sponsor's name
    had been cleared, yet her evidence before Judge  Walker  was  that  she
    left Turkey when she was on bail, pending an appeal.


 9. Judge Swaniker indicated that he was  grateful  for  the  interpreter's
    assistance as to the different meanings of  the  word  'tem'  at  [15],
    however noted, inter alia, that the sponsor confirmed at the  onset  of
    her oral testimony  that  she  remembered  everything  in  her  witness
    statement.  Judge Swaniker made a finding of fact that the sponsor  was
    cleared of the charges against her and  that  her  discrepant  evidence
    regarding this, tainted her overall reliability as a witness.

10. As set out at [17] onwards, it is against that  background  that  Judge
    Swaniker considered and dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of appeal

11. In grounds settled by Counsel, the  appellant  submitted:  first,  that
    Judge Swaniker erred in law in failing to treat Judge Walker's decision
    as the starting point in accordance with Devaseelan v SSHD  [2003]  Imm
    AR 1; and second, there was a  failure  to  address  the  interpreter's
    intervention that there was a 'problem' with the English translation of
    an important part of the Sponsor's evidence.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission on both grounds.


Hearing

12. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Tarlow agreed with the  provisional
    view  we  expressed  regarding  the  second  ground  of   appeal.    He
    acknowledged that the error goes to the 'heart  of  the  determination'
    and that notwithstanding what is said within the rule  24  notice,  the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


13. Mr Tarlow was entirely correct to make this concession for the  reasons
    we set out below.  Given this concession, we do not need to address the
    first ground of appeal and can set out our reasoning for  allowing  the
    appeal on the second ground, succinctly.

Discussion

14. Judge Swaniker made a finding that  the  Sponsor's  evidence  contained
    discrepancies without clearly identifying or understanding the evidence
    she actually provided.  Having noted the  interpreter's  'advice'  that
    there may be a 'problem' with the translation of a  particular  Turkish
    word and that it might mean 'clean' or 'appeal', the judge was  obliged
    to clarify with the Sponsor and the interpreter, whether any, and if so
    which, aspects of the Sponsor's evidence may have been misunderstood or
    interpreted inaccurately.  Where, as here, evidence is provided through
    an  interpreter  who  has  acknowledged  a  degree  of  confusion   and
    misunderstanding  going  to  a  pivotal  potential  discrepancy,   that
    evidence cannot properly support or act as a foundation stone  for  any
    viable material discrepancy.


15. We note that the witness statement itself states that the Sponsor  'was
    cleared'.  However, the accuracy of that  translation  is  called  into
    question by the interpreter's indication that 'clear' might be confused
    with 'appeal'.  Indeed, the Sponsor only confirmed that her  statement,
    as translated to her, was true. Contrary to the observations  of  Judge
    Swaniker at [15] it is possible to interchange: "however, I was cleared
    and fled Turkey"; with "however, I appealed and fled Turkey".


16.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  interpreter's  intervention  raised  an
    important point and the First-tier Tribunal was obliged to  address  it
    by  specifically  exploring  the  extent  to  which  it   tainted   the
    reliability of the translation of the evidence provided by the Sponsor.
     Absent this, there has been, as accepted by Mr Tarlow on behalf of the
    Respondent, procedural unfairness.

Disposal

17. For these reasons, we find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    discloses errors of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal,
    and we set it aside.


18. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  We have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement, the fundamental  nature  of  the
    error identified, and the nature and extent  of  the  factual  findings
    required in remaking the decision, and conclude that  it  is  necessary
    for this appeal to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined afresh by a judge other than Judge Swaniker.

Decision


19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


20. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal   .


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 6 November
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
