
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09671/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|conference on 25 November 2020 (V)   |on 8 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 VAKKAS [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J. Byrne, instructed by Visa Inn Immigration
Specialist
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS
1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 21 May 2019  to
      refuse a human rights claim. He applied for leave  to  remain  on  the
      ground that he was the family member of a person who had limited leave
      to  remain  with  reference  to  the  European  Community  Association
      Agreement ("ECAA") also known as the Ankara Agreement.
2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge S. J. Walker  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated  on  23  September  2019.  The  judge
      outlined the background to the  case.  He  noted  that  the  appellant
      entered the UK illegally in 2004. He was refused asylum on 04 November
      2004. It is unclear whether he appealed the  decision.  The  appellant
      remained in the UK without leave  until  28  November  2018,  when  he
      applied for leave to remain with his partner and two children on human
      rights grounds. His partner, also a Turkish national, ran  a  business
      in the UK. The respondent accepted that his partner had limited  leave
      to remain under the Ankara Agreement. The familial  relationships  are
      not disputed.
3.    The judge noted that the appellant's  partner  lived  in  Turkey.  She
      moved to Italy with the oldest child in 2012 and then  to  the  UK  in
      2014. The youngest child was born in  the  UK.  Neither  child  was  a
      'qualifying child' because they had not been resident in the UK for  a
      continuous period of seven years for the purpose of section 117B(6) of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").  There
      was no evidence of any compelling compassionate circumstances relating
      to health or to show that the  family  would  face  'very  significant
      obstacles' to integration  in  Turkey.  The  judge  observed  that  no
      information had been provided relating to the conditions the  children
      might face there. The appellant's representative accepted that he  did
      not meet the qualifying requirements of the immigration rules relating
      to family life because his partner is not settled in the UK.
4.    The judge went on to  consider  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
      circumstances  that  might  justify  granting  leave  to  remain  with
      reference to GEN.3.2.(1) of Appendix FM of the immigration  rules.  He
      concluded that the best interests  of  the  children  were  served  by
      remaining with both parents. He  found  that  there  was  insufficient
      evidence to show that it would be 'unduly harsh'  for  the  family  to
      return to Turkey. Although he noted what was said about the  important
      stage the oldest child was at in  her  education,  he  concluded  that
      'educational inconvenience' was not a sufficiently  strong  reason  to
      reach the threshold of 'unjustifiably harsh consequences'.
5.     The  judge  considered  the   arguments   put   forward   about   the
      proportionality of removal in light of the  standstill  provisions  in
      the immigration rules relating to the Ankara Agreement. He noted  that
      the 'on-entry' provisions contained in the 1972 immigration rules  (HC
      509) provided for dependent family members to join a businessperson in
      the UK. However,  the  judge  also  observed  that  the  'after-entry'
      provisions of the immigration rules (HC 510) allowed the respondent to
      take into account relevant facts  including  whether  the  person  had
      observed the time limit and conditions of admission and whether in the
      light of his character, conduct or associations it was undesirable  to
      permit  the  person  to  remain.  The  judge  also  noted   that   the
      respondent's guidance on ECAA applications  states  that  a  dependent
      partner 'must not' fall for refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
      refusal  in  light  of  their  character,  conduct  or   associations,
      represent a danger to national security or be an illegal entrant.  The
      judge found that the guidance made it clear that  those  who  remained
      illegally or overstayed their leave 'should normally be  refused'  and
      that a dependent person who is in the UK illegally cannot switch to an
      application under the Ankara  Agreement.  He  considered  whether  the
      guidance should be disregarded because it was  more  restrictive  than
      the provisions of the 1972 immigration rules but  concluded  that  the
      wording of paragraph 4 of HC 510 was similar to  the  wording  of  the
      guidance and 'envisages applications being refused on,  for  instance,
      the grounds that the applicant was an illegal entrant' [41]. The judge
      found that the appellant was unable to  show  that  he  would  have  a
      strong chance of succeeding in an application for entry clearance  and
      that the Chikwamba principle did  not  apply:  see  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
      [2008] 1 WLR 1420. The judge concluded that there was nothing  in  the
      evidence  to  show  that  removal  of  the  appellant  would  lead  to
      'unjustifiably harsh consequences' for him or his family.
6.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:
      (i)   The judge failed to consider relevant evidence relating  to  the
           difficulties that the family  said  they  would  face  as  Kurds
           returning to Turkey.
      (ii)  The judge failed to consider the more stringent wording  of  the
           policy guidance compared with the 1972  immigration  rules.  The
           guidance stated that an applicant 'must not'  fall  for  refusal
           under the general grounds for refusal or be an illegal  entrant.
           In contrast, paragraph 4 of HC 510 did not  mandate  refusal  on
           that ground, but only provided for those  factors  to  be  taken
           into account.  Nor  did  the  1972  immigration  rules  prohibit
           switching to an application for leave to remain under  the  ECAA
           (this appears to be an incorrect assertion for the reasons given
           below). The judge  erred  in  placing  weight  on  the  guidance
           without taking these differences into account.
      (iii) If the judge erred in relation to the previous points,  he  also
           erred in assessing the Chikwamba principle.
      (iv)  It was procedurally unfair for the judge to  take  into  account
           the appellant's illegal  entry  as  a  relevant  factor  without
           giving him an opportunity to address the issue when it  was  not
           raised by the respondent in the decision letter or  put  forward
           in submissions at the hearing.
Decision and reasons
Error of law

7.    It is not necessary to  make  detailed  findings  because  Ms  Everett
      accepted that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
      errors of law. She was right to make the concession.
8.    First, the  judge  failed  to  conduct  an  evaluative  assessment  of
      whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the  family  to  return  to
      Turkey together. The appellant and his wife both gave reasons  why  it
      would be difficult for  them  to  return  to  Turkey.  The  background
      evidence relating to the situation for Kurds  was  not  evaluated.  In
      referring to whether it was 'unduly harsh' for the children to  return
      to Turkey the judge applied the wrong test,  which  is  applicable  to
      deportation cases but  not  to  non-deportation  human  rights  claims
      [32].
9.    Second, the judge erred in his  assessment  of  the  1972  immigration
      rules, which in turn impacted  on  his  assessment  of  the  Chikwamba
      principle. The judge failed to appreciate the distinction between  the
      'on-entry' requirements contained in  HC  509  and  the  'after-entry'
      requirements of HC 510 and the distinction between leave to enter  and
      leave to remain.
10.   Only the on-entry immigration rules  provide  for  family  members  to
      join a businessperson in the UK. Reflecting the time, paragraph 30  of
      HC 509 provided for 'businessmen' to  apply  for  leave  to  enter  to
      establish a business in the UK. Paragraph 35 allowed  for  'wives  and
      children under 18' of a person admitted as a businessman to  be  given
      leave to enter for the period of the businessperson's  stay.  The  on-
      entry requirements related to applications for  leave  to  enter  that
      would normally be made by way of an entry clearance  application  from
      abroad.
11.   The after-entry immigration rules applied to  in-country  applications
      for leave to remain. Paragraph 21 of HC 510 allowed non-EEC  nationals
      who were admitted as visitors to  apply  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      'businessman'. Nothing in HC 510 made provision for a person  who  was
      already in the UK to apply to switch to leave to remain as the  family
      member of a non-EEC businessperson. Paragraph 40 stated that a  person
      issued with a residence permit for 5 years should have the time  limit
      on their stay removed after they had remained in the UK for 4 years in
      business unless there were grounds for not removing the time limit.
12.   As noted by the judge, paragraph  4  of  the  after-entry  immigration
      rules allowed the Secretary of State to  'take  into  account'  public
      interest considerations relating to a person's history  of  compliance
      with immigration control when  deciding  in-country  applications  for
      leave to remain.  The  wording  was  not  mandatory  and  allowed  for
      discretion.
13.   There is some force in the argument that the mandatory wording in  the
      respondent's recent guidance is more restrictive than the  wording  of
      paragraph 4 of HC 510 and therefore impermissible  with  reference  to
      the standstill clause. However, in light of the  legal  framework  set
      out above, and for different reasons to the ones given by  the  judge,
      his finding that a partner who was remaining in the UK  without  leave
      could not switch to an application for leave to remain as  the  family
      member of a person who has been granted leave to remain as  an  Ankara
      Agreement businessperson was correct.
14.    The  1972  immigration  rules   required   family   members   of   a
      businessperson to apply for leave to enter. Although  a  person  could
      switch from being a visitor to a businessperson, the 1972  immigration
      rules made no provision  for  after  entry  applications  from  family
      members. In my assessment, the judge went wrong when  he  applied  the
      provisions of paragraph 4 of HC 510 to a theoretical  application  for
      entry clearance, when that  provision  only  applied  to  after  entry
      applications.  When  considering  whether  the  Chikwamba   principles
      applied, in fact, the appellant would only have to show that he is the
      spouse/partner of a person who  has  leave  to  remain  as  an  Ankara
      Agreement businessperson for the purpose of paragraph  35  of  HC  509
      (assuming that the 1972 rules would be interpreted in the expanded way
      that the current rules do for Article 8 family  member  applications).
      The fact that the appellant has been the partner of his ex-wife  in  a
      relationship akin to marriage for a period  of  more  than  two  years
      since they resumed their relationship in 2014 is not disputed.
15.   For these reasons, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
      involved the making of errors of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      usual course of action  is  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
      decision.
Remaking
Best interests of the children
16.         In  assessing  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  I  have
      considered  the  broad  principles  outlined  in  cases  such  as   ZH
      (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74  and  EV
      (Philippines) and  others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.  The  best
      interests of children are a primary consideration  although  they  are
      not the only consideration.

17.         The respondent must have regard to the  need  to  safeguard  the
      welfare of children who are "in  the  United  Kingdom".  I  take  into
      account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child Matters:  Change  for
      Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the duties
      owed to children under section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009 ("BCIA 2009"). In the  guidance,  the  respondent
      acknowledges the importance of international human rights  instruments
      including the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child  (UNCRC).  The
      guidance goes on to confirm: "The UK Border  Agency  must  fulfil  the
      requirements of these  instruments  in  relation  to  children  whilst
      exercising its functions as expressed in UK domestic  legislation  and
      policies." The UNCRC sets out rights  including  a  child's  right  to
      survival and development, the right to know and be cared for by his or
      her parents, the right not  to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the
      enjoyment of the highest attainable standards of  living,  health  and
      education without discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common
      responsibility of both parents for the upbringing and development of a
      child.
18.   The appellant and his wife have two daughters.  The  first,  'A',  was
      born in Turkey. She was 16 years old at the date of the hearing and is
      17 years old at the date of this decision. The appellant left Turkey a
      few months after her birth with the intention of claiming  asylum.  He
      hoped that his family could join him at a later date. A was raised  by
      her mother in Turkey.  A's  mother  says  that  life  was  tough.  She
      survived by doing farm work. A says that her  father  also  sent  some
      money. The appellant says that he kept in  touch  with  his  wife  and
      child by telephone but by 2008 the lengthy separation led to  marriage
      breakdown and  they  decided  to  divorce.  The  appellant  maintained
      contact with his daughter.
19.   In 2012 A and her mother went to  stay  with  her  maternal  uncle  in
      Italy. Her mother was issued with a work permit. A says that it was  a
      difficult time for her because her mother worked during the day and at
      night. She found it difficult because she did not speak  the  language
      at first. The children at school bullied her and teased  her  for  not
      having a father. She wanted her father in her life rather than just on
      the phone or Skype. A asked if she could visit her father in  the  UK.
      After an initial refusal they were issued  with  a  visit  visa.  They
      arrived in the UK in July 2014. This was the first time A had seen her
      father since she was very young. The family spent time together in the
      UK and her parents reconciled. A's mother agreed to start  a  business
      in the UK, as she had done in Italy, so that she could spend more time
      with her father.
20.   In December 2014 A's mother discovered that she was  pregnant  with  a
      second child. 'B' was born in the UK in 2015. She was five  years  old
      at the date of the hearing. She has known no other life  than  the  UK
      and has no experience of living in Turkey. She is of an age where  she
      is beginning to enter reception classes at school and is beginning  to
      develop connections outside the family home.
21.   There is no evidence to suggest that  either  child  has  any  serious
      health problems, disabilities or that there  are  other  compassionate
      issues.
22.   A says that life in the UK is so much better than in Turkey or  Italy.
      Here she is able to live in the family unit with both parents. She has
      lived in the UK for six and  a  half  years  and  is  likely  to  have
      completed the GCSE courses she was studying at the date when she  made
      her statement. She says that if she had to return to Turkey  it  would
      destroy the educational progress she has made since  arriving  in  the
      UK. The education system in Turkey is nothing  like  the  UK  and  she
      would find it difficult to adapt once again to a  new  school  system.
      She has future prospects here, which would not be available to her  in
      Turkey. Her  mother  was  granted  leave  to  remain  under  the  ECAA
      Agreement in 2018, which was extended. The children also have leave to
      remain on human rights grounds and are on a route to settlement.
23.   In assessing the best interests of the  children,  and  where  a  fair
      balance may lie in relation to Article 8, both parties agreed  that  I
      should look at the more up to date Country Policy and Information Note
      (CPIN) on 'Turkey: Kurds' (Version 3.0 - February 2020). An  estimated
      15 million Kurds  live  in  Turkey  where  they  form  10-20%  of  the
      population  [2.4.1].  The  clash  of  interests  between  the  Turkish
      government and calls for cultural and  political  freedom  of  Kurdish
      people  has  led  to  discrimination  against  Kurds  and  periods  of
      violence.  The  conflict  in  the  south  east  led  to  large   scale
      displacement and has resulted in 40,000 deaths. It  is  still  ongoing
      although at a  reduced  level  compared  to  previous  years  [2.4.2].
      Although a Kurdish middle class is growing in urban  areas,  Kurds  in
      the less-developed conflict affected areas in the south  east  of  the
      country  have  reduced  access  to  government  services   and   fewer
      opportunities [2.4.3]. The requirement to  speak  Turkish  in  schools
      puts Kurdish pupils who  may  not  speak  Turkish  at  a  disadvantage
      [2.4.6]. The CPIN  appears  to  accept  that  Kurds  face  significant
      discrimination in Turkey, but does not accept that this in  itself  is
      sufficient to give rise to a real risk for the purpose of a protection
      claim in the absence of other factors [2.4.12].
24.   Kurds may participate in all areas of public life, but  they  tend  to
      be under-represented in senior roles and may be  reluctant  to  reveal
      their Kurdish ethnicity in case it proves a  hindrance.  Opportunities
      to access better paid work are often denied to Kurds. A  Kurdish  name
      or accent may make it harder to gain employment. Kurds who had  gained
      senior positions did not emphasise their Kurdish identity [2.4.15].
25.   Women are generally  treated  less  favourably  than  men  in  Turkish
      society. Kurdish women may be less educated  than  ethnically  Turkish
      women [2.4.16]. There is evidence of societal  discrimination  against
      Kurds. Some Kurds in western Turkey may be  fearful  about  disclosing
      their  Kurdish  identity  or  speaking  Kurdish  in  public  [2.4.17].
      Citizens are free to  move  throughout  the  country  although  it  is
      mandatory to have a NUFUS identity card in order to work, register  at
      school, and to access a wide range of services [2.6.2].
26.   Information gained from the European Commission during a  Home  Office
      Fact-finding Mission in 2019 recognised that the  legal  framework  in
      Turkey provided general guarantees for fundamental  rights  but  there
      had been 'serious backsliding' in the areas of freedom of  expression,
      assembly and association. The rights of minorities were of  particular
      concern.  Discrimination,  hate  speech,  and   hate   crime   against
      minorities were of serious concern [3.1.7].
27.   Education is possible for Kurdish people, but classes are in  Turkish.
      It becomes an issue for poor people from the south  east  who  do  not
      know Turkish or speak Kurdish as their  first  language  [5.2.2].  The
      quality of education in the south east compared to western  areas  has
      also been  an  issue.  There  is  a  'general  patriarchal  issue  and
      urbanisation issue'.  Some  parents  might  not  want  to  send  their
      children, particularly girls, to school [5.3.1].
28.    One  source  told  the  Fact-finding  Mission  that  those  who  have
      previously  lived  in  the  east  of  Turkey   may   experience   some
      discrimination with regard to education,  employment  and  maybe  also
      accommodation in Ankara [5.8.2]. National fervour is simmering as  the
      country pursues a  military  offensive  against  Kurdish  militias  in
      northern Syria. Some say that this is behind a rise in  discrimination
      against Kurds [5.8.5]. Another report from October  2018  stated  that
      international  and  domestic   observers   had   reported   that   the
      government's response to the resumption of conflict in the south-east,
      and to the 2016 attempted coup, have significantly affected the rights
      and freedoms of Kurds. In particular, security operations  since  2015
      have resulted in significant hardship for local residents in the south-
      east [6.8.5].
29.   Although none of the witness  statements  go  into  any  detail  about
      their life in Turkey before they came to  the  UK,  several  documents
      indicate that the family come  from  a  town  called  Pazarcik,  which
      publicly available maps  indicate  is  a  small  town  just  north  of
      Gaziantep in south-east Turkey. The passports of the appellant's  wife
      and child both indicate that they were born in Pazarcik.  The  divorce
      certificate also indicates that their divorce was granted by  a  court
      in Pazarcik. The appellant's witness statement indicates that he  used
      to run a barber shop. The account  of  A's  mother  surviving  through
      basic farm work is consistent with rural life in south-east Turkey. It
      seems that by 2011 the appellant's partner was struggling to bring  up
      her daughter on her own, which may have prompted her to move to  Italy
      where she could benefit from family support.
30.   It is in the best interests of the children to remain  in  the  family
      unit with both parents. It is particularly important for A, who  spent
      the early years of her childhood without the physical presence of  her
      father. B has had the benefit of the support  of  both  parents  since
      birth. In practical terms, it might be  possible  for  the  family  to
      return to Turkey where their parents might be able to find  some  form
      of work to support themselves. However, the background evidence  shows
      that the family would face discrimination as Kurds in a wide range  of
      areas, including employment. They would be disadvantaged in  the  type
      of employment they might be able to obtain. They are more likely to be
      in less well-paid employment. The background evidence shows that A and
      B are likely to be discriminated against as girls. As  Kurdish  girls,
      they will be further disadvantaged. The background evidence also shows
      that the situation for Kurds  has  deteriorated  again  in  Turkey  in
      recent years, as has the security situation in south-east Turkey.  The
      evidence shows that the family comes from south-east Turkey. There  is
      no evidence to suggest that they have any connections to larger cities
      in the west of the country. In  any  event,  the  background  evidence
      indicates that they are likely to face hurdles to relocating to a  big
      city because they would be disadvantaged and discriminated against  as
      Kurds from the south-east.
31.   In contrast, the girls are well settled in the UK. Their 'real  world'
      situation is that they have leave to remain in line with their mother.
      They are on a route to settlement. In the UK they are likely  to  have
      better access to and quality of education. They  are  likely  to  have
      better  access  to  healthcare.  They  are  likely  to   have   better
      opportunities for long term development. They are less likely to  face
      discrimination on grounds of their gender or ethnicity. The girls  are
      more likely to be safe. They will not have to face insecurity  arising
      from armed conflict. For these reasons I conclude that it  is  in  the
      best interests of the children to remain in the UK with both parents.
Article 8(1)

32.   The appellant has lived in the UK for 16 years. His witness  statement
      provides no detail about the nature of any private life he might  have
      established in the UK. It is reasonable to assume that he is likely to
      have established friendships and other ties. Since 2014 he has also re-
      established his family life in the UK. Removal would separate him from
      his  partner  and  children.  I  am  satisfied  that  his  removal  in
      consequence of the decision would affect  his  right  to  private  and
      family life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation  of
      Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2)

33.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
      and family life. However, it is not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
      interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite law
      that the state has a right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
      governing the entry and residence of people into the country  are  "in
      accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article   8.   Any
      interference with the right to private or family life must  be  for  a
      legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

34.   Part 5A NIAA 2002 applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts  breaches
      a person's right to respect for private and family life under  Article
      8 of the European Convention. The 'public interest question' means the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

35.   The 1972 immigration rules made no provision for a spouse  or  partner
      to apply for leave to remain in the UK. The only provisions  were  the
      on-entry provisions by way of an application for entry clearance.  The
      appellant does not meet the family life requirements  of  the  current
      immigration rules because his partner is not settled  in  the  UK  and
      neither of the children are 'qualifying children' who  have  lived  in
      the UK for a continuous period of seven  years  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing in order for the appellant to come within  the  exceptions  to
      the eligibility requirements for paragraph EX.1 to apply.

36.         Section 117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002 ('NIAA 2002') states that the maintenance of immigration  control
      is in the public interest. The appellant  does  not  meet  the  strict
      requirements of the standstill  provisions  of  the  1972  immigration
      rules nor the current immigration  rules.  The  appellant's  level  of
      English  is  unclear  from  the  evidence  before  me.  His  wife  has
      permission to run her own business and works to  support  the  family.
      The appellant is not likely to be a burden on taxpayers. He previously
      ran a barber shop and there is nothing to suggest that he is unable to
      work should he have permission to do so. At best, that  is  a  neutral
      factor. Little weight should be given to his private life in  the  UK,
      which was established while the appellant had no leave to remain.

37.         Although section 117B(4) states that  little  weight  should  be
      placed on a relationship 'formed' at a time  when  the  appellant  was
      remaining in the UK unlawfully, the circumstances  of  this  case  are
      different  to  those  envisaged  by  the  statutory  provisions.   The
      appellant and his partner were married before he came to the UK.  They
      did not begin a relationship in the  UK  in  the  knowledge  that  the
      appellant's status was unlawful but were reconciled when  his  partner
      visited with their  daughter.  The  appellant  re-established  a  pre-
      existing family life with his partner and daughter. Their family  life
      was strengthened by the birth of their second child. I find that  some
      weight can be given to the appellant's relationship with a person  who
      has leave to remain under the Ankara Agreement.

38.         At the date of the  hearing  neither  child  was  a  'qualifying
      child' for the purpose of section 117B(6). It is important to remember
      that the provisions of Part 5 NIAA 2002 are intended to be  consistent
      with Article 8 of the European  Convention.  The  threshold  of  seven
      years continuous residence recognises that after such time a child  is
      likely to have established significant ties to the UK but that is  not
      to say that the circumstances of children who have been  resident  for
      less than seven years should not be properly evaluated and weighed  in
      the balance.

39.         At the date of the hearing A had been continuously  resident  in
      the UK for a period of six years and four months. When A's history  is
      placed in context, it becomes clear from her evidence  that  the  time
      she has spent living in the UK has  been  important.  Her  father  was
      absent in the early years of  her  life.  Her  mother  faced  hardship
      bringing up a child on her own. A faced upheaval when her mother moved
      to Italy, where she struggled to learn the language and to  integrate.
      Only two years later she faced further upheaval when she came  to  the
      UK, where she had to start again  at  a  different  school  and  learn
      another language. For the first time she benefited from being  brought
      up by both parents. She has lived in the UK for a large proportion  of
      her young life. A entered the UK when she was 10 years  old.  She  has
      developed ties to the UK at an important time of her life when a child
      begins to develop more connections outside the  family  home  as  they
      enter adolescence. B has lived in the UK all her  life  and  knows  no
      other life but is unlikely to have developed particularly strong  ties
      given her young age.

40.         The 'real world' situation of the children  is  that  they  have
      leave to remain in the UK in line with their mother and are on a route
      to settlement. The only obstacle to their father being able to  remain
      in the UK with them is the fact that the 1972  immigration  rules  did
      not make provision for family members of a businessperson to apply for
      leave to remain in-country. I take into account the fact that was  not
      an obstacle to the children being granted leave to remain  with  their
      mother on human rights grounds. The  only  requirement  the  appellant
      would have to meet to satisfy the on-entry requirements  of  the  1972
      immigration rules as preserved by the standstill  clause  is  to  show
      that he is the partner of a person  who  has  been  granted  leave  to
      remain under the Ankara Agreement. There is no dispute that the couple
      have been married, and  despite  their  divorce,  have  resumed  their
      relationship in a way that is akin to marriage for the last six years.



41.         Although I do not think  the  Covid-19  pandemic  can  be  given
      anything like the weight Mr Byrne sought to place on it, it does  form
      part of the overall picture at the date of  the  hearing.  Unnecessary
      travel is being discouraged by governments  around  the  world.  Entry
      clearance posts are likely to be centred  in  big  cities  in  Turkey,
      where the appellant is unlikely to have any connections to assist  him
      with support while he makes an application. Whilst the  appellant  has
      not produced any evidence to indicate  how  long  an  entry  clearance
      application might take, it is reasonable to infer  that  a  period  of
      separation might not be insignificant while an application is prepared
      and processed. A is  most  likely  to  be  affected  by  a  period  of
      uncertainty given that she has already experienced a  long  period  of
      separation from her father in the past.

42.         I bear in mind that the appellant's  immigration  history  is  a
      relevant factor. He has remained in the UK for a  considerable  period
      of time without leave. Paragraph 4 of the 1972 after-entry immigration
      rules  allowed  the  respondent  to  take  into  account  a   person's
      immigration history when deciding whether to grant leave to remain but
      did not mandate refusal  solely  on  the  ground  that  a  person  was
      remaining without leave. The fact that the  appellant  has  never  had
      leave to remain is a matter that must be given weight, but there is no
      evidence of abuse of the immigration system at the more serious end of
      the scale e.g. fraud or deception that might add additional weight  to
      the public interest considerations.

43.         In Chikwamba Lord Brown was not setting down a legal  test  when
      he found that "only comparatively rarely, certainly  in  family  cases
      involving children, should an article 8 appeal  be  dismissed  on  the
      basis that it would be proportionate.... for the  appellant  to  apply
      for leave from abroad". But his observation recognised the essence  of
      the right that Article 8 is intended to protect if, all  other  things
      being equal, requiring a person to return to their country  of  origin
      for the sole purpose of completing an administrative  procedure  would
      lead to the separation of a family  with  children  for  an  uncertain
      period of time.

44.         Having considered the particular circumstances of  this  case  I
      conclude that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      return to Turkey with their parents. Removal of  the  appellant  would
      separate him from his partner and children for an uncertain period  of
      time  and  would  interfere  with  his  right  to  family  life  in  a
      sufficiently grave way to engage the operation of  Article  8.  Having
      weighed the appellant's circumstances against the factors relating  to
      the public interest in maintaining an effective system of  immigration
      control, I conclude that removal would not strike a fair  balance  and
      would be disproportionate in this case.

45.         I conclude that the removal of the appellant in  consequence  of
      the decision would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998.

DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan                          Date 02 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

____________________________________________________________________________
    ___
NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
