
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/09202/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2019                  |On 17 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Jones Whyte LLP
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 27  February
    2018 refusing him indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 322(5)  of
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).

 2. This is an 'earnings discrepancy' case.  Three such cases were  in  the
    Tribunal's list on a single day.  They are not  otherwise  linked,  but
    the legal principles are the same in each case.   Thus,  the  following
    analysis appears in each of the judgments.

 3. In these cases, the appeal is against the refusal of  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the basis of ten years' lawful residence, under  paragraph
    276B of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
    amended).  The reason for the refusal is not that the applicant did not
    meet the basic requirements of  paragraph  276B,  but  on  one  of  the
    'General  Grounds  for  Refusal',  paragraph  322(5).   That  paragraph
    indicates that leave 'should normally be refused' on the ground of:

         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct   (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security."

 4. Among the various ways in which a  person  may  accumulate  ten  years'
    lawful residence, some, including in particular, presence in the United
    Kingdom under the points-based system as a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
    ("T1GM"), will have required the person concerned to obtain  extensions
    of leave.  The applications for the extensions  in  turn  required  the
    applicant to declare a particular level of earnings.  The next steps in
    the story so far as the Home Office is concerned are set out as follows
    by Underhill LJ,  giving  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Balajigari and others v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673:

         "4.  The Home Office became concerned that there was  a  widespread
         practice of applicants for leave  to  remain  as  a  T1GM  claiming
         falsely inflated earnings, particularly  from  self-employment,  in
         order to appear to meet the required  minimum;  and  from  2015  it
         began to make use of its powers under section 40 of the UK  Borders
         and Immigration Act 2007 to obtain information from  Her  Majesty's
         Revenue  and  Customs  ("HMRC")  about  the  earnings  declared  by
         applicants in their tax returns  covering  the  equivalent  period.
         This information disclosed significant  discrepancies  in  a  large
         number of cases. It also revealed what appeared to be a pattern  of
         taxpayers who had in earlier years submitted  tax  returns  showing
         earnings that attracted little or no liability to tax  subsequently
         submitting amended returns showing much higher levels of  earnings,
         over the required minimum, in circumstances  which  suggested  that
         they  were  aware  that  the   previous   under-declaration   might
         jeopardise a pending application for leave to  remain.  There  were
         also instances of returns being submitted belatedly where none  had
         been submitted at the time and where an application for  leave  was
         pending ....

         5.   It has been Home Office practice to  refuse  applications  for
         ILR in all, or in any event the  great  majority  of,  cases  where
         there are substantial discrepancies between the earnings originally
         declared to HMRC by a T1GM applicant (even if subsequently amended)
         and the earnings declared in the application for ILR or a  previous
         application for leave to  remain  ("earnings  discrepancy  cases"),
         relying on the "General Grounds for  Refusal"  in  Part  9  of  the
         Immigration Rules. Initially it relied  specifically  on  paragraph
         322 (2), which applies in cases where an applicant has made a false
         representation in relation to  a  previous  application.  Latterly,
         however,  it  has  relied,  either  additionally  or  instead,   on
         paragraph 322 (5), which embraces more general misconduct....

         6.   It is the Secretary  of  State's  case  that  his  policy  and
         practice is only to rely on paragraph 322  (5)  where  he  believes
         that  an  earnings  discrepancy  is  the   result   of   deliberate
         misrepresentation either to HMRC or to the Home  Office,  in  other
         words only where it is the result of dishonesty. But a large number
         of migrants have claimed that in their cases errors which were  the
         result only of carelessness or ignorance have wrongly been  treated
         as dishonest, and that the Home Office has been too ready  to  find
         dishonesty without an adequate evidential basis or a fair procedure
         ..."

 5. In Balajigari, the Court had before it cases where  the  challenge  had
    been by way of Judicial Review, because there was no  right  of  appeal
    against the decisions taken by the Secretary of State.  It considered a
    range of arguments in support of the  challenges.   It  concluded  that
    paragraph 322(5) is not limited to cases of criminal  conduct,  threats
    to national security, war crimes or travel bans (para  [31]),  although
    the dishonest submission of false figures to either the Home Office  or
    HMRC would be criminal conduct  (para  [37(3)]).   Thus  the  paragraph
    could properly and lawfully be deployed against a person who  had  made
    different statements of his income for the purposes of obtaining  leave
    and for the purposes of tax (para [35]).  But the  applicant's  conduct
    must be dishonest in the Adedoyin v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 sense:  it
    was not enough simply to show that the statements (or one  or  more  of
    them) were factually  inaccurate.   Further,  the  misconduct  must  be
    sufficiently serious to merit refusal in these terms: 'the rule is only
    concerned with conduct of a serious character'; but again the dishonest
    and deliberate submission of false  earnings  figures  would  meet  the
    threshold, wherever that were to be pitched (para [37(2)]).

 6. The Secretary of State is not bound  to  make  further  enquiries  with
    HMRC, and the lack of action by HMRC does not conclude  the  matter  in
    the applicant's favour (paras [67], [72], [76]).  Procedural  fairness,
    however, requires that the applicant be given notice of  the  Secretary
    of State's suspicion, and a proper opportunity to meet  any  allegation
    of dishonesty and to put forward any other reason  why  if  there  were
    dishonesty it should not in the present case  lead  to  refusal  (paras
    [55]-[56]).  If that is done, the Secretary of State  is  not  required
    simply to accept an assertion that there has  been  an  honest  mistake
    (para [106]).  The Court endorsed at [40] the general guidance given by
    Martin Spencer J in R (Shahbaz Khan) v SSHD [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC)  at
    [37(iv)-(vii)], which adds that the Secretary of State is  to  look  at
    the explanations given, will expect evidence supporting them, and  will
    and consider  them  in  context,  for  example  in  the  light  of  the
    applicant's knowledge and what was done to remedy the error  and  when.
    Further, the Secretary of State is not required to accept an  assertion
    of an error  made  by  an  accountant,  but  again  will  consider  the
    evidenced facts about the applicant's dealings with the accountant.

 7. The burden of proof of showing dishonesty  lies  on  the  Secretary  of
    State, the standard being the balance of probabilities (Balajigari para
    [43]).   The  question  is  whether  there  is  a   credible   innocent
    explanation for the discrepancy: is the applicant  merely  careless  or
    does the evidence show him to have been dishonest?  There will then  be
    in principle a second issue  of  whether  paragraph  322(5)  should  be
    applied or not, given that it is discretionary, because  there  may  be
    factors outside article 8 that might impact on whether  leave  of  some
    sort should be granted (para [39], but see para [20]).

 8. The Court also concluded that a decision to refuse leave on this  basis
    would be likely to involve an interference with article 8 rights, which
    would need separate examination.  Because both Balajigari and Khan were
    judicial review cases, there were procedural  issues  relating  to  the
    possibility of raising an article 8 issue not advanced previously,  and
    adducing  further  evidence.   I  am  not  concerned  here  with  those
    considerations.  What is important for present purposes  is  the  clear
    decision justifying treatment of a refusal in cases of this sort  as  a
    refusal raising human rights issues.  It is that part of  the  decision
    that has led the Secretary of State now to make decisions incorporating
    a refusal on human rights grounds, as  the  Court  indicated  would  be
    possible (para [102]) and perhaps desirable.  Those decisions  carry  a
    right of appeal under s 82(1)(b).

 9. All the Balajigari appellants succeeded because the Court held that  in
    each case the Secretary of State's decision-making was at fault and the
    decisions could therefore not stand.  In three of the cases  there  had
    been no  opportunity  to  rebut  what  amounted  to  a  presumption  of
    dishonesty arising from the figures alone; in the fourth case there had
    been an opportunity, but no finding of dishonesty.  In one of the cases
    the decision to refuse leave was quashed by the Court;  in  the  others
    the question was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  for  redetermination,
    but the inquiry and the remedy  were  limited  to  those  available  in
    judicial review.

10. In these appeals Mr Govan for the Secretary of State  argues  that  the
    appeals process itself gives an opportunity to put all  relevant  facts
    before a judge, and that  the  procedural  difficulties  faced  by  the
    Secretary of State in the Balajigari cases do not  arise.   Subject  to
    one important reservation, I agree.  The landscape of  appeal  is  very
    different from that  of  judicial  review.   The  appeal  is  for  most
    purposes limited to human rights grounds, but  there  needs  to  be  an
    examination of whether the appellant ought to have succeeded under  the
    Rules.   Thus  there  is  room  for  a  factual  investigation  of  the
    appellant's  acts  and  motives  and  whether  paragraph   322(5)   was
    applicable to him.  There is also a full opportunity for evidence to be
    adduced and considered, whether or not it has been deployed previously,
    on both the underlying events and any present factors going to  article
    8.  What is more, there is no free-standing ground of appeal  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

11. These points make it clear that where there is an appealable  decision,
    the role of the Tribunal will be to undertake  an  examination  of  the
    evidence and decide whether the refusal should be upheld  or  reversed,
    not on the grounds applicable in judicial review, but on  determination
    of all the relevant facts.  The appeal  process  fills  both  the  gaps
    identified by the Court in Balajigari -  the  procedural  fairness  gap
    because the appeal gives the relevant opportunity, and  the  article  8
    gap because the appeal encompasses such  human  rights  issues  as  are
    raised.  By the end of an appeal process the appellant  has  had  every
    opportunity to put his case.

12. I note, of course, what the Court said in Balajigari at paragraphs [59]-
    [61], that the opportunity to make submissions only  after  a  decision
    has been made will usually be insufficient to meet the requirements  of
    procedural fairness.  But, for a number of reasons, I do not think that
    those observations can be taken as applying to appeals  of  this  sort.
    First, they were specifically made in the context of  judicial  review,
    by reference to leading authorities on judicial review  and  procedural
    fairness,  and  including  observations  about  the  limited  role   of
    statutory administrative review, which is available only where there is
    no  right  of  appeal.   Secondly,  it  is  not  easy  to  detect   any
    reservations  of  this  sort  in  the  Court's  consideration  of   the
    possibility of affording a right of appeal in part C of its decision at
    [95]-[106], where the scope of its  observations  would  appear  to  be
    severely limited if the underlying decision on the merits  were  to  be
    considered as potentially  unlawful  even  within  the  context  of  an
    appeal.  Thirdly, and most important, although  judicial  review  is  a
    remedy lying outside  any  specific  statutory  regime,  the  statutory
    regime itself includes  the  right  of  appeal.   Where  an  appealable
    decision is made the entire process, including the notification of  the
    decision to the individual, envisages the possibility of the correction
    of the decision by an appeal.  In  this  sense,  the  decision  is  not
    finally 'taken' until any appeal is over; and indeed,  judicial  review
    can have virtually no role until an appellant has exhausted  his  right
    to have the decision set aside on appeal.

13. I said above that there was one reservation.  It is this.   The  appeal
    process ought to provide an opportunity for an individual to raise  all
    the relevant matters he wishes to raise.  But it may not do so  if,  at
    the time the appeal is heard, there is a restriction  (imposed  by  the
    judge either of his own motion or from a current understanding  of  the
    law) which proves to have been itself unlawful.  If the appeal  allowed
    the appellant to raise questions going in substance to whether  he  was
    dishonest, the appeal to that extent will have  filled  the  procedural
    unfairness gap even if that was the first opportunity he  had;  but  if
    the appeal proceeded on the basis that the figures gave rise themselves
    to a presumption of dishonesty, it may be that the evidence adduced was
    in practice curtailed by what it was thought might be a possible ground
    of challenge.  Each  case  is  likely  to  depend  on  its  facts.   In
    particular, if all the evidence going to the issue was in fact adduced,
    a judge's error in the application of the law to that evidence will not
    necessarily prevent the Upper Tribunal from correcting  the  error  and
    substituting a decision on the basis of the evidence.  But  it  is  not
    difficult to envisage cases where a misunderstanding of the  law  might
    require there to be an opportunity to take further evidence.  For these
    reasons it cannot be said that in every case the actual appeal provided
    all the opportunities to which  the  appellant  was  entitled  by  law,
    although the general position is that the appeal process satisfies  the
    demands of procedural fairness.

14. One feature of the cases so far heard in the Tribunal is that is  seems
    to be assumed on all sides that  the  figures  originally  claimed  for
    immigration purposes were an accurate statement of the appellant's then
    income (on which tax would be payable) and that the tax returns at  the
    time were a fictitious under-return.  Thus, the Revenue is envisaged as
    the sole potential victim of the dishonesty.   There  is,  however,  no
    reason at all to suppose that is the  truth  of  the  matter.   It  may
    equally be the case that the figures originally submitted  in  the  tax
    return were accurate,  and  that  the  immigration  application  was  a
    fictitious inflation of income solely in order to claim an  immigration
    advantage.  Where dishonesty is at work, the fact  that,  years  later,
    when it is convenient to do so and in preparation  for  an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain, an individual chooses to pay a  sum  of
    money to HMRC as though in underpaid tax does not begin to  demonstrate
    that his statement  of  income  for  those  years  is  correct  or  was
    incorrect.  Further, again if there is  dishonesty,  there  may  be  no
    reason to suppose that either figure is  correct:  the  truth  may  lie
    somewhere between them.

15. This is no doubt part of the reason why evidence from  the  accountants
    may be so important, why an appellant is likely to  be  so  anxious  to
    show what figures he gave to his accountant, and why Underhill LJ  said
    what he  did  say  at  paragraphs  [106]  and  [40]  of  Balajigari  as
    summarised at paragraph [6] above.  There is no reason to suppose  that
    accountants with professional qualifications and who have continued  in
    practice without  disciplinary  measures  would  regularly  make  gross
    errors in submissions to HMRC or its predecessors.  It is  in  nobody's
    interest  that   accountants   who   make   such   errors   should   go
    uninvestigated.  The explanation of how  the  error  is  said  to  have
    arisen is crucial, because it reflects on the accountant's professional
    standing.  The accountant needs to have an opportunity to say  or  show
    what instructions the appellant gave and how  those  instructions  were
    carried out.  In a case where the accountant  is  found  to  have  been
    actually or apparently at fault, the Tribunal may well cite the name of
    the accountant in its judgment and may pass a copy of the  judgment  to
    the relevant professional body.  On the other hand, where there  is  no
    evidence going beyond the appellant's own  statement,  a  Tribunal  may
    well consider that the material adduced by the Secretary  of  State  is
    sufficient to establish the appellant's  dishonesty:  see  also  Abbasi
    [2020] UKUT 27 at [63]-[64].

16. These observations are prompted by the somewhat complex factual  matrix
    presented by the appellant in the present case.  The appellant used  at
    least two firms of accountants.  It is his  case  now  that  the  first
    accountant, CDOKS UK, submitted incorrect figures  to  HMRC  (only)  on
    numerous occasions and that that accountant has accepted that he was in
    error.  ACCA have refused  to  investigate  the  appellant's  complaint
    because it was made three years  after  the  appellant  discovered  the
    discrepancies  and   obtained   (as   he   claims)   the   accountant's
    acknowledgment of the error.  Although  ACCA  have  not  indicated  any
    other difficulty, the appellant claims that this accountant cannot  now
    be contacted, although apparently still  in  business.   The  appellant
    instructed a second accountant from sometime in 2016.   It  is  claimed
    that that accountant had certain  correspondence  with  HMRC,  but  the
    appellant's account of the correspondence does not accord with that  in
    HMRC's records.  The position is further complicated by the  fact  that
    the appellant was dealing directly himself with HMRC in  January  2016.
    In determining the question of dishonesty there are two  other  matters
    that have been the subject of submissions.  One is that  the  appellant
    does not claim to  be  illiterate  in  finance  or  economics:  he  has
    qualifications in business management.  The other is that  it  is  said
    that the appellant overstated his tax liability in one or  perhaps  two
    years.  In view of what I said at paragraph  [15]  above  this  may  be
    nothing to the point; or, at best, it may assist him; or, at worst,  it
    may demonstrate a reckless lack of intention to comply with the laws of
    the United Kingdom.  It depends on the context of  that  point  amongst
    the rest of the evidence.

17. Mr Caskie's principal ground of appeal,  and  the  only  one  on  which
    permission was granted, is that Judge McManus made extensive  reference
    in his decision to the judgment of Martin Spencer J in Khan, which post-
    dated the hearing.  There is absolutely nothing in that  ground  as  it
    stands.  The judge was required to determine the  appeal  according  to
    the law, whatever the law was; and Mr Caskie's submissions  before  the
    judge needed to be directed to the law, whatever the law was. In making
    his decision the judge was entitled to refer  to  whatever  compendious
    statement of the law he found convenient, whatever its date.  The  only
    limitation, of course, is that that statement, again whatever its date,
    should contain no error affecting the decision the judge was to make.

18. As it happens, however, and as Balajigari at [42] shows, the  statement
    of the law in Khan was not entirely accurate.  There is no legal burden
    on the appellant to disprove dishonesty.  Permission having been given,
    this Tribunal needs to determine this appeal on the basis of a  correct
    understanding of the law so far as I can ascertain it.   It  is  in  my
    view abundantly clear that Judge McManus, for perfectly  understandable
    reasons given the state of the authorities, wrongly placed that  burden
    on the appellant.   At paragraph [5] the judge clearly states that  the
    burden of proof is on the appellant and indicates  no  exceptions.   At
    [36] the correct standard is stated in relation to dishonesty,  without
    any indication that the burden is elsewhere than on the appellant.   At
    [34] and [38] the language used is in my view clearly that  of  failure
    to find a reason for displacing a  presumption  against  the  appellant
    rather than positive findings of fact against him.

19. Judge McManus' decision was based on error of law as to the  burden  of
    proof.  It cannot stand and I set it aside.

20. I have given careful consideration to the question whether  the  appeal
    should be redetermined in this Tribunal and have decided that  remittal
    is necessary in practical terms and in the interests  of  justice.   So
    far as concerns the former, it is  not  in  my  judgment  realistically
    possible to construct what the judge's view of the evidence before him,
    or any element of it, would have been if he had had in  mind  from  the
    first that the burden and  standard  of  proof  was  that  set  out  in
    Balajigari.  So far as concerns the latter, given the  clear  statement
    in paragraph [106]  of  Balajigari  and  the  observations  above,  the
    appellant will no doubt wish  now  to  ensure  that  he  has  detailed,
    probably oral, evidence from  both  his  accountants.   In  short,  the
    appeal will need to be heard  anew,  probably  on  the  basis  of  more
    extensive evidence than was called before Judge McManus.

21.  I  therefore  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   for
    redetermination by a judge other than Judge McManus.


                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 15 June 2020
