
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09420/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2019                   |On 31 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          BHAVIN BHARATKUMAR PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Patel, counsel instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eldridge, promulgated on 12 June 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 13 September 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 September  2006  with
    entry clearance as a student. His leave was  extended  until  14  April
    2009. An in-time application for further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
    Post-Study migrant was refused and elected not to appeal that decision.
    His leave expired on 10 June 2009. The appellant was granted  leave  to
    remain on 29 September 2009 and his leave was extended until 15 January
    2016. He applied in-time for leave to remain on 12 September 2015,  but
    this application was unsuccessful. On 14 January 2015  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1 migrant and on 13 December  2016
    the appellant varied that application to one for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of 10 years long residence.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  long   residence
    application on 15 August 2017. It was  said  that  the  appellant  made
    false representations in previous applications submitted  in  2010  and
    2012 with regard to his earnings, which did not correspond with  checks
    made with HMRC. The appellant's explanation  for  the  discrepancy  was
    rejected and  his  application  was  refused  under  paragraph  322(2),
    322(5), 276B(ii) and (iii) of the Rules.  It  was  further  noted  that
    there was a gap in the appellant's legal residence of 110 days when  he
    was without leave and he could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    276B (i)(a) and (v). The respondent noted that the  appellant  did  not
    rely  on  family  life  or  raise  any  exceptional  circumstances   or
    compassionate factors.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it  was  argued  on  the
    appellant's behalf that he submitted an application to the Secretary of
    State in 2009 but that  his  previous  lawyer  had  not  preserved  the
    records. The judge rejected that claim and found  that  it  was  likely
    that any further application was made  on  21  August  2009,  when  the
    appellant's leave had already expired. The judge found there to  be  no
    exceptional circumstances. As the period of overstaying was  in  excess
    of 28 days, the judge found that the appeal  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276B of the Rules. The judge considered paragraph  322(5)  of
    the Rules and with reference to Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  673,
    concluded that the Secretary of State was not entitled to rely  on  the
    general grounds for refusal because the issue of  dishonesty  regarding
    which the respondent was minded to refuse the application, had not been
    put to the appellant prior to a decision being made.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The following criticisms of the decision were made;

       - There was a failure to consider that the  appellant  qualified  for
         ILR under paragraph 245CD due to his 5 years lawful residence as  a
         Tier 1 General Migrant.

       - There had been no findings in relation to dishonesty

       - Failure to take account of historical injustice

       - failure to take account of the evidence that the appellant  applied
         for further leave in 2009 within the 28 days grace period

       - the judge had made a mistake of fact as to  the  length  of  lawful
         residence and the operation of section 3C of the 1971 Act.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained no finding in relation to dishonesty. The
    remaining grounds were not considered.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 8 October 2019,  opposed
    the appeal. The Secretary of State stated that it was correct that  the
    judge erred in failing  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  dishonesty  but
    inferred that it was immaterial because there were  clear  findings  to
    the effect that the appellant's lawful residency was broken in 2009.

The hearing

 9. Mr Patel relied on the grounds and Mr Tarlow concurred with the Rule 24
    response.

10. Mr Patel argued that the judge erred in failing to make findings on the
    dishonesty allegation. That  failure  was  relevant  to  the  remaining
    grounds. He referred me to an administrative court decision,  namely  R
    (oao) Godwin Chaparadza v SSHD [2017] EWHC 1209 (Admin) in relation  to
    the appellant's variation of his application under paragraph  245CD  in
    order to rely on paragraph 276B of  the  Rules.   He  argued  that  the
    variation application supplemented rather than supplanted  the  earlier
    application and the First-tier Tribunal should have taken  the  earlier
    application into account. Mr Patel added that the appellant now met the
    residence requirements of the 10-year Rule, regardless of the  previous
    break in residence and thus the only  issue  outstanding  was  that  of
    dishonesty.

11. At the end of the hearing, I accepted that the First-tier Tribunal made
    a material error of law in failing to determine the general grounds  of
    refusal. I therefore set aside the decision in its entirety.

Decision on error of law

12. The First-tier Tribunal judge avoided making a decision as  to  whether
    the appellant deceived either the respondent or HMRC as to his previous
    earnings. Instead, he criticised the respondent for failing  to  inform
    the appellant that the Secretary of State  was  minded  to  refuse  his
    application for this reason. The judge considered  that  there  was  no
    need to decide the dishonesty issue because in his view  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules in any event as there  had
    been a break in his claimed 10-year residence. At this point,  I  refer
    to the helpful reported decision handed up by Mr Patel, SD  (para  320.
    Findings desirable) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00021, the headnote of  which
    states as follows;

         "In view of the influence that a decision under para 320  may  have
         on subsequent applications by an appellant, it  is  desirable  that
         the Tribunal should give its view  on  issues  arising  under  that
         paragraph, even if they are  not  material  to  the  determination,
         provided that there has been sufficient evidence to enable it to do
         so."

13. The case of SD has clear application in this case, notwithstanding  the
    differing general grounds' paragraphs in issue. The appellant submitted
    a substantial quantity of evidence regarding the dishonesty  allegation
    and was cross-examined extensively, according to the judge's record  of
    proceedings.  There was, therefore, no good reason not  to  decide  the
    dishonesty matter. The grounds rightly argue that  such  a  finding  is
    required in order to  determine  whether  the  appellant's  application
    under paragraph 245CD met the requirements of  the  Rules  based  on  5
    years' continuous residence as a Tier 1 migrant.  Furthermore,  at  the
    time of the hearing, the appellant had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    for well over 9 years following the  apparent  break  in  his  previous
    residence which occurred between 27 May 2009  and  29  September  2009.
    Therefore, a decision was required on the dishonesty issue in  relation
    to  any  future  consideration  of  the  appellant's  compliance   with
    paragraph 276B of the Rules.

14. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his appeal at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge.


Signed   Date: 30 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
