
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/09569/2018
                                                               HU/01639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                       SAMIA HASSAN (FIRST appellant)
                     MUHAMMAD HASSAN (SECOND appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Dhanji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first appellant was  born
    on 15 April 1984.  The second  appellant,  the  husband  of  the  first
    appellant, was born on 7 April 1978.

 2. The appellants appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant  them
    leave to remain in two decisions dated 20 December 2017  and  16  April
    2018.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 6 March 2019, Judge  Seifert  (the  judge)
    allowed both appeals.  As regards the appeal of the  second  appellant,
    the judge found the grounds in 322(5) of the Immigration Rules were not
    made out.  The  respondent  had  also  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 276B(iii) and paragraph 276B(ii)(c) which the judge  did  not
    consider were made out.  He said it was  likely  the  second  appellant
    would meet the requirements of the Rules.  The first appellant's appeal
    was  considered  in  the  light  of  the  refusal  of   her   husband's
    application.  As regards  the  appeal  outside  the  Rules,  the  judge
    repeated that the general ground for refusal under paragraph 322(5) was
    not made out and that there were exceptional circumstances.

 4. The grounds claim the judge made a material error.  The grounds are set
    out in detail which I do not propose to  repeat  here.   Briefly,  they
    allege that the judge made a material misdirection in law and failed to
    apply the reasoning of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Khan  (Dishonesty,  tax
    return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC) in assessing  whether
    the second appellant had acted dishonestly in relation to his  dealings
    with UKVI or HMRC.  Two judicial review cases were  also  relied  upon,
    Samant [2017] UKAIT JR/6546/2016 and Abbasi JR/13807/2016.

 5. Judge Hollingworth refused permission to appeal in a decision dated  24
    April 2019.

 6. He said:

         "No error of law vitiates  the  decision  which  would  lead  to  a
         different outcome.  The judge has implicitly considered the salient
         criteria sent out in Khan.  At paragraph 22 the judge has  referred
         to Mr Hassan having had strokes three times.  The judge referred to
         the effect of the strokes.  Medical  evidence  had  been  provided.
         The judge has referred to the letter from the accountants accepting
         prejudice to their client due to errors which had been  made.   The
         judge has referred to the footings of tax liability.  The judge was
         entitled to conclude on the basis of the sustainable  analysis  set
         out that Mr Hassan was a credible witness.   The  explanations  put
         forward were accepted.  The judge has depicted the backcloth to the
         acceptance of those explanations by referring to the extent of  the
         available evidence.  The  judge  has  set  out  the  chronology  in
         relation to the discrepancies.  The judge was entitled to refer  to
         no penalty having been imposed.  This reference  was  made  on  the
         footing of the confirmation.  The position adopted by HMRC did  not
         play a material role in the reaching of  the  judge's  conclusions.
         The judge has dealt with the issue of the allocation of losses".

 7. The grounds  were  repeated  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   An  additional
    observation was made that Judge Hollingworth noted  that  the  Tribunal
    referred to a letter from the appellant's former accountants as forming
    part of the credibility assessment.  That  finding  was  based  on  the
    understanding that the accountants' letter was  unchallenged  but  that
    was not the case.  Following Khan the Tribunal should  have  applied  a
    critical scrutiny to this evidence and noted that  the  accountant  had
    not been  tendered  for  cross-examination.   On  that  basis,  it  was
    submitted that there was little weight that should have been applied to
    that evidence.  It followed that the Tribunal's finding that there  was
    a reasonable explanation for the appellant's  conduct  was  necessarily
    weakened.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup granted permission on  24  June  2019.   He
    said, inter alia:

         "1.  It is arguable that the judge took an unduly generous view  of
             the  second  appellant's  explanations  for  the   significant
             discrepancy between his HMRC declaration of  income  and  that
             provided to the respondent on  his  previous  application  for
             leave to remain.  Following Khan, when assessing  whether  the
             second appellant acted dishonestly it  is  arguable  that  the
             judge should have adopted a  more  critical  scrutiny,  noting
             that the accountant was not called as a witness so that little
             weight should attach to the  letter.   In  effect,  the  judge
             absolved the appellant of liability  for  his  tax  submission
             showing a significantly lower income.

         2.   It is  arguable  that  these  matters  fatally  undermine  the
             findings  that  there  was  a   reasonable   explanation   for
             discrepancies.  The fact that no penalty was imposed  by  HMRC
             was not probative of the issue either way and the decision  is
             arguably in error for that additional reason".

Rule 24 Response

 9. Mr Dhanji handed up his Rule 24 response which was dated 16 July  2019.
    Although the judge did not  refer  to  Khan  (Dishonesty,  tax  return,
    paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC) it was clear  that  from  his
    reasoning he applied the guidance in Khan as amended by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673.  The judge acknowledged  that
    the discrepancy between earnings declared to HMRC and the  Home  Office
    gave rise to a suspicion of dishonesty that required the  appellant  to
    provide a plausible explanation and the judge went on to assess whether
    that explanation was satisfactory.

10. At [17] of his decision, the judge noted that Mr Hassan  was  credible.
    He was persuaded by the medical evidence adduced relating to the  three
    strokes he suffered in 2011, 2014 and 2017 and by  his  evidence  about
    the effect the strokes had on the way in which he conducted himself  in
    his tax affairs.  He had relied on his accountant to assist  him.   The
    judge assessed whether the explanation for the error by the  accountant
    was plausible which approach reflected that suggested in Khan.

11. The judge found that Mr Hassan had discharged the evidential burden and
    that discrepancies had "been satisfactorily  explained".   That  was  a
    conclusion open to the judge on an assessment of the evidence.

12. The challenge on the part of the Secretary of State rested  on  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the judge's conclusions.

Submissions on Error of Law

13. Mr Dhanji relied upon his Rule 24 response I have set out above.

14. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

15. Balajigari considered 322(5) and found that ongoing  use  of  the  same
    could lead  to  unfairness  because  decision  makers  were  proceeding
    directly from finding that the earnings discrepancies were  the  result
    of dishonesty without giving applicants an opportunity  to  proffer  an
    innocent explanation.   The  court  approved  Khan  and  held  that  an
    earnings  discrepancy  only  constituted   sufficiently   reprehensible
    conduct  if  it  was  as  a  result  of  the  applicant's   dishonesty.
    Carelessness or ignorance or poor advice were  not  conduct  making  it
    undesirable for the applicant to  remain  here.   However  regrettable,
    such  "genuine"  or  "innocent"  errors  did  not  meet  the  necessary
    threshold.  The judge considered the circumstances  of  the  errors  in
    considerable  detail  at  [15]-[24].    The   judge   carried   out   a
    comprehensive and careful analysis  taking  into  account  considerable
    documentary  evidence  including  the  appellant's  significant  health
    issues between 2011 and 2017.  The judge found at [24] that taking into
    account  the  evidence  and  explanations  including  reliance  by  the
    appellant upon his professional advisers' advice, it had not been shown
    that a ground for refusal  under  322(5)  had  been  established.   The
    discrepancies were not the result of any  dishonesty  or  intention  to
    deceive or mislead.  There was no penalty imposed by HMRC for the error
    corrected by the amendment.  It  was  irrelevant  that  the  accountant
    failed to attend to give evidence. The judge carried out an appropriate
    analysis under Khan and Balajigari.  He gave clear and  cogent  reasons
    for his decision which he was entitled  to  come  to  on  the  evidence
    before him.

16. The grounds disclose no error  of  law.   The  judge's  decision  shall
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

