


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/09197/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 April 2019                        | On 8 May 2019                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     UP
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mrs A Chaudhry (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal  (the  tribunal)  which  it  made  on  9  October  2018,
following a hearing of 22 June 2018, and which it sent to the parties on  22
October  2018.  The  tribunal,  in  making  its  decision,   dismissed   the
claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of  4  April  2018,
refusing to grant him leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  as  the
spouse of his British citizen sponsor.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant  anonymity  because  it  thought  it
should do so to protect the welfare and privacy of two infant  children  who
have an involvement in the case. Nothing was said to me about anonymity  but
I find myself in agreement with the tribunal  about  the  matter  and  have,
therefore, decided to continue that grant.

3.    Shorn of all the  essentials,  the  background  circumstances  may  be
summarised as follows: The claimant is a national of Turkey and he was  born
on 22 January 1994. His sponsor, a British citizen, has two children from  a
previous relationship who were aged ten and seven years respectively at  the
time the tribunal heard the appeal. The sponsor and the  claimant  met  each
other, in Turkey, in May 2014. They subsequently  married  in  Turkey  on  7
July 2016. It had been intended at one point that the  couple  and  the  two
children would all  live  together  as  a  single  family  unit  in  Turkey.
However, there were complications with those plans linked at least  in  part
to the wishes of the father of the two children to continue to have  regular
contact with them. There was in existence  an  Order  of  the  Family  Court
placing a qualified prohibition upon the children's removal  abroad.  On  11
November 2016 the claimant entered the UK as a visitor. That leave  was  due
to expire on 6 April 2017 but on 25  March  2017  he  made  the  application
which ultimately led to the appeal before  the  tribunal  and  now  to  this
appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

4.    The claimant attended the hearing before the tribunal  at  which  both
parties were represented. Both he and the sponsor gave oral  evidence.  Part
of his case was his assertion that if permitted  to  remain  in  the  UK  he
would have employment. A person said to be his  intended  employer  attended
before the tribunal but did not give evidence.

5.    The tribunal decided that the claimant  could  not  benefit  from  the
potentially relevant Immigration Rules contained within Appendix FM  because
he had been a visitor at the time of his application. That followed from  E-
LTRP.2.1 and has not been in issue. The tribunal asked  itself  whether  the
claimant could bring himself  within  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  but
decided that he could not. It then went on  to  consider  whether  he  might
succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR  outside  the  rules.  As  to  that,  it
reminded  itself  of  the  content  of  sections  117B  and  117D   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

6.    The tribunal then  turned  its  attention  to  what  it  made  of  the
evidence. As to the  claimed  relationship  between  the  claimant  and  the
sponsor's two children it said it accepted that  "there  is  now  a  genuine
bond of affection between him and the children and that he  participates  in
their day to day care". At a later point in  its  written  reasons  it  said
that it was satisfied that the claimant, the sponsor and the  sponsor's  two
children enjoy family life for the purposes of Article  8.  It  referred  to
the evidence regarding the claimant's prospective employment in the  UK  but
was unconvinced about the genuineness of the claimed  job  offer,  observing
that the potential  employer's  evidence  had  not  been  tested  in  cross-
examination. Ultimately, it decided that the order of the Family  Court  did
not absolutely prohibit the children  going  to  Turkey,  that  family  life
could reasonably be enjoyed outside the UK, that the best interests  of  the
children would be for them to reside with their mother wherever  that  might
be, and that, putting everything together, any interference with  Article  8
rights would be proportionate. That is why it dismissed the appeal.

7.    An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
followed. A plethora of points were taken  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
permission to appeal, on an unlimited basis  was  granted.  That  led  to  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so  that  consideration  could
be given as to whether the tribunal had  erred  in  law  and,  if  so,  what
should flow from that. Representation  at  that  hearing  was  as  indicated
above and I am grateful to each representative.

8.    Although not persuaded by all of the points made  in  the  grounds  of
appeal, I have concluded that  the  tribunal,  notwithstanding  its  careful
analysis of the evidence, did err in law in a way which was material in  the
sense that, had it not so erred, the outcome might  (I  do  not  say  would)
have been different. I shall now explain why I have reached that view.

9.    Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
relevantly provides:

                 "117B Article 8: Public interest considerations  applicable
in all cases

           1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
              public interest...

           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -

                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

10.   Section 117D of the same Act relevantly  provides  that  a  qualifying
child is a person under the age of eighteen who is British or who has  lived
in the UK for a continuous period of seven years.

11.   The tribunal clearly thought  that  there  was  a  close  relationship
between the claimant and the two children. That followed from  what  it  had
said about the relationship which I have noted above. But,  on  my  reading,
it did not actually make a finding as to whether it could be said  that  the
claimant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  them  as
that term is used in section 117B above. That  was  a  matter  of  potential
importance because had it been decided that there was  such  a  relationship
it would only have been in circumstances where it was reasonable  to  expect
the children to leave the UK that the appeal would fail.

12.   It may be that the tribunal  in  saying  what  it  did  regarding  the
relationship between the claimant and the children  was  intending  to  find
that there was such a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship.  But  I
think if it was making such a finding it would have said so in a  way  which
was clear and unequivocal. That  is  particularly  so  given  that,  on  the
evidence, the  children's  natural  father  remained  in  the  UK,  remained
concerned about their welfare and location and  remained  a  part  of  their
lives. It might be said that the tribunal can be assumed not  to  have  been
intending to make such a finding because of  the  existence  of  the  father
such that there was no room, in the circumstances, for a third  parent.  But
in R (on the application of RK v SSHD IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC)  it  was
said that it would be  unusual,  but  not  impossible,  for  more  than  two
individuals to have a "parental relationship" with a  qualifying  child.  It
is  not  recorded  in  the  tribunal's  written  reasons  whether   it   was
specifically argued, in terms,  that  this  was  a  case  where  there  were
effectively three parents (including a de facto parent) but such was  argued
in a skeleton argument which had  been  provided  to  the  tribunal  by  the
claimant's representatives. Since it would be unusual to have more than  two
"parents" I could not have faulted the tribunal at all for  not  considering
the possibility for itself if  the  point  had  not  bene  put  to  it.  But
notwithstanding that it appears it might not have been put to it during  the
course of the hearing, the point was clearly put in  the  skeleton  argument
so, in my judgment, the tribunal had to make a finding about the  matter.  I
have concluded that it did not do so, or at least, it  did  not  clearly  do
so.

13.   The tribunal said, at paragraph 31 of its  written  reasons,  that  an
important consideration for it was whether "family life  can  reasonably  be
enjoyed outside the United Kingdom". It then embarked upon an assessment  as
to that noting, amongst other things, that the claimant and the sponsor  had
originally planned for the family, including the children,  to  relocate  to
Turkey and that the best interest of the children would simply be served  by
them residing with their mother. I  have  considered  whether  all  of  that
amounted to an assessment under section 117B(6)(b) as to  whether  it  would
or would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.  But  it
seems to me that such an assessment as to reasonableness is wider,  as  well
as being more specifically targeted upon the children, than a  more  general
assessment as to whether family life can reasonably be enjoyed  outside  the
UK. Further, a best interests assessment is not  necessarily  the  same  and
would  not  necessarily  yield  the  same  result  as  a  reasonableness  of
departure test. Of course, had the tribunal found that there was no  genuine
and subsisting parental relationship between the claimant and  the  children
it  would  not  have  had  to  ask  itself  the   question   regarding   the
reasonableness or otherwise of the  children  leaving  the  UK.  But  on  my
reading, it is not clear that it did so find.

14.   So, in my judgment,  the  tribunal  notwithstanding  its  careful  and
thorough  approach  failed  to  make  appropriate  findings  under   section
117(6)(a) and (assuming a positive finding regarding parental  relationship)
under 117(6)(b). I have concluded, therefore, that its decision  has  to  be
set aside.

15.   I was originally minded to keep the case in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
the purposes of remaking. But I have changed my mind as to that.  There  was
another issue raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  regarding  the  tribunal's
treatment of the evidence concerning the job  offer.  Specifically,  it  was
said that the prospective employer had not only  attended  the  hearing  but
had been tendered for cross-examination but that the  Secretary  of  State's
representative had declined to cross examine.  In  such  circumstances,  ran
the argument on behalf of the claimant, it had not open to the  tribunal  to
dismiss the evidence of the job offer on the basis that the  letter  written
by the prospective employer had not been the subject  of  cross-examination.
I have not found it necessary to reach a view as to that ground  of  appeal,
given the view I have reached about the one which I  have  already  analysed
above, but it may be that, ultimately, a view or a finding will have  to  be
reached as to the evidence of  prospective  employment  (thought  I  do  not
think it is by any means the most pivotal aspect of this appeal) as well  as
findings regarding the  precise  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
claimant and the qualifying children. If there  is  to  be  extensive  fact-
finding it does seem to me, on reflection, that this is  something  that  is
best done by the First-tier Tribunal as the expert fact-finding body in  the
field.  I  have  concluded,  therefore,  that  the  appropriate  course   is
remittal.

16.   So, there will be  a  complete  rehearing  of  the  claimant's  appeal
before a differently constituted First-tier  Tribunal.  The  rehearing  will
not be limited to the basis upon which  I  have  set  aside  the  tribunal's
decision. All matters of fact and law will be considered, at the  rehearing,
entirely afresh.

17.   Since I am remitting I am statutorily required to give directions  for
the rehearing. But it does not seem to me that I need  to  be  unnecessarily
prescriptive as to that. Accordingly, I would simply direct that the  appeal
be considered  entirely  afresh,  by  way  of  an  oral  hearing,  before  a
differently  constituted   First-tier   Tribunal.   Any   other   incidental
directions will, no doubt, be made by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  in
due course.

18.   This appeal to the Upper Tribunal then succeeds on the  basis  and  to
the extent explained above.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law. Accordingly, that decision is set aside and the case is remitted for  a
complete rehearing before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant for the same reasons that it was made. I do so under rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of
these proceedings shall name or  otherwise  identify  the  claimant  or  any
member of his family nor the sponsor or any  members  of  her  family.  This
applies to all parties to the proceedings. Failure to  comply  may  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:                                 Dated: 2 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
