
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09728/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2021                       |On 22 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              saritha ramancha
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Y Din, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal comprising Judges Beach and Simpson ("the panel"), promulgated
    on 27  November  2019.  By  that  decision,  the  panel  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision, dated  21  August
    2017,  refusing  her  human  rights  claim  made  in  the  context   of
    deportation action.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of India, had come to the  United  Kingdom  in
    2007 as a student and had  remained  here  with  leave  thereafter.  In
    February 2011, she applied for further leave to remain as  a  Tier  one
    (General) Migrant. This application was granted.  It  later  transpired
    that the appellant had in fact practised  deception  when  making  that
    2011 application.

 3. The appellant returned to India in 2011 and, in 2013, married a British
    citizen, Mr Bejjenki. She re-entered the United Kingdom  in  2014  with
    leave as his spouse. Later that year, the  appellant  was  arrested  in
    relation to the 2011 application. She was convicted on 20 May 2016  and
    sentenced in June of that year to 12 months' imprisonment. The sentence
    triggered the application of section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.  A
    decision to deport was issued on 19 July 2016, followed by the  signing
    of a deportation order on 9 September of that year.

 4. On appeal from the respondent's refusal of her human rights claim,  the
    appellant  was  initially  successful.  However,   the   decision   was
    challenged by the respondent and ultimately  set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The appeal was remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    complete re-hearing. In this way, the appellant's case came before  the
    panel.

 5. The appellant essentially put her  Article  8  case  to  the  panel  as
    follows. Although she and husband did  not  have  children,  they  were
    engaged in fertility treatment in this country. It was asserted that it
    would be unduly harsh on the husband for him to relocate to  India.  He
    was employed in this country and it would have been very  difficult  to
    find appropriate work in India. It would  have  been  unduly  harsh  to
    separate the couple: it would interrupt the fertility treatment and the
    husband would be unable to  see  the  appellant  for  lengthy  periods.
    Finally, it was said that there were very compelling  circumstances  in
    the appellant's case.



The panel's decision

 6. For reasons set out at [58]-[64], the panel concluded that it would not
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's husband to relocate to  India  with
    her. It  found  that  the  husband  would  be  able  to  find  suitable
    employment, the couple would have familial  support,  and  the  husband
    could retain his British citizenship and obtain Overseas Citizenship of
    India. In  considering  an  additional  argument  put  forward  on  the
    appellant's behalf, the panel concluded that the husband's inability to
    vote in Indian elections would not render relocation unduly harsh.

 7. The panel concluded at [65] that separation would not be unduly  harsh.
    Essentially, it found that the husband could travel to  India  for  the
    purposes of any ongoing fertility treatment and that the  couple  could
    maintain effective communication through the Internet and holidays.

 8. The panel then goes on to address  the  very  compelling  circumstances
    issue in detail between [66] and [75].  It  found  that  the  appellant
    would not be without familial support, accommodation, and employment in
    India, even if her  husband  remained  in  United  Kingdom.  The  panel
    considered the appellant's single offence and took the  view  that  its
    nature went to the "very heart  of  the  maintenance  of  an  effective
    immigration system." The sentencing remarks of the relevant Judge  were
    taken into account, as were a number of surrounding circumstances.  The
    panel noted the assessment of a low risk of reoffending and a low  risk
    of serious harm, but did not regard this as a "significant"  factor  in
    its overall balancing exercise.

 9. Ultimately, the panel concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate and the appeal was accordingly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. Two grounds were put forward. First, it was said that the  panel  erred
    in concluding that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  the  husband  to
    relocate to India because it had failed to take  account  of  the  fact
    that he would not be entitled to vote in that country. Second,  it  was
    said that the panel failed to give sufficient weight to the low risk of
    reoffending  evidence  and  had  also   failed   to   take   mitigating
    circumstances into account when evaluating the appellant's offence.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal. The  Judge
    saw little merit in the first ground, but the  second  ground  appeared
    stronger.

12. Following the grant of permission, the respondent provided  a  rule  24
    response, dated 14 January 2020.



The hearing

13. Mr Din relied on the grounds of appeal and his skeleton argument (which
    followed those grounds in all material respects). During submissions, I
    observed that ground 1 only challenged the panel's  conclusion  on  the
    relocation scenario: nothing was said  in  respect  of  the  separation
    scenario. Mr Din acknowledged this, but did not  withdraw  reliance  on
    the first ground. He made no application to amend his grounds.

14. In respect of ground 2, I pointed out that it relied on the  dissenting
    judgment of the late Lord Kerr in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60;  [2016]  1
    WLR 4799. The grounds had not made the status of the passages relied on
    clear and this in turn gave rise to the potential  risk  of  misleading
    the reader. Mr Din apologised and I accept that he did not in  any  way
    intend such a result.

15. Mr Din submitted that the panel should have  regarded  the  appellant's
    low risk of reoffending and low risk of serious harm as  a  significant
    factor in the  assessment  of  whether  very  compelling  circumstances
    existed. The panel was wrong not to have given it that level of weight.
    He also submitted that the panel had  failed  to  conduct  a  balancing
    exercise, weighing up the mitigating factors  against  the  aggravating
    factors in respect of the appellant's offence. In terms of the right to
    vote issue, Mr Din accepted that he could not  point  to  any  case-law
    supporting his argument.

16. Mr Tufan submitted that there was no error in relation to the right  to
    vote issue. The panel had been entitled  to  regard  the  low  risk  of
    reoffending and  low  risk  of  serious  harm  is  not  constituting  a
    significant factor in  the  appellant's  favour.  The  public  interest
    included the element of deterrence as well.

17. In reply, Mr Din accepted that the reoffending issue was not enough  of
    itself to meet the very compelling circumstances threshold, but it  was
    a relevant factor. He submitted that the panel should have regarded the
    fact of the appellant's voluntary departure from the United Kingdom  in
    2011 and her return under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules as being
    an important factor in her favour.

18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions on error of law

19. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the panel's decision such
    that I should set it aside under section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

20. Ground 1 faces an insuperable  obstacle.  In  considering  whether  she
    could satisfy the exception in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appellant  had  to  show  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for her husband to relocate to India and for them
    to be separated (see, for  example,  Patel  (British  citizen  child  -
    deportation) [2020] UKUT 00045 (IAC), at paragraph 31). The  panel  had
    concluded that neither limb of the exception had been satisfied. Ground
    1 seeks only to challenge  the  conclusion  on  the  first  limb;  i.e.
    whether it would have  been  unduly  harsh  for  the  husband  to  have
    relocated to India. Therefore, whatever the merits of the argument  put
    forward, it could make no difference to the outcome, as the  conclusion
    on the second limb (the separation scenario) has gone unchallenged.

21. In any event, I have no hesitation in concluding that ground  1  fails.
    This aspect of the challenge has been framed so as to assert  that  the
    absence of a right to vote in the country to which an individual  would
    be relocating must be unduly harsh. Quite apart  from  this  contention
    being unsupported by any case-law, as a matter of principle  it  cannot
    be right. The unduly harsh threshold is high  one.  To  hold  that  the
    inability of an individual to vote in the elections of the  country  to
    which they would be going to live with their partner would, in  and  of
    itself, render such a move unduly harsh would be  to  wholly  undermine
    the high threshold and the overall strength of the public  interest  in
    deportation cases, as recognised in the legislative framework.

22. Whilst I accept that Article 21 of the Universal Declaration  of  Human
    Rights 1948 refers to the right  of  everyone  to  "take  part  in  the
    government  of  his  country,  directly  or   through   freely   chosen
    representatives", this of itself cannot constitute a  sound  basis  for
    elevating the importance of suffrage to that of a  factor  sufficiently
    strong to render relocation unduly harsh in cases where  an  individual
    would not be eligible to vote.

23. Further, on the facts of the  present  case,  the  appellant's  husband
    would retain the right to vote in  United  Kingdom  elections  even  if
    living in India, and thus it cannot be said that he would  be  entirely
    disenfranchised.

24. The panel concluded that the partner's  inability  to  vote  in  Indian
    elections would not be unduly harsh because  the  appellant  could  not
    vote in the United Kingdom elections if she remained  in  this  country
    with  discretionary  leave.  It  may  be  that,  as  a  citizen  of   a
    Commonwealth country with leave to remain, the appellant could in  fact
    have voted in elections in this country. However, for the  reasons  set
    out in paragraphs 20-23, above,  any  error  on  the  panel's  part  is
    immaterial to the outcome.

25. For the avoidance of any doubt, the panel's consideration of all  other
    matters relevant to the unduly harsh issue was entirely sustainable and
    has not been the subject of challenge.

26. I turn to ground 2. It is clear from the panel's decision that  it  was
    fully aware of the nature of the appellant's offence, the fact that she
    left United Kingdom voluntarily in 2011, that she re-entered  lawfully,
    and that her assessment of future risk and  reoffending  was  low.  The
    fact that the appellant had received a 12 month sentence was, first and
    foremost, relevant to the triggering of  the  framework  under  section
    117C of the 2002 Act. There is nothing  on  the  face  of  the  panel's
    decision to suggest that it regarded the appellant's  offence  as  more
    serious than any other. Having said that, the  panel  was  entitled  to
    regard the offence (obtaining or seeking to obtain leave by  deception)
    as going to the heart of the  legitimate  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration controls. Further, the panel was entitled to raise concerns
    about the appellant's reasons for leaving the United  Kingdom  in  2011
    and what she did not say when making the application for re-entry  (she
    answered  "no"  the  question  of  whether  she  had  ever  engaged  in
    activities that might point against her being admitted to this country,
    notwithstanding the use of deception in the 2011 application).

27. A particular focus of Mr Din's challenge has been what the  panel  said
    at [74], namely that the low  risk  of  reoffending  and  low  risk  of
    serious harm was not a "significant" factor to be  taken  into  account
    when assessing  whether  very  compelling  circumstances  existed.  The
    relevant sentence reads as follows:

           "However, the likelihood of reoffending in the future is  not  a
           significant factor to be taken into account as it is  simply  to
           be expected that an individual will not commit offences."

28. I address this issue in two ways. First, Mr Din has put his argument on
    the basis that the panel should have (in other  words,  were  bound  to
    have) afforded "significant weight" to the low risk assessment.  As  is
    well-established, weight is, subject to the  elevated  threshold  of  a
    rationality challenge, a matter for the Tribunal. Here, the  panel  was
    stating that "significant" weight was not being placed on this  factor.
    It was not stating that no weight was being attributed. In light of the
    panel's analysis as a whole, this was a  rational  conclusion  to  have
    drawn and the appellant's challenge fails.

29. The second approach to this aspect of the  challenge  is  to  read  the
    sentence within [74] as a reference to the observation of Hamblen LJ in
    Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551, at paragraph 84,  in  which  he  said  the
    following:

           "...rehabilitation involves no more than returning an individual
           to the place society expects him to be."

30. In HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; [2021] 1 WLR 1327 (a judgment handed
    down after the panel's decision had  been  promulgated),  Underhill  LJ
    commented on the view expressed in Binbuga and  stated,  at  paragraphs
    141 and 142:

           "141. What those authorities seem to me to establish is that the
           fact that a potential deportee has shown positive evidence of
           rehabilitation, and thus of a reduced risk of re-offending,
           cannot be excluded from the overall proportionality exercise.
           The authorities say so, and it must be right in principle in
           view of the holistic nature of that exercise. Where a tribunal
           is able to make an assessment that the foreign criminal is
           unlikely to re-offend, that is a factor which can carry some
           weight in the balance when considering very compelling
           circumstances. The weight which it will bear will vary from case
           to case, but it will rarely be of great weight bearing in mind
           that, as Moore-Bick LJ says in Danso, the public interest in the
           deportation of criminals is not based only on the need to
           protect the public from further offending by the foreign
           criminal in question but also on wider policy considerations of
           deterrence and public concern. I would add that tribunals will
           properly be cautious about their ability to make findings on the
           risk of re-offending, and will usually be unable to do so with
           any confidence based on no more than the undertaking of prison
           courses or mere assertions of reform by the offender or the
           absence of subsequent offending for what will typically be a
           relatively short period.

           142. That summary may come to much the same thing in practice as
           the UT's proposition that "no  material  weight  ...  ordinarily
           falls to be  given  to  rehabilitation  in  the  proportionality
           balance"; but I think, with respect, that it is more  accurately
           expressed, and I cannot in any event adopt  its  reasoning  that
           "rehabilitation will ... normally do no more than show that  the
           individual has returned to the place where society  expects  him
           ... to be", notwithstanding its endorsement (not, I think, as  a
           matter of ratio) in Binbuga. I do not  think  that  it  properly
           reflects the reason why rehabilitation is in principle  relevant
           in this context, which is that it goes to  reduce  (one  element
           in) the weight of the public interest in deportation which forms
           one side of the proportionality balance. It is not generally  to
           do with being given credit for being a law-abiding  citizen:  as
           the UT says, that is expected of everybody, but  the  fact  that
           that is so is not a good reason for denying to an appellant such
           weight as his rehabilitation would otherwise carry."

31. Applying Underhill LJ's comments to the present case, it  may  be  said
    that the panel wrongly  linked  the  non-attribution  of  "significant"
    weight to the idea that  individuals  are  expected  not  to  reoffend.
    However, even if this interpretation were to be adopted,  there  is  no
    error on the panel's part such as to require its  decision  to  be  set
    aside. As Underhill LJ noted, the relevance of the reoffending issue is
    fact-specific and will only rarely  be  afforded  "great  weight".  The
    panel did adopt a fact-specific approach. The appellant has been unable
    to establish any other errors such as irrelevant  matters  being  taken
    into  account  or  relevant  matters  being  overlooked.  In  all   the
    circumstances,  and  reading  the   panel's   decision   sensibly   and
    holistically, it is in my judgment inconceivable  that  it  might  have
    placed "significant" weight  (as  opposed  to  some  weight,  which  it
    implicitly did) on the reoffending factor, sufficient  to  have  tipped
    the balance in the appellant's favour (given the very stringent  nature
    of the very compelling circumstances threshold). Therefore,  any  error
    was not material to the outcome.

32. The appellant's challenge to the panel decision fails and her appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal must therefore be dismissed.



Anonymity


33. The panel made no anonymity direction and there is no reason for me to
    do so at this stage.


Notice of Decision

34. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


35. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 5 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
