
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09716/2017
                                                               HU/16539/2016
                                                               HU/16541/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 06 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        Olawale [B] (first appellant)
                       Sherifat [B] (second appellant)
                           [T B] (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Moffatt, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal to a Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal to grant them leave to remain  on  the
    basis of private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  first
    appellant is  the  partner  of  the  second  appellant  and  the  third
    appellant is their daughter.  The first appellant has also two sons  by
    his  previous  partner.   They  are  British  citizens  and  were  born
    respectively on 18 December 2004 and 12 May 2009.  The third  appellant
    was born on 18 July 2010.

2.   After a hearing on 13 November 2017 the judge dismissed their  appeals.
     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  subsequently  granted,
    and following a hearing on 28 August 2018 I found errors of law in  the
    judge's findings and directed that the matter fell to be reheard in the
    Upper Tribunal.

3.   The first appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2001.  He  had
    an unsuccessful claim for asylum, and a subsequent appeal was dismissed
    in 2002.  Further asylum submissions were made in 2011 and were refused
    in 2013, but he was granted leave to remain on the basis of private and
    family life until 8 June 2016.

4.   As noted above, his sons are  British  citizens  born  respectively  in
    2004 and 2009.  His relationship with their mother ended in 2009.   The
    second appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  2010,  being  an
    overstayer after the end of her leave as a visitor on 4 May 2011.

5.   One of the issues before the judge in relation to which  there  is  now
    some clarification concerns the degree  of  involvement  of  the  first
    appellant in his sons' lives.  His evidence was that his former partner
    caused difficulties in his access to his sons and at that time  he  had
    not attempted to seek access to them through the family court.  He  had
    tried to seek the help of his ex-partner's  father  with  whom  he  had
    always had a good relationship, but to no avail.  There  was  an  issue
    before the judge as to the most recent contact between the  father  and
    the sons and the difficulties being experienced.

6.   There is however now a family court order dated 7  May  2019  intending
    to provide certainty to the parties in terms of  the  arrangements  and
    ordering that the children be made available to  spend  time  with  the
    appellant every Saturday between 12 noon and 4pm and telephone  contact
    on a Monday, Wednesday and Friday on a time agreed between 4pm and 8pm.



7.   I note in passing, though as Ms Moffatt said it is  of  no  materiality
    to this appeal, that the first and second  appellants  have  a  further
    child who was born on 29 March 2018.

8.   Ms Moffatt provided a helpful and detailed skeleton argument which  she
    developed in points made in oral submissions.  I should  note  at  this
    point that Mr Tarlow was content to limit his submissions  to  reliance
    on the refusal letter.

9.   Ms Moffatt's first  point  was  that  the  first  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  his  parental
    relationship with his two British sons and as a consequence his removal
    is disproportionate.  This is argued on the  basis  that  the  evidence
    shows that he is taking and intends to continue to take an active  role
    in his sons'  upbringing  as  required  in  Appendix  FM  paragraph  E-
    LTRPT.2.4.  Reliance was placed on the fact that  he  lived  with  them
    from their births until his relationship with their mother  broke  down
    in 2009, that he shares parental responsibility with their  mother  for
    them, that in 2013 the respondent  had  accepted  that  he  had  access
    rights to them and  had  provided  evidence  that  he  was  taking  and
    continuing to take an active part in their upbringing, since moving out
    of their home he has maintained regular contact with them over the past
    ten years including trips out and time spent at  his  home,  and  their
    securing of the court order formalising the requirement for him to have
    contact.

10.  In this regard it can be seen from the first  appellant's  most  recent
    statement, which he adopted today, that this was a last resort and that
    he had tried to resolve matters through family channels  before  having
    recourse to the courts.  It is also the case that he  has  consistently
    provided financial contributions for his sons' upbringing as documented
    in the evidence including the  witness  statements,  child  maintenance
    letter and bank statements and that he is involved with their school as
    can be seen from his second statement.

11.  The point is made that in light of the difficulties between  the  first
    appellant  and  the  children's  mother,  and  in  particular  periodic
    obstructive  behaviour  on  her  part,  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his sons is not without its difficulties.  It is asserted
    however that such difficulties are a frequent and normal  part  of  any
    human relationship and particularly one with teenage children.

12.  I am satisfied that the argument in  this  regard  is  made  out.   The
    volume of evidence culminating most recently in the family court  order
    but also the evidence of ongoing involvement to the necessary level  in
    the children's lives from their birth on the part of the  appellant  is
    such in my view as to amount to him taking  an  active  role  in  their
    upbringing.

13.  In the alternative I accept  the  argument  that  the  first  appellant
    satisfies EX.1 since he has on  the  basis  of  the  above  findings  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  the  two  boys  and  has  a
    subsisting role in providing elements of direct parental care which  is
    longstanding.  In addition it would not be reasonable to expect them to
    leave the United Kingdom.  They live separately from the appellant with
    their British  mother  and  requiring  them  to  go  to  Nigeria  would
    therefore have the effect of  separating  them  from  their  mother  or
    alternatively requiring their mother who is a British national to leave
    the United Kingdom to accompany  them.   This  cannot  be  said  to  be
    reasonable, and it is clear in my view that their best interests favour
    them remaining in the United Kingdom as  British  citizens  with  their
    British national mother and with regular contact that has now been  set
    out in a family court order with their father the first appellant.

14.  The next point made by Ms Moffatt concerned  the  third  appellant  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

15.  She will be 9 in July, and it is argued that it is not  reasonable  for
    her to leave the United Kingdom, bearing in mind that she is at an  age
    at which ties and roots put down outside the immediate family  take  on
    greater significance, she regularly sees her two British  half-brothers
    and the effect of her being required to leave the United Kingdom  would
    separate her from them which would in  practice  I  accept  lead  to  a
    significant breakdown in her relationship with  them.   She  has  never
    visited Nigeria and knows little of it beyond the fact of it being  the
    country in which her parents were  born  and  brought  up.   It  is,  I
    accept, in her best interests to remain in the United  Kingdom.   As  a
    consequence I consider that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)
    are made out.  The guidance in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 is of  clear
    relevance here, bearing in mind the  conclusion  there  that  it  is  a
    question in assessing whether it is reasonable to  expect  a  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom with a parent the position of the  child  only
    and not the immigration history and conduct of  the  parents.   I  find
    that the argument in respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) is made out  in
    that it would not be reasonable for the third appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

16.  In the alternative I agree with the further submission that even if  it
    were not the case that the first appellant had been shown to be  taking
    an active role in his sons' upbringing, as was noted in SR [2018]  UKUT
    00334 (IAC), an appellant may still be able to  demonstrate  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  for  the
    purposes of section 117B(6) even if the requirement of active  role  is
    not satisfied.  As noted above, I am satisfied  that  the  active  role
    requirement is satisfied but in the alternative if I am wrong  in  that
    regard I consider that the appellant has shown  a  genuine,  subsisting
    parental relationship with his two sons who  are  qualifying  children.
    As a consequence the public interest does not require his removal  from
    the United Kingdom.  It is clear from what was said  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 that the proper  application  of
    section 117B(6) when resolved in a person's favour is determinative  of
    proportionality.

17.  Further in the alternative, the argument is made  that  if  I  were  to
    find that Article 8 would be breached in a requirement that  the  first
    appellant leave the United Kingdom but not with regard  to  the  second
    and third appellants, on the independent basis of the third appellant's
    private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  would  not,  I  agree,  be
    proportionate to require the second and third appellants  to  leave  in
    the circumstances since this would have the effect  of  separating  the
    first appellant from his partner and daughter and the infant child, and
    the  third  appellant  from  her  British  half-brothers.   The  public
    interest falls firmly in favour of the second and third appellants.

18.  For all the above reasons therefore I am  satisfied  that  this  appeal
    falls to be allowed on the basis set out above.

19.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed   Date 22 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

