
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09720/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 May 2019                                |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     d s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant
    or members of  his/her  family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  This  direction  has  been
    made in order to protect the Appellant's  stepson  from  serious  harm,
    having regard  to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the  principle  of
    proportionality.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rai, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the remaking of the decision in the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal, dated 8 April 2016, of a human  rights  claim
    made on 16 December 2015.  By a decision dated 27 January 2019, I found
    that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law (this decision
    is annexed, below).  In essence, my error of  law  decision  was  based
    upon the inadequate assessment of the Appellant's claimed  relationship
    with his claimed partner K and  her  son  J  (the  Appellant's  claimed
    stepson).

 2. I set  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and  issued
    directions to the parties.  The matter then came before me on 25  March
    2019 for a  resumed  hearing.   Unfortunately,  due  to  administrative
    issues, the Senior Presenting Officer had not been  provided  with  the
    relevant file and I decided that it would  have  been  unfair  to  have
    proceeded on that occasion.  Therefore, I adjourned the appeal and  set
    out in a directions notice what I considered to be the core factual and
    legal issues in this appeal.  In respect of the  former,  I  stated  as
    follows:

         "There are three factual issues:

         1.1  first, the nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant
             and his claimed partner;

         1.2  second, the nature of the relationship between  the  Appellant
             and his claimed partner's son (his claimed stepson);

         1.3  third, the claimed circumstances relating to  the  Appellant's
             familial history in India and any  protection  issues  arising
             therefrom."

 3. In respect of the legal issues, I identified these as being:

         1.1  first, whether the Appellant can rely on Appendix  FM  to  the
             Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), with particular reference  to
             EX.1;

         1.2  second, whether the Appellant can rely on section  117B(6)  of
             the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA
             2002");

         1.3  third whether the Appellant can rely on  claimed  problems  in
             India arising before his arrival in the United Kingdom to show
             that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             reintegration into Indian society, with reference to paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules."



The Appellant's case in summary

 4. As set  out  in  my  directions,  the  Appellant's  case  concerns  two
    relationships, that with K and the stepson  J,  together  with  claimed
    difficulties arising in his home area in Punjab, India, which  he  says
    would cause him problems if he were to return there now.




The evidence before me

 5. In remaking the decision in this  appeal  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    following sources of evidence:

               1) the original Respondent's bundle  under  cover  of  letter
                  dated 29 March 2017;

               2) the Appellant's First-tier Tribunal  bundle,  indexed  and
                  paginated 1 - 387;

               3) the Appellant's  supplementary  bundle  prepared  for  the
                  rehearing of this appeal, indexed and paginated 1 - 27;

               4) an independent social worker's report by Mr Brian E Smith,
                  dated 18 May 2018; copies of the residence permits  for  K
                  and J;

               5) a copy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  K's
                  appeal, promulgated on 31 January 2017 (PA/07597/2016).

 6. The Appellant and K both attended the rehearing and gave oral  evidence
    with the assistance of a Punjabi interpreter.  A full note of the  oral
    evidence is contained in the Record of Proceedings.  I do  not  propose
    to set it out here but will refer to any relevant aspects  of  it  when
    setting out my findings of fact, below.



Submissions of the parties

 7. For the Respondent, Mr Bramble relied on the reasons for refusal letter
    dated 8 April 2016.  He expressly accepted, in light of the evidence as
    a  whole,  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with K and that he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  J.   Whilst  not   specifically   challenging   the
    credibility of the Appellant's evidence relating to  the  claimed  land
    dispute in India, Mr Bramble submitted that as matters  now  stood,  it
    would not cause him any difficulties on  return.   In  respect  of  the
    relevant legal issues, Mr Bramble accepted that J, like his mother,  is
    a recognised refugee in this country and that it would be in  J's  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom.  Mr Bramble suggested that K
    and J would be in a better position in respect of  returning  to  India
    now that the Appellant would be with them.   He  suggested  that  there
    were no particularly good reasons as to why this family unit could  not
    go and live away from the Punjab.  Mr Bramble did accept  that  J  only
    spoke English and Punjabi.

 8. Mr Rai relied on his skeleton argument. He placed significant  emphasis
    on the social worker's report, in particular the matters referenced  at
    paragraph 3 of the skeleton argument.  J was  clearly  well-settled  in
    the United Kingdom and had a strong relationship  with  the  Appellant.
    Leaving  the  United  Kingdom  for  India  would   entail   significant
    disruption to J and his mother.  The  latter  had  already  experienced
    very traumatic events whilst in India.  Overall, it was submitted  that
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant being able  to
    enjoy family life  with  K  in  India  and/or  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for J to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Findings of fact

10. There was very little, if any, dispute as to the material fact in  this
    case, particularly in light of what I consider to be the entirely  fair
    and realistic position taken by Mr Bramble at the hearing before me.

11. Taken as a whole, the evidence clearly shows that the Appellant is  and
    has been for a  number  of  years  now  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with K.  When combining Mr Bramble's concession as to  the
    existence of the  relationship  with  the  evidence  contained  in  the
    couple's witness statements and the Appellant's bundle, I find that the
    relationship began at some stage in 2012 or shortly  thereafter  and  I
    find that the couple began cohabiting in 2014.

12. I find that K is a recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.   This  is
    not in dispute.  I find that her  status  resulted  from  a  successful
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in 2017 in which the judge  concluded
    that she had given  truthful  evidence  and  was  at  risk  of  serious
    domestic violence at the hands of her  ex-husband.   I  find  that  the
    judge also concluded that there would have  not  have  been  any  state
    protection and that she could not  internally  relocate  (at  least  in
    respect of her circumstances at that point in time).  I find that K had
    suffered from PTSD as a result of her traumatic past experiences.

13. I find that the Appellant does have a subsisting and  genuine  parental
    relationship with J, a  point  fairly  conceded  by  Mr  Bramble.   The
    unchallenged expert evidence of the  social  worker  is  clear  on  the
    nature or the relationship between the two and I place very significant
    weight upon it.  This evidence  is  to  the  effect  that  J  sees  the
    Appellant very much a father figure and  that  the  Appellant  plays  a
    significant role in the child's day-to-day life.  In addition,  I  find
    that J was born and brought up in the United Kingdom and is very  well-
    settled in school and in his social environment more generally.  I find
    that J speaks English and Punjabi only.

14. In respect of the Appellant's circumstances in India, I find  that  his
    parents do indeed live with his sister approximately 60 kilometres from
    the family's home village.  In view of the evidence before me  and  the
    absence of any specific attack on credibility, I am prepared to  accept
    that there had indeed been some sort of a land dispute at some point in
    the past.



Conclusions on the Article 8 claim within the context of the Rules

15. The Appellant cannot rely on Appendix FM insofar  as  his  relationship
    with J is concerned.  That is because he lives together with J and K in
    single family unit and therefore cannot get past E-LTRP.2.3 and 2.4.

16. However, the Appellant is potentially able to rely on EX.1  in  respect
    of his relationship with K.  On my findings of fact, K is his "partner"
    for the purposes of the Appendix, there are no suitability issues. With
    reference to EX.1, K is a person  with  leave  as  a  refugee  in  this
    country and in my view there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life being continued outside of this  country.   My  reasons  for  this
    final conclusion are as follows.

17. First, whilst I appreciate Mr Bramble's submission in  respect  of  the
    Appellant being with K and potentially accompanying her  to  India,  it
    remains the fact that K is a recognised refugee in this country.  There
    is no suggestion that her status has been or  would  be  revoked.   She
    gained her status by virtue of a satisfaction of  the  requirements  of
    Article 1(A) of the Refugee Convention.  Thus, there was a risk to  her
    in her  home  area  in  the  Punjab,  there  was  no  state  protection
    available, and she could not have been expected to internally  relocate
    anywhere in India.  The simple presence of the Appellant, if the family
    unit were to return to India together,  would  not  in  and  of  itself
    materially reduce the risk  to  K,  particular  in  light  of  her  ex-
    husband's extremely  nasty  actions  and  attitudes  in  the  past  (as
    described in the First-tier Tribunal's decision in K's appeal).

18. Second, the fact that K is a refugee amounts, at least on the facts  of
    this case, to an insurmountable obstacle to her being  able  to  go  to
    India and continue a family life with the Appellant.

19. On this basis, the Appellant succeeds in his appeal with  reference  to
    his satisfaction of the Rules and in light of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1109.

20. For the sake of completeness, I conclude that the Appellant  is  unable
    to satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Rules  in  his  own  right.
    Although I have accepted that there was a land dispute in the past,  it
    is highly unlikely that this would cause any material difficulties  now
    and in any event he could relocate within India.



Conclusions on the Article 8 claim outside the context of the Rules

21. I now turn to consider the core provision  outside  the  ambit  of  the
    Rules, namely section 117B(6) NIAA 2002.

22. J is a qualifying child by virtue of the length  of  his  residence  in
    this country.

23. I have found (in light of Mr Bramble's properly made  concession)  that
    the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    J.

24. The crucial issue is whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  J  to
    leave the United  Kingdom.   In  considering  the  assessment  of  this
    question I direct myself to the guidance set out in KO (Nigeria) [2018]
    UKSC 53, and AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

25. On a cumulative view of the reasons set out below, I conclude  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect J to leave the United Kingdom.  I say
    this on the hypothetical basis that he would leave, notwithstanding the
    reality that he is able to remain in the United Kingdom with K.

26. J's best interests very clearly lie in remaining in the United Kingdom.
     He was born in this country and has resided here throughout his 8-year
    life.  He is clearly well-settled in  his  life,  both  in  respect  of
    educational and social matters.  He enjoys stability here and having to
    go to India would quite clearly entail significant disruption, contrary
    to those best interests.

27. J is of course a refugee, having been granted in line with his mother's
    recognition as such following her successful appeal.  It is in my  view
    highly relevant to the question of reasonableness  that  the  child  in
    question currently has a status based on a risk to his mother  and,  by
    almost inevitable extension, himself (it would be close  to  absurd  to
    believe that K's ex-husband would not feel any animosity towards  J  as
    well).

28. The unchallenged social worker's report clearly states that being taken
    from the only life that he knows would be significantly prejudicial  to
    J. This expert evidence lends considerable support to  the  Appellant's
    case.

29. Even if it could be said that the  family  unit  would  go  and  reside
    somewhere away from Punjab, this  would  entail  additional  disruptive
    factors in respect of J.  He knows only English and Punjabi, and  would
    therefore very probably have to learn  another  language  (most  likely
    Hindi).  He would also be with his mother and the Appellant, neither of
    whom have any contacts or immediate means of re-establishing themselves
    in India were they to go and live elsewhere in that country.  Thus, the
    significant disruption and instability  caused  by  the  very  fact  of
    leaving the United Kingdom would be compounded by the circumstances  in
    which J would be likely to find himself in India.

30. I have taken into  account  what  is  described  as  the  "real  world"
    situation in which the  Appellant  has  no  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country.  However,  the  factors  in  his  favour  (strictly  speaking,
    relating to J) outweigh by some distance that particular point  in  the
    Respondent's favour.

31. All of the requirements of section 117B(6) NIAA 2002 are  met  and  the
    Appellant therefore succeeds in his appeal.



Anonymity

32. I have decided to make an order in this case because of  the  existence
    of the Appellant's stepson and the need to protect his identity.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  material
error of law and it has been set aside.



I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 21 May 2019

H Norton-Taylor

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have remade the decision and allowed the appeal and because a  fee  has
been paid or is payable, I have considered making a fee award in respect  of
the proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal. I have decided to make  a  whole
fee award of �140.00.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 21 May 2019

H Norton-Taylor

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09720/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel, instructed by Gills
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Easterman (the judge), promulgated on or about 17 August
    2018, dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  8
    April 2016.

 2. In  essence  the  Appellant's  case  had  been  based  on  his  claimed
    relationship with K, a recognised refugee in the  United  Kingdom,  and
    his stepson, J, also  a  refugee  (granted  status  in  line  with  his
    mother).  The Appellant's original appeal had  been  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  back  in  2017.   This  had   been   successfully
    challenged before the Upper Tribunal and the matter remitted.



The judge's decision

 3. It is clear that a good deal of effort went into the judge's  decision.
    He has clearly set out the evidence before him and the submissions made
    by the representatives.  The  relevant  findings  in  relation  to  the
    stepson begin at [62] and run to [78].  The findings in  respect  of  K
    run from [79] to [89].

 4. Ultimately the judge appears to conclude that there was not  a  genuine
    relationship between the Appellant and K,  but  at  the  same  time  he
    suggests that the whole family unit could go to India  and  live  there
    together.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of  appeal  suggest  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    concluded that K and J could go to India, as both  were  refugees.   In
    addition,  it  is  said  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal  with   J's
    circumstances adequately.

 6. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 21 November 2018.  He  makes  the  point  that  there
    appeared to be  insufficient  findings  regarding  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and the stepson.   If  there  was  a
    sufficiently strong relationship, section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 would have come into play.  It is  also
    commented that there were arguably insufficient  findings  relating  to
    the Appellant's relationship with K.



The hearing before me

 7. Following what was clearly a productive pre-hearing discussion  between
    the representatives, Mr Clarke accepted that there were  insufficiently
    clear findings by the judge relating to  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with J.  He also, quite rightly in my view, accepted that the judge had
    not undertaken an adequate assessment of  the  reasonableness  question
    under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 8. Ms Bagral submitted that the judge was also wrong  in  respect  of  his
    consideration of the relationship between the Appellant and  K.   These
    two relationships were in a sense bound up  together  and  the  judge's
    findings were somewhat confused.



Decision on error of law

 9. I conclude, with respect, that the judge has materially erred in law on
    the two core issues in the case, namely  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with J and that with K.

10. In respect of the former, Mr Clarke has effectively conceded the  point
    and in my view quite rightly so.  Although there are findings that  are
    potentially pertinent to the relationship, it is unclear as to  whether
    the judge was concluding  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship of any sort.  We  know  from  decisions  such  as
    Ortega (remittal; bias; parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298  (IAC)
    and SR (subsisting parental relationship -  s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]
    UKUT 00334 (IAC) that a person who  is  not  a  biological  parent  can
    potentially have such a relationship.

11. In this case, it was the Appellant's claim to be the stepfather  of  J.
    There was clear evidence in support of this, not least of which was the
    report of an independent social worker which, whilst referred to by the
    judge in his decision, does not appear to have been factored  into  the
    final conclusions on what was a core issue in the appeal.

12. As to the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  K,  the  judge's
    findings at [89] indicate an adverse view.  However, at other points in
    the decision, for example [87]  and  [91],  the  judge  appears  to  be
    suggesting that there was a relationship.  Although the error  on  this
    point is less clear than in respect of the first relationship, the  two
    are in reality closely interlinked and taking  matters  as  a  whole  I
    conclude that there is a material error here as well.

13. In light of the above I set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

14. Although the remaking of the decision in this  appeal  will  require  a
    certain amount of fact-finding, this does not  prevent  it  from  being
    retained in the Upper Tribunal.  I am aware of the appeal's history and
    the need for the parties to obtain finality.  In my view  this  can  be
    properly done in a resumed hearing before me in due course.  I will  be
    able to receive  further  written  evidence  and,  if  necessary,  oral
    evidence on the two core issues in the appeal, namely the  relationship
    between the Appellant and K and his relationship with J.

15. I issue relevant directions to the parties, below.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before
me.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 27 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Directions to the parties

   1. Any further evidence relied on by either party shall be filed with the
      Upper Tribunal and served on the other side  no  later  than  14  days
      before the resumed hearing;

   2. Updated witness statements for the Appellant and K shall be filed with
      the Upper Tribunal and  served  on  the  Respondent  within  the  same
      timeframe as direction 1;

   3. Oral evidence at the resumed hearing will be permitted,  but  only  if
      updated witness statements are provided in time;

   4. The Appellant's representatives are to check with the Upper Tribunal's
      administration in good time to ensure that a Punjabi  interpreter  has
      been booked for the resumed hearing.
