
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number HU/09002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th November 2016                |On 23rd November 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              AJMAL SHUKRUDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant entered the UK in May 2007 and having been refused asylum
   was granted Discretionary Leave to Remain in the UK until the 23rd of
   January 2016. Before that leave expired he applied for further leave
   under the parent route, in rejecting the application the Secretary of
   State considered both that and the 10 year route. The Appellant appealed
   but did not seek an oral hearing so the appeal was considered on the
   papers.

2. The appeal was dealt with by First-tier Tribunal Judge Whitcombe who
   dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on the 5th of July 2016.
   The Judge noted in paragraph 9 that there was very little evidence which
   he listed in paragraph 10. There were no witness statements or any
   description of the Appellant's life in the UK. By paragraph 24 the judge
   described the evidence as scant, the nationalities or immigration status
   of his partner and children was not known and there was no evidence
   dealing with the prospect of life outside the UK. The appeal was
   dismissed under the Immigration Rules and article 8.

3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 30th of June 2016. The grounds were to the effect that his
   children, whose names and dates of birth were given, had been born in the
   UK and he had been with his partner for 9 years. If he were to be removed
   his partner's other children would suffer as they regard him as a father
   figure they would be affected in all kinds of ways.

4. Permission was granted by Judge Frankish who noted the almost complete
   absence of evidence from the case and observed that the Appellant had
   been his own worst enemy in seeking a paper hearing. Although not raised
   by the Appellant Judge Frankish thought that there might be an argument
   in relation to section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 and the presumption in relation to parents.

5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant and his partner
   attended without representation. The limits to the hearing were explained
   and the limited role of the Upper Tribunal was made clear. The
   Appellant's partner expressed her concern that the Appellant had
   previously been granted leave and it appeared that they had assumed that
   any further applications would proceed on the basis of information that
   they had provided in the past.

6. I can understand that in their personal circumstances the Appellant and
   Sponsor may not have found it easy to obtain legal assistance and with
   their assuming that evidence previously submitted would automatically be
   considered they chose not to instruct a lawyer or other adviser. However,
   each decision can only be made on the information that is provided. One
   reason for requiring evidence with each application is that circumstances
   may change and so evidence is needed to show what all the circumstances
   are.

7. In order for the Upper Tribunal to interfere with a First-tier Tribunal
   decision it would have to be shown that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
   made a decision that was not available on the evidence presented or was
   legally wrong for a different reason such as a lack of jurisdiction. In
   this case, for the reasons set out above, the Judge had effectively no
   evidence that addressed any of the issues that had to be considered.
   There was not even any evidence to show that status of the Appellant's
   partner or her children and in those circumstances the Judge's hands were
   tied.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.



Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd November 2016

