

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/09934/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|On 17 October 2018                       |On 14 January 2019                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     MLS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:       Mr Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Gracefields
Solicitors (Leeds).

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier Tribunal Judge M Robertson, promulgated on 21 March  2018,  in
        which the Judge allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.



Background


     2. MLS is a national of Jamaica born on 31 July 1976. He is subject of
        an order for his deportation from the United Kingdom following  his
        conviction on 18 November 2015 for possession with intent to supply
        a controlled Class  A  drug  -  Crack  Cocaine  for  which  he  was
        sentenced to 4  years  imprisonment.  MLS  was  also  convicted  of
        possessing a Class B - Cannabis/Cannabis resin, for  which  he  was
        sentenced to one-month imprisonment to be served concurrently.
     3. The Judge considers the available evidence including that  relating
        to the index offence. The  Judge  noted  it  was  accepted  by  the
        Secretary  of  State  that  MLS  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
        relationship with his two children. He is separated from his wife.
     4. At [34] the Judge writes:


             34. On the evidence in the round, I accept that the  Appellant
             has always played  a  major  role  in  the  parenting  of  the
             children; he is keen to see them do well and has been there to
             support them during most of their lives. It was the contact he
             had with them during the time  of  his  imprisonment  and  the
             encouragement he gave them that helped them through  the  time
             of separation. I find that they will  experience  considerable
             difficulties if he were to be deported from the UK and I  find
             that it is in their best interests for him to remain in the UK
             so that physical contact can occur. Although it is stated that
             his relationship with his  children  can  continue  by  modern
             means of communication if he is deported, the Appellant stated
             that telephone communication from the  prison  was  relatively
             straightforward and he could speak to his  son  every  morning
             before school. He  stated,  and  I  accept,  that  if  he  was
             deported, telephone communication would be  difficult  due  to
             the time difference.  It  is  also  difficult  to  maintain  a
             committed and effective role in the lives of his  children  if
             he is many miles away. I find that the Appellant is determined
             to be a good role model for his  children  and  it  is  highly
             unlikely that he will do  anything  to  put  his  position  in
             jeopardy again.


     5. The Judge sets out findings in relation to section 117C of the 2002
        Act at [37] in the following terms:


             37.  As to the provisions of s 117C of the 2002 Act, I find:


                    i.  There  is  a  very  strong   public   interest   in
                       deportation as set out at paragraph  15  above,  for
                       the  prevention   of   crime   and   disorder.   The
                       Appellant's offences are serious,  as  reflected  in
                       the sentence  imposed.  I  have  kept  this  at  the
                       forefront of my mind in making my assessment. The UK
                       has a margin of appreciation when  striking  a  fair
                       balance between his rights and those of  the  public
                       in preventing crime and disorder.
                   ii. The index offence was the Appellant's first offence.
                       He was on bail until he was sentenced (from 2013  to
                       January 2016) and committed no further offences.  He
                       is at low risk of reoffending and assessed as  being
                       at low risk of causing serious harm  to  himself  or
                       others. His conviction has caused him anxiety due to
                       the separation from his family and the impact of his
                       incarceration on his family.
                  iii. As to exception one (s 117C(4)), the  Appellant  has
                       not been in the UK lawfully most of his life. He was
                       without leave from the end of  his  visit  Visa.  In
                       February 2000, until he obtained a spousal  visa  in
                       2009. He was lawfully in the UK on his  re-entry  to
                       the UK, except possibility for a short period before
                       he obtained his ILR until his deportation order  was
                       signed on 29  September  2016.  It  is  likely  that
                       having spent approximately 18 years in the  UK,  and
                       having only returned to Jamaica  once  or  twice  in
                       that time, he is socially and culturally  integrated
                       into the UK. Although it is stated in the RL at p 59
                       of RB, that the Appellant re-entered the UK when  he
                       was 34 years of age, it  was  confirmed  during  the
                       hearing that the Appellant had in fact been  in  the
                       UK since he arrived on a visit Visa. This would mean
                       that he was aged 25 years of age when he came to the
                       UK. However, this still does not mean that he  would
                       have difficulty reintegrating into life in  Jamaica.
                       English  is   widely   spoken   there.   There   was
                       conflicting evidence as to the number of siblings he
                       had (it was stated that he had 11 siblings at  p  36
                       of AB, although the Appellant stated that he did not
                       meet all of them as he was the youngest sibling.  At
                       p115 of AB it is stated that he had two sisters  and
                       three brothers. During  the  hearing  the  Appellant
                       stated that one of his sisters had passed  away  and
                       the other was in the USA, that one  brother  was  in
                       the UK, another in the USA and he did not know where
                       the other one was; he had heard once that he was  in
                       one of the Caribbean islands and another  time  that
                       he was in Canada.) I do not,  however,  accept  that
                       even if he had no relatives in Jamaica, that he  has
                       no one there. He clearly  was  in  contact  with  Ms
                       Strachan (see her letter at PP 33 - 35 of A B),  and
                       referred to her as a family friend. I find  that  he
                       has no serious health concerns, he is able  to  work
                       and he would be able to  reintegrate  into  life  in
                       Jamaica on his return.
                   iv. As to exception 2, the Appellant  no  longer  has  a
                       genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his  ex-
                       wife. It is unlikely  that  she  would  relocate  to
                       Jamaica to ensure  that  he  has  contact  with  his
                       children. I do not find that her care of her  nephew
                       would result in a significant inability to visit him
                       with the children because she  is  simply  fostering
                       him  and  she  may  have  to  adjust  to   fostering
                       arrangements if she is to adequately  care  for  her
                       children. I do not find  that  it  would  be  unduly
                       harsh for her  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
                       Appellant.
                    v. However, the  Appellant  does  have  a  genuine  and
                       subsisting relationship with his children and I have
                       found that it is in their best interests for him  to
                       remain in the UK. I find it would  be  unduly  harsh
                       for them to go to Jamaica with him, because that  is
                       likely to involve a separation  from  their  mother;
                       they are British nationals. They were born here  and
                       have not known life in Jamaica.
                   vi. Would it be unduly harsh for them to remain  in  the
                       UK without him? I find  that  it  would,  given  the
                       significant part he has played in their  upbringing,
                       and the contact he maintained with  them  whilst  he
                       was in prison, which played  some  part  in  helping
                       them to come to terms with separation  from  him.  I
                       have placed weight on  the  reports  of  Ms  Harris,
                       which I find fair and provide a balanced opinion  of
                       the likely effect on the children of the Appellant's
                       removal from the UK. Had his  role  in  their  lives
                       been less significant, they would be  less  affected
                       by  his  removal.  His  presence  is  a  stabilising
                       influence, and it results  in  them  having  a  more
                       positive relationship with their  mother  and  their
                       grandmother.
                  vii. Are there very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
                       above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2? Mr Pipe
                       drew my attention to the  guidance  in  relation  to
                       "very compelling circumstances over and above  those
                       identified in the Exceptions 1 and 2" as given in NA
                       (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at paras 28 - 32. The
                       Court of Appeal stated that a foreign  criminal  was
                       entitled to rely on features of his case of  a  kind
                       mentioned in exceptions 1 and 2, or features outside
                       the  circumstances  described  in  those  Exceptions
                       which made his claim based on Article  8  especially
                       strong. However, "... If a  serious  offender  could
                       only just succeed in such an argument, it would  not
                       be possible for him to  describe  his  situation  as
                       involving very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
                       above those described in  Exception  1  and  2.  One
                       might describe that  as  a  bad  case  of  the  kind
                       described in Exception 1 and 2. On the  other  hand,
                       if you could point  to  factors  identified  in  the
                       descriptions of Exception 1 and 2 of  an  especially
                       compelling kind in support of an  article  8  claim,
                       going well beyond what will be necessary to make out
                       a bare case of the kind described in Exception 1 and
                       2,  they  could  in   principle   constitute   "very
                       compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   those
                       described in Exceptions 1 and 2", whether  taken  by
                       themselves or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
                       relevant to the application of Article 8" (para 30).
                 viii. Mr Pipe submitted, and I accept, that  although  the
                       Appellant's offence was  serious,  it  was  a  first
                       offence and the risk of serious harm and reoffending
                       was low. He had a close and loving relationship with
                       his  children  and  his   removal   would   have   a
                       considerable detrimental effect on the  children.  I
                       find that  both  children  are  influenced  for  the
                       better by the presence  of  their  father  in  their
                       lives,  who  encourages  them  and   supports   them
                       practically and emotionally; he is a figure  who  is
                       known  within  L's  school  as  having  a   positive
                       influence on his children as well as  being  a  role
                       model for the other young children (see letter in  A
                       B, at pp  154  and  155).  I  find  the  Appellant's
                       presence is a positive influence on  his  mother-in-
                       law's relationship with her grandchildren and builds
                       family life. I find that cumulatively these  factors
                       amount to very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
                       above those set out in exception 2.



     6. The Judge finds at [38] that it is not proportionate to deport  MLS
        from the United Kingdom.
     7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted by another judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  on  14  April
        2018.



Grounds and submissions



     8. The Secretary of States grounds set out his concerns in relation to
        the decision of the Judge. They are in the following terms:


                i. This is the appeal against the decision of  the  SSHD  to
                   deport  the  appellant,  following  a  four-year   prison
                   sentence for drug related crime.
               ii. Given the  severity  of  the  offence  and  the  sentence
                   imposed the appellant was required  to  show  that  there
                   were 'very compelling' circumstances over and above those
                   sited at paragraph 339 and 339A of the Immigration  Rules
                   (as encompassed in S 117C(4) & 5) of the 2002 Act).
              iii. The FTTJ finds at [37  vii-viii]  the  Judge  finds  that
                   there are very compelling  reasons  over  and  above  the
                   exceptions seemingly on the basis  that  the  appellant's
                   removal would have a "considerable detrimental effect  on
                   the children" and his "presence is a  positive  influence
                   on his children and the relationship between his  mother-
                   in-law  and  the  children".  As  such  very   compelling
                   circumstances of said to have been established.
               iv. While the FTTJ considers that it would  be  unduly  harsh
                   for the children to move to Jamaica the question of undue
                   harshness of separation is posed at [37 vi] it  does  not
                   appear to be answered. Even if this is  answered  by  the
                   Judge in the appellant's favour  is  not  sufficient  for
                   this appeal to succeed.
                v. The respondent challenges the conclusion that  separation
                   is unduly harsh, if indeed the FTTJ makes  this  finding,
                   and   secondly   that   there   are    very    compelling
                   circumstances.
               vi. The  respondent  respectfully  submits  that  the  FTTJ's
                   reasoning falls significantly short of demonstrating  any
                   form  of  compelling  circumstances,  let  alone  to  the
                   required standard in this instance. There is for example,
                   no explanation concerning the  relationship  between  the
                   children and grandmother and why the  appellant  must  be
                   present  to  facilitate  this  relationship.   There   is
                   absolutely nothing to suggest that the appellant  is  the
                   only person who can ensure the relationship continues.
              vii. Similarly, the  finding  that  separation  would  have  a
                   considerable detrimental effect appears to be  vested  in
                   the oral evidence and the  social  worker's  report.  The
                   SSHD maintains that there are deficits in  the  value  of
                   that  'expert'  evidence,  since  the  author   has   not
                   witnessed the family interaction over a period of time or
                   engage substantively with the school. The school evidence
                   demonstrated that children did  not  suffer  academically
                   during their father's period of  incarceration  see  [30]
                   and there was nothing from the schools to show  that  the
                   children misbehaved because of the separation.  The  FTTJ
                   fails to reconcile the evidence presented.  Moreover,  it
                   is unclear that the same issues would arise  again,  that
                   this simply wasn't the  misadventure  of  youth  or  that
                   their mother, who was training to be a social worker (see
                   [14 iii]), could not assist  in  the  transition.  It  is
                   apparent  that  one  of  the  children   at   least   has
                   demonstrated  an  understanding  of  her  actions  and  a
                   sincere pledge not to do so again [see 30].
             viii. The SSHD submits that the children's reactions  have  not
                   been demonstrated to be  anything  but  those  one  would
                   expect when separated from a parent, and cannot be unduly
                   harsh, nor very compelling. Much emphasis  is  placed  by
                   the Judge as to how the children reacted during prison as
                   opposed to considering how they will act  in  the  future
                   given, they  have  dealt  with  separation  before,  have
                   protective factors and family members  around  them,  and
                   there has been a passage of time.
               ix. Naturally the children would miss their  father,  but  as
                   found in the NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662 "the  best
                   interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,  as
                   identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor of  the
                   Italian Republic [2012] UKSC  25,  [2013]  1  AC  338  at
                   [145]. Nevertheless, it  is  a  consequence  of  criminal
                   conduct  that  offenders  may  be  separated  from  their
                   children for many years, contrary to the  best  interests
                   of those children. The  desirability  of  children  being
                   with both parents is a commonplace family life.  That  is
                   not usually a sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  to
                   outweigh the high public interest  in  deporting  foreign
                   criminals." [33].
                x. Similarly in FP (Nigeria) v The Secretary  of  State  for
                   the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  251  the  Court  of
                   Appeal commented:


                      "in my judgement, the determination of the First-Tier
                      Tribunal did not identify, as it  should  have  done,
                      what with the features of the Appellant's  case  that
                      amounted to compelling reasons, or  were  exceptional
                      circumstances, justifying the success of his  appeal.
                      Indeed, I would go further and state that I have been
                      unable to identify in the determination  findings  of
                      fact  that   could   properly   be   categorised   as
                      exceptional, or amounting to compelling  reasons  for
                      him to be allowed to remain in  this  country,  given
                      the seriousness of his repeated criminal  conduct.  I
                      fully recognise that if the judge's factual  findings
                      are well-founded, there will  be  a  really  damaging
                      impact on his partner and the children; but that is a
                      common consequence of deportation of a person who has
                      children in this country."


                      "Deportation will normally be  appropriate  in  cases
                      such as the present, even though the children will be
                      affected and the interests  of  the  children  are  a
                      primary consideration. In some cases the  family  may
                      be able to a joint the deportee in the country of his
                      nationality, but that was not explored in this  case,
                      and I assume was not a real possibility."


               xi. While the FTTJ cites various authorities  at  [12]  these
                   decisions do not consider the best interests of  children
                   in the context of criminal deportation, where the  public
                   interest is both different and has greater force.  It  is
                   not apparent that the FTTJ  has  understood  the  correct
                   approach to the best interests of the  child  in  a  case
                   which involves criminality, and  particularly  where  the
                   relevant question is one of very compelling circumstances
                   existing.
              xii. The responsibility for meeting the  children's  emotional
                   and physical needs will be met by the children's mother -
                   the FTTJ does not find this would not be the case.
             xiii.  In  the  relevant  assessment  the  FTTJ  minimise   the
                   appellant's criminality (by virtue of it being the  first
                   offence and the risk of reoffending being low) and  fails
                   to engage with the weighty public interest at all in  the
                   relevant  assessment.   The   appellant   was   convicted
                   following a criminal trial  of  a  serious  offence.  The
                   decision to  impose  such  a  sentence  is  not  one  the
                   Immigration  Tribunal   should   go   behind.   Following
                   Valasquez Taylor v Sec  State  for  the  Home  Department
                   [2015]  EWCA Civ 845 and Danso v Secretary of  State  for
                   the Home Department [2015] EWAC Civ 595 rehabilitation of
                   this kind  is  unlikely  to  contribute  greatly  to  the
                   existence of the very compelling  circumstances  required
                   outweighed the public interest in deportation.
              xiv. For all the above reasons, it is submitted that the  FTTJ
                   has failed to appreciate the arduous hurdle the appellant
                   has to surmount in this case, and  has  simply  paid  lip
                   service to the  phrase  "very  compelling  circumstances"
                   with engaging with the relevant jurisprudence as to  what
                   this entails, and  has  erroneously  diluted  the  public
                   interest.


Discussion



     9.  The  determination  under  challenge  has  been  written  by  very
        experienced First-tier Tribunal Judge who has a detailed  knowledge
        and understanding of the relevant legal provisions. The  suggestion
        in the grounds to the contrary has no arguable merit.
    10. The Judge spends an appropriate amount of time within the  body  of
        the determination recording and discussing the  importance  of  the
        public interest; noting there is a very strong public  interest  in
        the appellants  deportation.  The  Judge  clearly  notes  that  the
        appellant received a sentence of more than 4 years imprisonment and
        that the relevant immigration rules is  paragraph  398(a)  and  the
        relevant  statutory  provisions  section  117C(6).  The  Judge   in
        undertaking the assessment of the merit of the appeal clearly takes
        into account the existence of the exceptions and asks  herself  the
        correct question at [37(vi)] of whether it will be unduly harsh for
        the family members to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
        appellant. The Judge  clearly  considered  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  has  given  sufficient
        reasons in support of the findings she  makes.  The  weight  to  be
        given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge and any  challenge
        in the grounds to weight attributed  is,  arguably,  no  more  than
        disagreement with the Judge's findings on this point.
    11. The Judge accepts MLS has committed a serious offence but  explains
        why she considers his deportation will be  unduly  harsh  upon  the
        children. It has not  been  shown  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
        relevant evidence.  The finding on this point is in accordance with
        the definition of this term provided by the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
        (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 at [23].
    12. The Court of Appeal have reminded  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  when
        assessing whether a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  has  made  an
        error of law material to the decision under challenge it  must  not
        approach the exercise from the viewpoint of what they would  do  if
        deciding the case themselves. Similarly, whilst some  may  consider
        decisions to be unduly  generous  or  challenge  decisions  against
        deportation orders allowing appeals as a  matter  of  policy,  that
        does not of itself establish arguable legal error.
    13. The grounds disagree with the conclusions of  the  Judge  and  make
        statements that are not supported by a reading of the decision as a
        whole. The Judge does not set out the report of Ms DH verbatim  but
        clearly made reference to both the original report and  an  updated
        report in the determination.  The  conclusions  of  those  reports,
        which were accepted by the Judge, have to be read as  part  of  the
        reasoning given by the Judge when considering this challenge.
    14. Even if the Judges conclusion was more generous to MLS  than  other
        judges may have been or even if very few other  judges  would  make
        this decision in this way, that  is  not  the  relevant  test.  The
        question has to be whether the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  is
        within the range of reasonable conclusions available to  the  Judge
        on  the  evidence.  In  this  carefully  considered   and   written
        determination the only  conclusion  has  to  be  that  it  is.  The
        Secretary of State fails to establish the decision is so  perverse,
        irrational, or so contrary to the evidence that  it  cannot  stand.
        Accordingly, despite Mr Mills best efforts, I find the Secretary of
        State has failed to establish arguable legal error material to  the
        decision to allow  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering in this matter.


Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 December 2018












