
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09428/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 2 September 2020                            |                              |
|                                                |On: 07 September 2020         |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DELONA KEON BENNETT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Hulse, instructed by A & A Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a  remote  hearing.  In  addition  to  the  above-
   mentioned parties, the  appellant  was  present,  remotely,  as  was  his
   instructing solicitor.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Bennett's
   appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  his  human
   rights claim following the making of a deportation order against him.

3. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr  Bennett  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

4. The appellant is a citizen of the USA born on 2 January 1990 in  Jamaica.
   He first entered the United Kingdom, aged 13 years, on 11 August 2003  on
   a visit to see his mother and on 7 January 2004 he applied for indefinite
   leave to remain as a dependant relative of his  mother.  The  application
   was  initially  refused  but  the  appellant  was  subsequently   granted
   indefinite leave to remain on 10 May 2004.

5.  Between 29  May  2013  and  17  March  2015  the  appellant  received  4
   convictions for 16  offences,  including  making  false  representations,
   possessing controlled drug - class B cannabis,  using  a  vehicle  whilst
   uninsured, burglary and theft and breach of a conditional  discharge.  On
   14 April 2015 he was sentenced to a  total  of  2  years  and  10  months
   imprisonment.

6. On 26 May 2015 the respondent made a decision to  deport  the  appellant.
   In response the appellant made written representations  on  human  rights
   grounds, on 15 June  2015,  followed  by  further  representations  on  8
   January 2016, 8 March 2016 and 15  February  2017.  He  relied  upon  his
   family life with his mother, his sister and his partner and daughter.  It
   was claimed that  his  absence  was  having  a  negative  impact  on  his
   daughter, with whom he was involved on a day to day basis prior to  being
   imprisoned. It was also claimed that he had a close relationship with his
   mother and sister and that his mother relied on him a lot  owing  to  her
   medical condition (lupus). It was claimed that his father  lived  in  the
   USA, but he had had no contact with  him  for  many  years.  As  for  the
   appellant's private life, he had left the USA at the age  of  7  and  had
   attended school in the UK and had developed a strong private  life  here.
   Evidence of the appellant's subsequent marriage to  his  partner,  on  22
   December 2016, was submitted.

7. On 27 November 2017 the respondent signed  a  deportation  order  against
   the appellant under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  and  on  30
   November 2015 made a decision to deport  him  and  to  refuse  his  human
   rights claim and certify his human rights claim under section 94B of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Following the  judgment  of
   the Supreme Court in Kiarie and Byndloss, R (on the  applications  of)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42 the  respondent
   withdrew the certified decision and made a fresh  decision  refusing  the
   appellant's human rights claim, on 14 August 2017.

8. In that decision the respondent noted that the  appellant  and  his  wife
   had had a second child, born on 10 June  2017.  The  respondent  accepted
   that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his two
   British children and his British wife but did not accept that it would be
   unduly harsh for them all to relocate to the USA with him, or  to  remain
   in the UK without him. The respondent found that the appellant could not,
   therefore,  meet  the  requirements  in  paragraph  399(a)  or  (b).  The
   respondent considered that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
   in paragraph 399A on the basis of his private life as he had not been  in
   the UK lawfully for most of his life, he was not socially and  culturally
   integrated in the UK and there would be no very significant obstacles  to
   his  integration  in  the  USA.  The  respondent  considered   that   the
   appellant's mother's medical condition and his claim  in  regard  to  his
   responsibility for his half-sister and care for  his  daughter  were  not
   sufficient to amount to very compelling circumstances and that there were
   no such circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation  and
   that his deportation would not breach his Article 8 human rights.

9. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 17 December 2019 by  Judge  Davey.  The  judge
   heard from the appellant and his wife  and  mother.  The  judge  did  not
   accept that the requirements of paragraph 399A were met, as the appellant
   had not lived in the UK for most of his life, there was  little  evidence
   of his integration into the UK, and no very significant obstacles to  his
   integration into the USA. As for the appellant's family life,  the  judge
   had before him an independent social worker's report and  concluded  that
   it was in the children's best interests for the children to remain in the
   UK with the appellant  as  a  family  unit.  The  judge  noted  that  the
   appellant and his wife had not looked at the options  available  if  they
   moved to the USA, but he concluded that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
   expect his wife and children to leave the UK. The judge  found  that  the
   appellant could not succeed under the immigration rules, but, in light of
   the fact that his offending was in 2014 and that he had  not  re-offended
   since then, and given that he had completed his  rehabilitation  and  was
   unlikely  to  re-offend,  concluded  that  his   deportation   would   be
   disproportionate. He therefore allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  human
   rights grounds.

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had failed to take account of paragraph 398
   of the immigration rules and to make any findings on whether  there  were
   very compelling circumstances preventing the appellant's deportation.

11. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
   subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on 20 April 2020.  The  matter
   then came before me for a remote hearing by way of skype for business.

Hearing and Submissions

12. Both parties made submissions before me. Mr Melvin submitted that  Judge
   Davey had  materially  misdirected  himself  in  law  and  made  confused
   findings in regard to the immigration rules relating to  deportation.  He
   made no findings on the second part of the "unduly harsh" test, but  went
   on to find that the requirements of the immigration rules  had  not  been
   met, and  then  considered  Article  8  outside  the  rules  without  any
   reference to "very compelling circumstances" and  paragraph  398  of  the
   immigration rules.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  any  rational  Tribunal,
   accepting the judge's findings that the requirements of  the  immigration
   rules were not met, would have  to  conclude  that  there  were  no  very
   compelling circumstances and dismiss the appeal.

13. Ms Hulse submitted that Judge Davey had  carefully  considered  all  the
   evidence and had noted that there was no challenge to the report  of  the
   independent social worker in regard to  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
   deportation on the appellant's children. The judge  properly  found  that
   the Secretary of State had not considered the social worker's report  and
   had failed to provide any addendum to  the  refusal  decision  after  the
   report had been submitted. The appellant's deportation  would  be  unduly
   harsh on the children, as he played a central role in their lives.  Their
   mother worked full-time and it was the appellant  who  looked  after  the
   children. The appellant was a low risk of re-offending and  had  not  re-
   offended since his release from detention. He had completed  his  licence
   and had rehabilitated himself. Judge Davey's decision should be upheld.

Discussion and Findings

14. Ms Hulse's submissions, as I put to her and as Mr  Melvin  submitted  in
   his reply, failed to address  the  matters  of  law  in  the  grounds  of
   challenge and were simply a re-statement of  the  appellant's  case.  Her
   submissions focussed on the unduly harsh consequences of the  appellant's
   deportation, given the central  role  he  played  in  the  lives  of  his
   children, yet  Judge  Davey  had  found  that  the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules were not met and, as such, that it would not be  unduly
   harsh for them to be separated. Although  he  did  not  make  a  specific
   finding on that basis, it is clear that that was his  conclusion,  having
   found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the  appellant's  wife  and
   children to leave the UK with the appellant. Accordingly, by focussing on
   the question of undue harshness  and,  as  part  of  that  question,  the
   independent social worker's report, the best interests  of  the  children
   and the appellant's role in the children's lives, Ms  Hulse  was  herself
   going behind Judge Davey's decision and  failed  to  address  the  actual
   challenge in the respondent's grounds,  namely  the  judge's  failure  to
   consider the "very compelling circumstances" test in paragraph 398 of the
   immigration rules, above and beyond the question of undue harshness.

15. As Mr Melvin submitted, Judge Davey, having found that the  requirements
   of the immigration rules had not been met,  went  on  to  embark  upon  a
   general Article 8 evaluation and proportionality assessment  without  any
   regard to the relevant considerations in deportation cases. He  referred,
   at [33], to the provisions in section 117A and 117B of the NIAA 2002, but
   made no mention of section 117C relating to deportation and did not refer
   to paragraph 398 or the test  of  "very  compelling  circumstances".  The
   bases upon which the judge found, at [35], that the respondent's decision
   was disproportionate, was the fact that the appellant had not re-offended
   since 2014 and had completed his rehabilitation, that he posed a low risk
   of re-offending and that the best interests of the children  lay  in  the
   family remaining in the UK. There was no explanation by the judge  as  to
   how any of those factors amounted to very compelling circumstances and Ms
   Hulse did not make any submissions in that regard. I agree with Mr Melvin
   that, having found that the requirements of the  immigration  rules  were
   not met, and, as such, that the  appellants'  deportation  would  not  be
   unduly harsh on his wife or children, the  judge  did  not  identify  any
   circumstances that could be considered as compelling. The fact  that  the
   appellant had not offended since 2014 could not possibly be considered as
   a very compelling circumstance, and Ms Hulse did not suggest that it was.

16. Accordingly, it is undoubtedly the case that the judge materially  erred
   in law in his decision and that the decision must be set aside.

17. Mr Melvin  submitted  that,  on  the  judge's  own  findings,  the  only
   conclusion that could be reached was that the appeal  could  not  succeed
   and he therefore invited me to re-make the  decision  by  dismissing  the
   appeal. Ms Hulse objected to the decision being re-made without a further
   hearing, in the event of Judge Davey's  decision  being  set  aside.  She
   requested that, if an error of law was found,  the  appeal  ought  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh, in the  interests
   of fairness. However, when I asked her if  there  was  any  intention  to
   produce further evidence, she replied that there was not,  and  that  she
   simply required the appeal to be re-heard. In the circumstances, I see no
   reason why there is a requirement for a  further  hearing.  There  is  no
   challenge to Judge Davey's record of the evidence or his findings on  the
   evidence, and the challenge lies only in his failure to make findings  on
   whether the appellant's circumstances, as evidenced before him, amount to
   very compelling circumstances. On the  evidence  available,  and  on  the
   basis of  Judge  Davey's  own  findings,  and  his  conclusion  that  the
   requirements of paragraphs 399 and 399A were not met,  there  is  plainly
   nothing approaching  "very  compelling  circumstances"  to  outweigh  the
   public interest in the appellant's  deportation.  Ms  Hulse's  assertion,
   that the role played  by  the  appellant  in  his  children's  lives  was
   material, is completely addressed by the unchallenged, and properly made,
   finding that the requirements of paragraph 399(a) were not  met.  In  any
   event, there is nothing in the report of the independent social worker to
   indicate any circumstances other than those that  would  be  expected  to
   arise through  separation  of  a  deportee  from  his  children  and  the
   consequential responsibilities and difficulties faced  by  the  remaining
   parent.

18. Accordingly, I agree with Mr Melvin that the re-making of  the  decision
   could only be on the basis that the appeal is  dismissed  and  I  do  not
   agree that that gives rise to any unfairness as Ms Hulse submits.

DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I  re-make  the
   decision by dismissing Mr Bennett's appeal.





Signed:       S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 2 September
2020
