
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09707/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2018                             |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Jahid [h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Eurasia Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a  decision  of  Judge  Gurung-
    Thapa of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated  on  16th  March
    2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him at the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  5th  November  1980.   On
    22nd June 2015 he applied for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK.
    The application was made on the basis that he entered the  UK  on  25th
    November 2009 with a Tier 4 Student visa  valid  to  22nd  March  2011.
    Further leave as a student was granted until 28th June 2014,  but  this
    was curtailed on 2nd April 2012 to expire on 1st June 2012.

 4. On 28th May 2012 he applied for leave as a spouse of a  person  present
    and settled in the UK which was granted from 19th February 2013 to 19th
    February 2015.  On 17th February 2015 he applied for further  leave  as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK, which was granted
    from 28th March 2015 to 28th March 2017.

 5. The Claimant married [TA] (the Sponsor) on 7th January 2015.  She is  a
    British citizen.  The couple have a son born in the UK on [ ] 2015  who
    is a British citizen.

 6. The application was refused  on  23rd  March  2016  with  reference  to
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules, which states that  leave  to
    remain should normally be refused if it is undesirable  to  permit  the
    person to remain in the UK in  the  light  of  his  conduct  (including
    convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character  or
    associations or the fact  that  he  represents  a  threat  to  national
    security.  Reliance was placed on this paragraph on the basis that  the
    Claimant had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate.  The  Secretary
    of State's case was that the Claimant had used a proxy to undertake the
    speaking test with Educational Testing  Service  (ETS)  on  17th  April
    2012.  As a result of enquires made by ETS those test results had  been
    cancelled.

 7. The application for leave to remain was also refused with reference  to
    paragraph 287(a)(v) on the basis that the Claimant would not be able to
    maintain himself and his  dependants  adequately  without  recourse  to
    public funds, and (vii) his application  fell  for  refusal  under  the
    general Grounds for Refusal.

 8. The Secretary of State went on to consider family life  with  reference
    to Appendix FM finding that the Claimant failed on suitability  grounds
    with reference to  S-LTR.1.6.  as  his  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
    conducive to the public good.  This was because he had  used  deception
    to obtain his TOEIC certificate.  The Secretary of  State  went  on  to
    consider EX.1. of Appendix FM noting that the Claimant's spouse and son
    are  British  citizens,  but  taking  the  view  that  there  were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  the  Claimant's  spouse
    continuing outside the UK, and it would be  reasonable  to  expect  his
    child to leave the UK.

 9. The Secretary of State did not accept that the Claimant was entitled to
    remain in the UK by relying upon his private life pursuant to paragraph
    276ADE(1), and in considering Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules
    did  not  consider  that  the  application  disclosed  any  exceptional
    circumstances.

10. The appeal was heard by  the  FTT  who  found  that  the  Claimant  had
    exercised  deception  in  his  TOEIC  test,  notwithstanding  that  the
    evidence indicated that his test result was found to be questionable as
    opposed to invalid.  The FTT found that the Claimant had proved that he
    could adequately financially support himself and his dependants.

11. The FTT considered paragraph 322(5) and found the Secretary of  State's
    decision to be unlawful, and allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent  that
    because the decision was unlawful, a lawful decision needed to be  made
    by the Secretary of State.  The finding that the decision was  unlawful
    was made because the FTT found that the Secretary of State  had  failed
    to  take  into  account  all  relevant  material  facts,  and  in   the
    alternative, ought  to  have  exercised  discretion  differently  under
    paragraph 322(5).  The FTT found that it was not necessary to  consider
    the Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.

12. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State contended that the FTT had  erred  in
    law in considering paragraph 322(5) and failed to give adequate reasons
    for concluding that the Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  all
    relevant matters or should have exercised discretion  differently.   It
    was also contended that the FTT had erred  by  making  no  findings  in
    relation to the Claimant's human rights.

Error of Law

13. At a hearing before me on 24th November 2017 I heard  submissions  from
    both parties regarding error of law.  Full details of  the  application
    for permission, the grant  of  permission,  and  the  submissions,  are
    contained in my error of law  decision  promulgated  on  12th  December
    2017.  I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an  error
    of law and setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         "20. The human rights application made by the Appellant was made on
             22nd June 2015 and refused on 23rd March 2016.   Although  the
             Appellant's application was for leave to remain, it is treated
             by the Respondent as a human rights claim,  and  it  is  clear
             that the Appellant had a right of appeal against that decision
             and the appeal fell to be  decided  under  the  appeal  regime
             brought in by the Immigration Act 2014.

         21.  Because the appeal is against refusal of a human rights claim,
             the only Ground of Appeal available to the  Appellant  is  set
             out in section  84(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002.  That states;

             (2)  An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
                  claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision  is
                  unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         22.  The Appellant based his appeal upon  Article  8  of  the  1950
             European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

         23.  The FTT erred by failing  to  consider  Article  8.   The  FTT
             having conclude that the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
             unlawful, recorded at paragraph 75 that it was  therefore  not
             necessary to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.
              The FTT did not consider Article  8  within  the  Immigration
             Rules.

         24.  While consideration of the Immigration Rules is necessary  and
             relevant when considering  the  public  interest  in  a  human
             rights appeal, involving Article 8, it is an error of  law  to
             decline to consider Article 8.

         25.  The FTT made reference  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
             Greenwood (No. 2) (para  398  considered)  [2015]  UKUT  00629
             (IAC), taking the view that  this  case  was  authority  which
             enabled the FTT to  make  a  finding  that  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.   In  my
             view, with  respect,  that  is  incorrect.   The  decision  in
             Greenwood related to  the  previous  appeal  regime,  not  the
             appeal regime brought in by the Immigration  Act  2014.   With
             reference to the appeal regime now in force, my view  is  that
             the FTT has no power to find that the decision is unlawful and
             not in accordance with the  law  because  discretion  and  the
             Immigration Rules should have been exercised differently.

         26.  In my view the FTT had to  decide,  in  this  appeal,  whether
             removal of the Appellant from the UK would be  unlawful  under
             section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and  therefore  had  to
             consider Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

         27.  I therefore conclude that although  the  FTT  considered  this
             appeal with care, an erroneous approach was taken which  means
             the decision is materially wrong in law and must be set  aside
             and remade.

         28.  I have considered  whether  any  findings  can  be  preserved.
             There has been no  challenge  to  the  FTT  finding  that  the
             Appellant could adequately financially  maintain  himself  and
             his dependants.  That finding is preserved.

         29.  Although the appeal was brought by the Secretary of State, and
             the Appellant did not apply  for  permission  to  appeal,  (Mr
             Ahmed's stance was  that  had  he  been  made  aware  of  this
             decision he would have advised an application  for  permission
             to appeal should be made) I do not find that  it  is  safe  to
             preserve the finding  made  by  the  FTT  that  the  Appellant
             exercised deception in obtaining the TOEIC certificate, as the
             evidence appears to indicate that his result was  recorded  as
             questionable rather than invalid.  That issue therefore  needs
             to be considered again.

         30.  I have considered whether this appeal should  be  remitted  to
             the FTT.  I have decided against that  course  of  action  and
             considered paragraph 7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
             Statements.  I take into account paragraph 7.3 which indicates
             that the normal course, following the setting aside of an  FTT
             decision, is to remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal even
             if  some  further  fact-finding  is  necessary.   There   will
             therefore be a further hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  so
             that the decision can be remade.  The only  preserved  finding
             is that  the  Claimant  can  adequately  financially  maintain
             himself and his dependants."

14. The hearing was adjourned so that evidence could be given to the  Upper
    Tribunal, in order for the decision to be remade.







Remaking the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 9th March 2018

Preliminary Issues

15. I made the parties aware of the  documentation  held  on  the  Tribunal
    file.  This consisted of the Home Office bundle with Annexes A - E, the
    supplementary Home Office bundle indexed 1 -  7,  a  bundle  lodged  on
    behalf of the Claimant comprising 88  pages  and  a  skeleton  argument
    submitted on behalf of the Claimant.

16. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no obligation for an adjournment.

The Oral Evidence

17. The Claimant gave oral evidence in English  without  the  need  for  an
    interpreter.  There were no difficulties in communication.  He  adopted
    his witness statement dated 14th February 2017.

18. The Sponsor gave oral evidence  in  English  and  adopted  her  witness
    statement dated 14th February 2017.

19. The Claimant and Sponsor were questioned by the representatives  and  I
    have recorded all questions and answers in my  Record  of  Proceedings.
    It is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.  If relevant I will
    refer to the oral evidence when I set out my conclusions and reasons.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

20. Mrs Aboni relied upon the reasons for refusal decision dated 23rd March
    2016.  I was asked to find that the Secretary of  State  had  submitted
    sufficient evidence to prove that the Claimant had exercised  deception
    by having a proxy undertake the English language speaking test for  him
    on 17th April 2012.  Therefore, refusal of the application pursuant  to
    paragraph 322(5) was appropriate.

21. Mrs Aboni  referred  to  Appendix  FM  (although  both  representatives
    expressed the view that the correct Immigration Rule was paragraph 287)
    submitting  that  if  Appendix  FM  was  considered,  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Claimant and Sponsor  continuing  their
    family life outside  the  UK,  and  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Claimant's British son to leave the UK.  It was  submitted  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances  which  would  justify  granting  the
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

The Claimant's Submissions

22. Mr Ahmed relied upon his skeleton argument.  He maintained  that  there
    was no evidence to justify the Secretary of State's conclusion that the
    Claimant  had  used  deception  in  obtaining  the  TOEIC   certificate
    following the test in April 2012.  ETS had not declared the test result
    invalid but had declared it  questionable.   Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that
    there was a distinction  between  those  results  which  were  declared
    invalid and those  declared  questionable.   There  were  therefore  no
    grounds to justify  the  Secretary  of  State  relying  upon  paragraph
    322(5).

23. Mr Ahmed therefore submitted that paragraph 287 was in fact  satisfied.
    I was asked to note that the Appellant has a British spouse and British
    son and reliance was placed upon section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in that the Claimant had a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a British child, and it would not
    be reasonable to expect the British child to leave the UK.  I was asked
    to allow the appeal on the basis  that  the  Claimant's  removal  would
    breach Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions, I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. I have taken into account all the evidence placed before me, and  taken
    into account the submissions made by both representatives.

26. The Claimant argues that the Secretary of State's decision is  contrary
    to section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and relies  upon  Article  8.
    In deciding this appeal I adopt the balance sheet approach  recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and
    in so doing have regard to the guidance as to  the  functions  of  this
    Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

27. The burden of proof lies on the  Claimant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in the UK and why the decision to refuse his human rights
    claim interferes disproportionately in  his  private  and  family  life
    rights.  It is for the Secretary  of  State  to  establish  the  public
    interest factors weighing against the Claimant.  The standard of  proof
    is a balance of probabilities throughout.

28. I find that Article 8 is engaged on the basis  of  family  and  private
    life.  The Claimant has resided, with  leave,  in  the  UK  since  25th
    November 2009.  He has been married since May 2012.  I find that he has
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor, and both have a
    genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  their  son.   The
    Secretary of State has not challenged the  genuineness  of  the  family
    relationship.

29. Although this is a human rights appeal, it is important and appropriate
    to examine the relevant Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 322(5) is one  of
    the general Grounds of Refusal, and the burden  of  proving  a  general
    ground rests upon the Secretary of State on a balance of probabilities.



30. When considering the ETS test I have followed the guidance  in  SM  and
    Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC), Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and Majumder
    and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.  In summary the legal burden rests upon
    the Secretary of State who bears the initial burden of furnishing proof
    of deception, which is an evidential burden.  If the Secretary of State
    provides prima facie evidence of deception the burden shifts  onto  the
    Claimant to provide a plausible innocent explanation, and  if  that  is
    done then the burden shifts back to the Secretary of State.

31. In this case the Secretary of State's  evidence  is  contained  in  the
    supplementary bundle, with the addition of an  interview  record  dated
    28th October 2015.

32. The evidence in the  supplementary  bundle  is  in  the  main  generic,
    containing a statement from a Home Office senior caseworker, by way  of
    explanation of the evidence, generic witness statements from R Collings
    and P Millington, both dated 23rd June 2014, the generic expert  report
    of Professor French, a summary of Project Fa�ade dated 15th  May  2015,
    which is a criminal  enquiry  into  abuse  of  the  TOEIC  at  Westlink
    College, Essex, which is the college where the Claimant took his  test.



33. I do not find that the Secretary of State has discharged the evidential
    burden in relation to the ETS test result.  The result was not declared
    invalid but  was  declared  questionable  by  ETS.   The  Claimant  was
    interviewed on 28th October 2015, but he was answering questions  about
    a completely different test that he undertook in  Manchester  in  March
    2015.  He was not asked any detail about the test he undertook in April
    2012.  He was simply asked if he had taken an  English  language  test,
    other than the test  in  Manchester  which  was  the  B1  test  and  he
    confirmed that he had taken a test he believed in January  or  February
    2012 at "one of the East London colleges."  At that point he could  not
    remember the name.

34. Rebecca Collings in her witness statement at  paragraph  29  makes  the
    following comment;

         "29.  ETS  explained,  at  the  time,  that  those  categorised  as
             questionable   (as   opposed   to   cancelled/invalid)    were
             inconclusive in terms of being certain of  impersonation/proxy
             test-taking."

35. The case law referred to above indicates that an ETS  printout  showing
    an  individual's  results  as  invalid,  together  with   the   generic
    statements of P Millington and R Collings, was sufficient to  discharge
    the evidential burden.  That is not the case here.  ETS  evidence  does
    not show the Claimant's test result to be invalid, but shows it  to  be
    questionable.  The initial evidential burden has not  been  discharged.
    Therefore there is no burden upon the Claimant  to  raise  an  innocent
    explanation.  The evidence submitted by the Secretary of State fails to
    prove that the Claimant exercised deception in relation to the  English
    language test in April 2012.   Therefore, the  application  should  not
    have been refused with reference to paragraph 322(5).  This also  means
    that the refusal under paragraph 287(a)(vii) falls away.   As  the  FTT
    found that the Claimant  could  be  adequately  financially  maintained
    without recourse to public funds, and that finding was  not  challenged
    and is preserved, the requirements of paragraph 287 are satisfied.

36. That does not necessarily mean  that  the  Claimant's  appeal  must  be
    allowed at this is an appeal against refusal of a human rights claim.

37. The best interests of the child of the Claimant  and  Sponsor  must  be
    considered as a primary consideration, but not the only  consideration.
    I find there is no doubt that his best interests  would  be  served  by
    being brought up by both his parents.  Because he is a British citizen,
    I find that his best interests would be to remain in the UK.

38. I must have regard to the considerations contained in section  117B  of
    the  2002  Act.   Subsection  (1)  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest.  Subsection (2) confirms
    that it is in the public interest that a person seeking leave to remain
    can speak English as this assists integration into the community.   The
    Claimant can speak English.  He spoke English at the  Tribunal  hearing
    without any need for an interpreter.

39. Subsection (3) confirms that a  person  seeking  to  remain  should  be
    financially independent.  The FTT found  that  the  Claimant  could  be
    adequately financially maintained without recourse to public funds.

40. Subsection (4) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established  by
    a person when in the  UK  unlawfully.   This  does  not  apply  to  the
    Claimant as he has not been in the UK unlawfully.

41. Subsection (5) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life established  by  a  person  when  in  the  UK  with  a  precarious
    immigration status.  The Claimant  has  had  a  precarious  immigration
    status in that he has only ever had limited leave to  remain,  so  this
    does apply to him.  This relates to private, as opposed to family life.



42. Subsection (6) confirms that in the case of  a  person  not  liable  to
    deportation, the public interest does not require his removal if he has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.
    The Claimant is not liable  to  deportation.   He  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.  His child is
    a qualifying child as defined in  section  117D  as  he  is  a  British
    citizen.

43. I find it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.
    I have considered the guidance in SF Albania [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)
    which refers to the Secretary of State's guidance on whether  it  would
    be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK.   In
    brief summary that guidance indicates that where a decision  to  refuse
    an application would require a parent or primary carer to return  to  a
    country outside the EU, the case must always be assessed on  the  basis
    that it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British  citizen  child  to
    leave the EU with that parent or primary  carer.   The  only  exception
    would be where the conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to
    considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the  child
    could otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary  carer.
    Examples of such conduct is criminality falling below the threshold set
    out in  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  or  a  very  poor
    immigration history, such  as  where  the  person  has  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

44. This is not a case where the Claimant has any criminal convictions.   I
    do not find that he has exercised deception.  He does not have  a  very
    poor immigration history.  His immigration history, as set out  earlier
    in this decision, indicates that he has resided in the UK, with  leave,
    since 2009.

45. I therefore conclude with reference to section 117B(6) that the  public
    interest does not require the Claimant's removal from the UK.

46. Having considered a balancing exercise, I find that  the  Claimant  has
    resided in the UK with leave since 2009, he married in May 2012 and has
    a genuine and subsisting  relationship,  and  his  wife  is  a  British
    citizen, as  is  his  son.   The  requirements  of  paragraph  287  are
    satisfied.  There is no criminality or  poor  immigration  history.   I
    therefore find that the weight to be attached to the maintenance of the
    Claimant's private and family life in the UK outweighs the weight to be
    attached to the public interest.  In fact, I do not find that there  is
    any  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's  removal.   Therefore,  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his application  for  leave  to
    remain  is  disproportionate  and  breaches  Article  8  of  the   1950
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.  The Claimant's appeal is allowed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I  see  no  need  to
make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             14th March 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the Claimant's appeal is allowed I do not  make  a  fee  award.   I
find that the appeal has been allowed because of evidence considered by  the
Tribunal that was not before the original decision maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             14th March 2018
