
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hU/09679/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2018                   |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               ARSHAD ALI KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, Instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, Mr Ali Khan is a citizen of Pakistan. His date of  birth
    is 15th October 1972.

2.   The appellant made an application on 9th November 2015  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of long residency.  This  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 28th March 2016.    The  appellant
    appealed against this decision.   His appeal was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal on 22nd May 2017.    The appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal.  On 23rd August 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge
    King TD found a material error of law and set aside the decision.

3.   The matter came before me on 26th  January  2018  to  hear  submissions
    with a view to remaking the decision.   I  heard  representations  from
    both parties.

4.    It is necessary to set out the appellant's  immigration  history.   He
    same to the UK in 2006 as a student.  He made in- time applications for
    leave which were granted up until 16th November 2010 when he made an in-
     time application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post  -Study)
    Migrant. This application  was  refused  on  24th  January  2011.   The
    application was refused giving the appellant an in-  country  right  of
    appeal.  On 28th January 2011 the appellant lodged an  appeal.   It  is
    the respondent's position that he withdrew this appeal  on  28th  April
    2011.  On 27th April 2011 the appellant made a further application  for
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student. This application was  rejected  on
    16th June 2011. It was, according to the respondent, invalid because it
    was made whilst there was an outstanding appeal.  On 25th July 2011 the
    appellant made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student.  This application was rejected as invalid on 8th  August  2011
    because of the non-payment of a fee.

5.   On 24th August 2011 the appellant made another  application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This application was rejected
    as invalid on 27th September  2011  as  a  result  of  the  failure  to
    complete a form.

6.   On 3rd April 2012 the  appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.   He was granted leave from  2nd
    January 2013 until 2nd January 2015.

7.   On 31st December 2014 the appellant made an application  for  leave  to
    remain  under  the  Human  Rights  Act  relying  on  Article  3.   This
    application was varied on 9th  November  2015  to  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.  This
    application was refused on 28 March 2016 and is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

8.   The respondent's position is that the appellant withdrew his appeal  on
    28th April 2011. He had 28 days to re-submit an application.   However,
    he failed to do so.  He submitted an application  on  25th  July  2011.
    The appellant was without lawful leave for 614  days  from  28th  April
    2011 until 2nd January 2013.    The respondent decided not to  exercise
    discretion in favour of the appellant.

9.   The grounds of appeal argue that the appellant withdrew his  appeal  on
    27 April 2011, the same day as he made a new application  and  applying
    the relevant policy (set out below) 3C leave continued.  The  appellant
    produced a copy of the Home Office Policy entitled "Leave  extended  by
    Section 3C (and leave extended by Section 3D  in  transitional  cases),
    version 8.0 of 6th March 2017. The policy provides:-

         "Withdrawal of appeals in the First-tier Tribunal

         "An appellant may withdraw an appeal:

           . Orally, at a hearing

           . At any time, by filing written notice with the tribunal

         An appeal is treated as withdrawn on the  day  that  the  appellant
         requests that the appeal be withdrawn.  If a  person  makes  a  new
         application to the Secretary of State on the  same  day  that  they
         have withdrawn their appeal then  the  new  application  should  be
         accepted.   For these purposes, the person is to be treated  as  if
         they did not have section 3C leave on the date they withdraw  their
         appeal"

10.  Judge King found that the FtT had concluded that  the  new  application
    and the withdrawal were made on 27th April 2011 with reference  to  the
    applicant's letter to the FtT (a copy of which was  before  the  judge)
    and the policy. Judge King concluded as follows:-

         "13. It has been noted that  the  application  of  27th  April  was
         considered on the basis of tier 4 migrant whereas  the  application
         of 3rd April 2012 which was granted, was on the basis  of  being  a
         tier 1  migrant.    Whether  it  could  be  safely  said  that  the
         application of 27th April would  have  succeeded  as  a  matter  of
         speculation as indeed when it might have been rejected.   The  view
         of course that is relied upon by the appellant is that if it were a
         valid application it remains so until such time as it was  properly
         dealt with and that event has not yet happened.

         14.  It seems to me in all the circumstances, given the fact of the
         policy,  that the decision should be set aside to be re-made in the
         light  of  such  evidence  that  may  be  forthcoming.   It  is  of
         importance to  clarify  whether  there  was  a  similar  policy  in
         existence in 2011 and if not why     the  policy  that  is  now  in
         existence came to be so in those terms.  There is no  issue  as  to
         credibility in this matter.   It is an assessment  of  the  various
         evidential elements within a relatively short  compass.   In  those
         circumstances I see no purpose in remitting the matter to the First-
         tier Tribunal but rather retain it in the Upper Tribunal.

         15.  The matter shall be listed in two  months  time  in  order  to
         enable the parties to have  access  to  the  relevant  details  and
         documents.   It  is  important,  if  at  all  possible,   for   the
         application for 27th April and the letter of 16th June 2011 also to
         be before the Tribunal".

11. The appellant's case in a nutshell is that applying  the  policy  there
    was no outstanding appeal and therefore the  application  made  by  the
    appellant  on  27th  April  2011  was  wrongly  rejected  and   remains
    outstanding.  It follows that there are  no  gaps  in  the  appellant's
    leave.  In any event, the application was not rejected until 16th  June
    2011 and at that time it was clear that the appeal had been withdrawn.

12. Ms Ahmed stated that there is no copy of the application that was  made
    on 27th April 2011. She submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that
    withdrawal was notified to the respondent  on  that  day.  However,  Ms
    Ahmed in my view did not appreciate that it was as acknowledged by  the
    FtT and Judge King that there was a letter from the  appellant  to  the
    Tribunal on 27 April 2011 indicating that he  wished  to  withdraw  his
    appeal. The relevant day, according to  the  policy,  is  the  day  the
    appellant  requests  the  withdrawal  of  his  appeal.  There   is   no
    requirement under the policy for appellant  to  notify  the  respondent
    that he wishes to withdraw his appeal.  I asked Ms  Ahmed  whether  the
    policy was in existence in 2011 and she was unable to confirm this. She
    was not able to provide any further documentary evidence to assist with
    this or explain the purpose of or intention behind the policy which  is
    now in existence.

13. Mr Nasim was not able to assist in this respect either.  The  appellant
    produced a further witness statement explaining the problems he has had
    in obtaining a copy of the application that he made on 27th April 2011.
    I have taken this into account.

14. It was very disappointing that the parties were not able to  assist  me
    in respect of the policy or indeed the substance of the application for
    leave made on 27 April 2011, particularly in the light of Judge  King's
    comments and the time he allowed for the parties  to  obtain  evidence.
    There was no evidence that the appellant  through  his  solicitors  has
    made any effort to ascertain whether the policy existed at the material
    time. The burden of proof rests on the appellant. There is  a  duty  on
    the Secretary of State to produce material policies.  I am not able  to
    conclude from the unsatisfactory position of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that she has failed to discharge a duty in the sense described  by  the
    Court of Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85 with reference  to
    Mandalia v SSHD [2015] 1 WLR 4546 [2015] UKSC 59 because  there  is  no
    evidence that there was a policy in existence at the time.  The  policy
    relied on and produced is dated 6 years after  the  withdrawal  of  the
    appeal. There was no application to adjourn to make  further  enquiries
    by either party. I proceed on the basis that the Secretary of State  is
    aware of the duty on her.

15. What there is before me which was not before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    (other than a copy of the policy) is a document entitled  GCID  -  Case
    Record Sheet which is stated as having been created on 13th  May  2016.
     The parts of the document that Mr Nasim relied on state as follows:-

         "Minute/Case Notes:

         General Student

         Application Posted: 27/04/2011

         Current visa expired:  17/11/2010

         Out of time

         Outstanding appeal  (Check  Appeal  Rights  Exhausted  Date):  YES,
         28/04/2011"

    There is a later entry in the document which reads as follows:-

         "***IMMIGRATION STATUS***

         Immigration Status points claimed: 20

         Immigration Status during period of study: Tier 4 Migrant

         Evidence provided: Passport

         Immigration Status points awarded: 20

         Comments: Leave extended under Section 3C"

Conclusions

16. Mr Wilding representing secretary of state before Judge King  indicated
    that the record showed that the respondent received notification of the
    withdrawal on 8th May 2011.   I have seen  no  evidence  to  contradict
    this.  There is in the appellant's bundle a letter of 27th  April  2011
    to the Tribunal making a formal request to withdraw  the  appeal.   The
    appellant  indicated  in  this  letter  that  he  is  making  a   fresh
    application for further leave to remain "under the  Tier  4  Category".
    It is stated in this letter that "the  fresh  application  for  further
    leave to remain is sent out to the UK Border Agency on the same date as
    this letter." The appellant's case was withdrawn on 28 April 2011  (the
    date  of  the  notice  of  withdrawal).  If  the  policy  applied,  the
    application would be treated as withdrawn on 27 April.

17. Having considered the evidence before me and the  submissions  made  by
    both parties, I conclude that it is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    policy now relied on was in existence in 2011 at the material time.  To
    find otherwise would involve unreasonable speculation.

18. If the policy was in existence in 2011 at the material time, I  do  not
    accept that, properly applied, the appellant's 3C leave would be deemed
    to have continued.   The  intention  of  the  policy  is  not  obvious;
    however, the meaning and application of it  was  not  explored  by  the
    representatives at the hearing before me. What it says is that if a new
    application is made on the same day as a person  withdraws  an  appeal,
    the new application will be "accepted". It does not say that section 3C
    leave continues if the new application is "accepted". As  a  matter  of
    fact the final sentence of the policy says  that  the  person  will  be
    "treated as if they did not have section 3C leave". If, having  applied
    the policy, the appellant's appeal was treated as withdrawn on 27 April
    2011 and his new application "accepted," I have considered whether this
    would assist the appellant. Whilst the application would not have  been
    rejected as invalid for the reason that he had an  outstanding  appeal,
    there is a possibility that it may have been invalid for other reasons.
    Without sight of the application or the decision of 16 June 2011, it is
    not possible to conclude that it was a valid application. As  a  matter
    of fact, the appellant made two later applications which were  rejected
    as invalid. When the appellant was  eventually  granted  leave  it  was
    under a different category.  Had the application  of  27th  April  2011
    been "accepted" under the policy and  considered  substantively  it  is
    impossible to speculate what the outcome would have been. Whatever  the
    outcome, applying the policy he would not have had section 3C leave  in
    any event. Had his section 3C leave continued for any reasons, in spite
    of the wording of the policy, it cannot be reasonably inferred that had
    the  application  been  considered  substantively   this   would   have
    seamlessly continued until 2016.  The argument is tenuous.

19. I do not accept Mr Nasim's submission that the application of 27  April
    2011 remains outstanding because it was unlawfully  rejected  and  that
    this appellant has leave under section  3C  until  the  application  is
    substantively determined by the respondent.  There is no evidence  that
    the decision of 16 June 2011 was  unlawful.  There  has  never  been  a
    challenge to it made by the appellant.  If he was of the view  that  he
    had 3C leave, it is not clear why instead of challenging  the  decision
    of 16 June, he continued to make further applications.   There were  no
    challenges made to the later decisions.  Furthermore, the appellant did
    not make an application within 28 days of 16 June 2011 which  may  have
    assisted him. He could have done so.  He made an  application  on  25th
    July 2011 and this was rejected for non-payment of a fee.

20. I do not accept that there has been any acceptance  or  recognition  by
    the respondent that the appellant had section 3C leave at the  material
    time. I have considered the reference  in  the  Case  Record  Sheet  to
    section 3C leave. However, having read the reasons  for  the  decision,
    which is the subject of this appeal, it is clear that  the  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post- Study) Migrant was not dependant
    on the appellant having leave.

21. The appellant's case is that he has no gap in his leave. I reject this.
    There is a significant gap  in  his  leave.   The  respondent  properly
    considered discretion. The gap in lawful residence  is  significant.  I
    conclude that discretion should not  be  exercised  in  favour  of  the
    appellant. The appellant's case falls far short of establishing that it
    is reasonably likely that the respondent made an administrative  error.
    The appellant cannot meet the long residence Rules.

22. Judge Hawden-Beal dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph
    276ADE and there was no challenge to  this.    The  appellant  has  not
    submitted any further evidence in relation to his private life. I  find
    that the  appellant  has  private  life  here  and  that  the  decision
    interferes with it. The determinative factor is proportionality. I have
    considered the appellant's evidence in  his  first  witness  statement.
    This was before the First-Tier Tribunal.  The appellant has  been  here
    since 2006.  He came to the UK  as  a  student.   He  has  a  wife  and
    children in Pakistan.   He speaks English.  Judge Hawden-Beal concluded
    that he was financially independent and there is no reason to interfere
    with that finding.   It may be the case that he has been poorly  served
    by those who were representing him at that time (although I  note  that
    there is no evidence of a complaint against the  representative  having
    been made). There is now a policy in place that may have helped him had
    it been in existence in 2011, but the argument is tenuous.  There  must
    be a rationale for and intention behind the policy in 2017, but I  have
    not been told about this. In any event, I attach appropriate weight  to
    this as a factor in the appellant's favour. It is material in this case
    that the appellant has not advanced  evidence  of  significant  private
    life despite having been here since 2006. I have  considered  that  the
    appellant was diagnosed with TB in 2013.  His evidence is that  he  has
    developed ties with the Pashtu community here and that  his  family  in
    Pakistan is financially dependent on  him.  There  is  no  evidence  to
    support this. However, I accept that this likely to  be  the  case  and
    attach weight to these factors.

23. Proportionality must be considered through the lens of section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  The  appellant's  status  has  always  been  precarious.
    Taking into account the limited extent and depth of  private  life  and
    all material factors, there are no properly  identified  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances in this case to outweigh the public interest.
     The appellant's appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

24. The appeal is dismissed under the Rules and Article 8.


Signed Joanna McWilliam    Date 16 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
