
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/09831/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th December 2018                   | On 8th March 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                               mrs abida rafiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision promulgated on 5th October 2018, the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to refuse her human rights claim  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J Pacey ("the judge").  The judge  took  into
    account an earlier dismissal  of  an  appeal  against  refusal  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim and a finding in that earlier appeal that  the
    appellant's account of fear of her father on return to Pakistan was not
    credible.  In the present appeal, the judge found  that  the  appellant
    had not received  threats  from  her  father  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant and her husband would not face obstacles of any substance  on
    return to Pakistan.  So far as the appellant's health is concerned, the
    judge found that she would have access to appropriate medical treatment
    in Pakistan.

2.   In grounds supporting an application for permission to  appeal,  it  is
    contended on the appellant's behalf that there has been  no  concession
    that she is unable to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("the rules") and the decision fails to make clear how the  judge  came
    to conclude that such a concession was made.  So far as  insurmountable
    obstacles to integration  on  return  are  concerned,  there  were  two
    witnesses who gave evidence, Mr B Hussain and Mr M  Sadiq.   The  judge
    discounted the evidence of the first of those witnesses but nothing  in
    the decision showed that any account was taken of the evidence given by
    Mr Sadiq, an independent witness and family friend who made a statement
    to the effect that he attempted a reconciliation between the  appellant
    and her father, to no avail.

3.    Mr  Sadiq's  evidence  was  material  and  relevant  to  the   judge's
    assessment, including how the appellant's marriage would be  viewed  on
    return by  her  family  and  whether  this  would  show  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with her husband continuing in Pakistan.   The
    judge's finding at paragraph 43 of the decision that the appellant  had
    not provided anything "beyond a bare assertion" was not sustainable.

4.   The judge also erred in assuming that the appellant's husband was  able
    to offer protection against threats  from  relatives  on  return.   The
    evidence from Mr Sadiq was relevant in this context also.

5.   Also in issue was  the  appellant's  explanation  regarding  a  caution
    issued to her.  In her witness statement, she provided  an  explanation
    for a failure to reveal the caution when  she  made  her  human  rights
    claim.  It was not clear from the decision  that  the  judge  expressly
    considered this explanation in the light of the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance, published on 11th January 2018, that decision  makers  should
    take into account that a person may not be aware  that  a  fine  for  a
    motoring conviction or a  caution  should  be  disclosed  and  that  an
    application must not be refused if a person has made a genuine error in
    this context.  Each case fell to be  considered  on  its  merits.   The
    decision showed that the judge may not have properly engaged  with  the
    discretionary nature of paragraph S-LTR 2.2 of the rules or  considered
    whether the appellant made  a  genuine  error  in  not  disclosing  the
    caution.  Moreover, the PNC was not available at the  hearing,  as  the
    judge noted at paragraph 5 of the decision and it was arguable that the
    respondent had failed to discharge the burden of proving this  part  of
    his case.

6.   On 2nd November 2018, permission to appeal was granted.  There  was  no
    rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Ms Iqbal said that guidance given in Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 00282  was
    relevant.  At paragraphs 34 to 36 of the decision, the judge identified
    the correct approach in the light  of  the  earlier  dismissal  of  the
    appellant's appeal against refusal of her asylum  claim.   However,  at
    paragraph 38 the judge erred in finding that there was no new  evidence
    of probative  weight  justifying  a  departure  from  previous  adverse
    findings regarding the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.   In
    fact, as the judge herself noted at paragraphs 16, 17 and 19,  evidence
    was given by several witnesses, including Mr B Hussain and Mr M  Sadiq.
    Mr Sadiq gave a detailed statement about the relationship  between  the
    appellant and her husband and how he  was  instrumental  in  seeking  a
    reconciliation with the appellant's father.  The decision contained  no
    findings regarding this evidence. Mr Sadiq was mentioned  in  paragraph
    19 but not elsewhere.  The contrast  with  Mr  Hussain's  evidence  was
    apparent from paragraph 40 of the decision,  where  the  judge  briefly
    took that evidence into account.   Mr  Sadiq's  evidence  bore  on  the
    genuineness of the marriage and the difficulties  the  appellant  would
    face on return.  It was relevant in relation  to  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing and obstacles to integration  under  the  private  life
    rule.

8.   Ms Iqbal said that the other grounds relied upon were fully set out  in
    the written application for permission to appeal.

9.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe dealt with the grounds in the order in  which  they
    appeared in the application.  The first ground was  predicated  on  the
    basis that it was unclear from the decision why the appellant failed to
    meet the requirements of the rules.  The decision  letter  showed  that
    the Secretary of State relied on the suitability  provisions  and  this
    was why the appellant could not succeed under Appendix FM or  paragraph
    276ADE.  Seen in this way, the judge's conclusions towards the  end  of
    the decision, beginning at paragraph 47, were sound in relation to  the
    failure to declare the caution.  The third ground also related  to  the
    caution.  The respondent did not adduce the PNC but the decision showed
    that the appellant accepted that she had been  given  a  caution.   The
    judge clearly rejected her explanation for failing to disclose  it,  at
    paragraph 49 of the decision.  It was not  unfair  or  unsound  of  the
    judge to reject the explanation and so the lack of the PNC itself  fell
    away as a material factor.

10.  The grounds contained no challenge to the adverse findings made in  the
    earlier appeal, regarding the asylum claim,  where  the  appellant  was
    found not to be a credible witness.  The judge in  the  present  appeal
    correctly concluded that rejection of the asylum claim and the  account
    of threats from the appellant's father could not  be  reopened  in  the
    family life context.  Any evidence referring back to the asylum aspect,
    including Mr Sadiq's evidence, had little or no probative weight.   His
    evidence amounted to a matter which could have been brought up  earlier
    but was not.  The appellant was not seeking to  challenge  the  adverse
    asylum findings.  It was important to note the rejection of  the  claim
    to be at risk from her father.  It followed  that  the  sole  basis  on
    which insurmountable obstacles were raised fell  away  because  of  the
    dismissal of the asylum appeal by the previous Tribunal.

11.  The judge's assessment of  the  case  was  open  to  her,  as  was  her
    analysis of the spouse's claim that in spite of his wife  fearing  that
    she would be killed in Pakistan, he was not willing to return with her.
     Paragraph 41 of the decision dealt with this aspect.  Overall,  taking
    into account the previous findings  regarding  the  asylum  claim,  the
    appellant had failed to show any real barrier to family life continuing
    abroad and the judge was entitled to conclude as she did.

12.  Ms Iqbal made a  brief  response.   So  far  as  the  first  ground  is
    concerned, the judge at paragraph 29 stated that it was "accepted" that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of the rules but  it  was
    not clear who accepted that this was so.  The decision letter  referred
    to the suitability requirements but the judge only considered these  at
    the end of the decision, as part of her  overall  conclusion  that  the
    appellant could not rely on the rules.

13.  The judge did not consider the guidance given  to  decision  makers  by
    the Secretary of State on the weight  to  be  given  to  a  failure  to
    disclose a fine or a caution.  A rational assessment of the appellant's
    explanation that she made a mistake required the guidance to  be  taken
    into account.

14.  Notwithstanding the adverse findings regarding threats,  it  was  clear
    that  the  appellant  was  maintaining  her  claim  that   her   father
    disapproved of her marriage and that was still in issue.  The  test  in
    relation to the risk from her father, by reason  of  his  threats,  was
    different from the fact that his disapproval of the  marriage  bore  on
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    or obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into Pakistan.  It was in
    that context that the evidence from Mr Sadiq had obvious importance.

15.  So far as the failure to  disclose  the  caution  and  the  suitability
    grounds were concerned, the  burden  was  on  the  respondent  and  the
    evidence contained in the PNC was not produced.  It  was  not  disputed
    that the appellant had an encounter in  a  shop  which  led  to  police
    interest but the evidence bearing on that matter was  simply  not  made
    available to the Tribunal.  In her witness statement, at paragraphs  26
    and 27, the appellant gave an account of the allegation of  shoplifting
    made against her.  Her  explanation  was  part  of  the  assessment  of
    whether the discretionary ground of refusal was made out.  The  judge's
    analysis was simply that the appellant  accepted  that  a  caution  was
    given but, in that context, the  respondent's  guidance  was  relevant.
    The relevance of  such  guidance  was  made  clear  in  SF  and  Others
    (Albania) [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

16.  The decision has been carefully prepared by a very  experienced  judge.
    I conclude, however, that the decision does contain errors of law, such
    that it should be set aside and remade.

17.  The judge properly began  her  analysis  by  taking  into  account  the
    earlier decision, following guidance given in Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT
    00082.  This earlier decision contained adverse findings in  which  the
    appellant's asylum claim was rejected.  She  was  found  not  to  be  a
    reliable  witness  in  relation  to  her  claim  that  her  father  had
    threatened her.  At paragraph 38 of the decision, the judge found  that
    there was no new evidence of probative weight to cause  her  to  depart
    from the previous findings.  She correctly  distinguished  the  present
    appeal from the earlier  one  and  identified  critical  questions  as,
    first, whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    between the appellant  and  her  husband  continuing  in  Pakistan  and
    secondly, whether there were obstacles to integration for the  purposes
    of the private life rule contained in paragraph 276ADE.

18.  The difficulty with the conclusion that there was no  new  evidence  of
    probative weight is that although the judge deals with what Mr  Hussain
    said, there is no engagement with the evidence given by Mr  Sadiq.   He
    is briefly mentioned in paragraph 19 but there is  nothing  else.    If
    the overall finding that there was nothing new of probative weight  was
    reached after considering what Mr Sadiq said, a reader of the  decision
    would struggle to understand why his evidence made no difference.

19.  So far as  the  caution  is  concerned,  the  appellant  explained  her
    failure to disclose it in her application for leave, at  paragraphs  26
    and 27 of her witness statement.  The  failure  led  the  Secretary  of
    State to conclude that the requirement of paragraph S-LTR 2.2(b) of the
    rules was not met.  The judge  found  as  a  fact  that  the  appellant
    received a caution but, as Ms Iqbal submitted, the ground of refusal is
    discretionary and the Secretary of State's guidance to decision  makers
    is relevant in deciding whether it is made out.  This is clear from  SF
    (Albania).  Although there is no "not in accordance with the rules"  or
    "not in accordance with the law" ground  of  appeal  available  to  the
    appellant, whether or not the requirements of the rules are met  is  an
    important part of the overall assessment of the human  rights  grounds.
    Paragraph 49 of the decision records, accurately,  that  there  was  no
    declaration of the caution in the application for leave but there is no
    mention of the guidance or of the appellant's explanation, save  for  a
    brief mention in paragraph 48 of the appellant's claim that she did not
    understand the procedures or the English language fluently.

20.  For these reasons, I find that the decision  contains  material  errors
    of law and that it must be set aside  and  remade.   The  parties  were
    agreed that if an error were found, the venue for  remaking  should  be
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree, as the  fact-finding  will  need  to
    take into account evidence from all the witnesses relied  upon  by  the
    parties.

21.  The findings of fact made by  the  judge  are  not  preserved  and  the
    decision will be remade de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  as  containing
material errors of law, and will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, by  a
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge J Pacey.

Signed                                  Date 6 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no application  for
anonymity before me.  I make no direction on this occasion.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell
