
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09775/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 27th July 2016                   |On: 26th August 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Accra
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Mrs Elizabeth Osei
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V. Aning, Immigration Advisory Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana born on the 19th May  1946.  On
       the 26th January  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Griffiths)
       allowed, on human rights grounds, her appeal against  a  decision  to
       refuse to grant her entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative.
       The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) now has permission to  appeal  that
       decision.




       Background

    2. The Respondent sought, by way of application dated 28th  April  2015,
       leave to enter as an adult dependent relative under Appendix FM.  She
       stated that she wanted to come to the United Kingdom  to  live  with,
       and be cared for by, her daughter.

    3. The ECO refused the application in a decision dated 7th August  2016.
       It was not accepted that the Respondent had shown that she  required,
       through age,  illness  or  disability,  long-term  personal  care  to
       perform everyday tasks. The application was refused with reference to
       paragraphs EC-DR.1.1(d) and E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM.

    4. When the appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Tribunal
       properly directed itself that pursuant to statutory amendments to s82
       of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  only
       available ground of appeal was 'human  rights'.   The  Tribunal  then
       considered the ratio of the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Kaur  (visit
       appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487. In an Article 8 case  concerning
       entry clearance (in that instance  an  application  for  entry  as  a
       visitor) the starting point must be to assess the applicant's ability
       to meet the requirements of the Rules. This will inform not only  the
       assessment of proportionality, but the question of whether Article  8
       is even engaged.  The Tribunal found this guidance to  be  consistent
       with that given in SS (Congo) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2015] EWCA 387, in which the Court of Appeal stressed the
       importance of identifying the substantive contents of  the  Rules  in
       order to assess the force of the public interest in a given case.

    5. Having directed itself accordingly the Tribunal went on to find  that
       the Rules relating to entry for adult dependent relatives  were  met.
       It considered the evidence provided by the  Respondent's  doctors  in
       Ghana to the effect that she is suffering from severe arthritis which
       is resulting in long-term incapacity. Her ability  to  perform  basic
       daily tasks was diminishing and was not improving with  medical  care
       in Ghana. Her problems had been  exacerbated  by  a  recent  bout  of
       pneumonia. Her condition required specialist equipment and facilities
       which were not available there. Her sedentary  lifestyle  was  giving
       rise to a risk of her developing  mental  issues.   The  sum  of  the
       medical evidence is described at paragraph 16 of  the  determination:
       "the appellant is suffering from severe arthritis  and  hypertension,
       her condition is deteriorating, she requires specialist care which is
       not available to her, she requires close monitoring,  long-term  care
       and rehabilitation to enable her to improve". On the  basis  of  this
       evidence the Tribunal  concluded  [at  17]  that  the  Appellant  had
       demonstrated that she met the requirements of  paragraphs  E-ECDR.2.4
       and E-ECDR.2.5: due to illness she required long term  personal  care
       to perform everyday tasks and that care was not available  in  Ghana.
       Those conclusions are not challenged before me.

    6. The focus of this appeal is where the determination goes from  there.
       At paragraph 17 the Tribunal directs  itself  to  take  the  findings
       under the Rule as its starting point in the Razgar assessment. At  18
       it says this:

           "The appellant and sponsor are mother  and  adult  daughter  and
           therefore more than the usual emotional ties  will  need  to  be
           demonstrated in order to amount  to  family  life.  The  sponsor
           stated that she is the one responsible for taking  care  of  the
           appellant  financially....I  am  prepared  to  find,  given  the
           circumstances of the appellant and in light of the support  that
           the sponsor provides to  her,  that  family  life  between  them
           exists owing to the level of dependency"

    7. The ECO submits that this conclusion was not open to the Tribunal for
       the reasons that it gives.  It is submitted  that  the  determination
       fails to give reasons as to how "more  than  normal  emotional  ties"
       have been established here. In his oral submissions Mr  Avery  relied
       on the decision in  Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  He submitted that the Tribunal  could
       not properly construe financial maintenance alone as enough to create
       an Article 8 family life between these two adults. The  determination
       referred to other "support" but it was not clear what that  might  be
       considering that they lived  in  different  countries.  The  question
       raised by this appeal is therefore: "how is  Article  8  family  life
       between adults to be assessed in the context of Appendix FM?".

       My Findings

    8. The ECOs reliance on Kugathas recalls a long  line  of  domestic  and
       European cases in which it was  held  that  the  term  'family  life'
       within the context of Article 8 must  mean  a  relationship  of  real
       substance. In the context of two adults  (other  than  partners)  the
       question was whether there was a connection between the two over  and
       above the "normal  emotional  ties"  that  two  related  adults,  for
       instance siblings, might share: see S v UK (1984) 40 DR 196,   Marckx
       v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330, Advic  v  UK  [1995]  EHRR  57.  Having
       considered that jurisprudence in the appeal of  Kugathas,  Sedley  LJ
       said this:

             1. Mr Gill says that none  of  this  amounts  to  an  absolute
                requirement of dependency. That  is  clearly  right  in  the
                economic sense. But if dependency is read  down  as  meaning
                "support", in the personal sense, and if one  adds,  echoing
                the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  "real"  or  "committed"  or
                "effective" to the word "support", then it represents in  my
                view the irreducible minimum of what family life implies...

             1. Returning to the present case, neither blood  ties  nor  the
                concern and affection that ordinarily go with them  are,  by
                themselves or together, in my judgment enough to  constitute
                family life. Most of us have close relations of whom we  are
                extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us, from time
                to time; but none of us would say  on  those  grounds  alone
                that we share a family life with them in any sense  capable
                of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8.

    9. The relevance of financial dependency to the existence of family life
       will vary depending on the context. At 25 of  Kugathas  Lady  Justice
       Arden held  that  "Such  ties  might  exist  if  the  appellant  were
       dependent on his family or vice versa", a comment relied upon  by  Mr
       Aning in his defence of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  in  this
       appeal.  By contrast in AAO v ECO [2011] EWCA Civ 840 Rix LJ held [at
       43] that remittances sent from the UK sponsor to her  elderly  mother
       abroad was not something which took that matter very far, noting that
       in some cases "the  provision  of  such  money  can  be  as  much  an
       insulation against family life as evidence of  it".   The  conclusion
       that can be drawn from these authorities is that where an  Article  8
       family life  is  claimed  between  two  related  adults  (other  than
       partners) the focus of the enquiry is whether there are between  them
       elements of dependency over and above the normal bonds  of  affection
       that relatives share.   This could include financial dependency,  but
       that will not necessarily be determinative of the  matter.  It  is  a
       question to be decided on the facts.

   10. Until the 9th July 2012 that was the  approach  that  decision-makers
       were bound to take in deciding whether Article 8 was engaged in  such
       claims.  On that  day  however,  the  legal  framework  substantially
       changed. With the introduction of Appendix FM the Home Office  sought
       to codify and define Article 8 with the aim of establishing where the
       balance between the competing interests of migrants  and  the  public
       should ordinarily be  struck.  This  aim  is  set  out  at  paragraph
       GEN.1.1, which explains the purpose of that part of  the  Immigration
       Rules:

           GEN.1.1. This route is for those seeking to enter or  remain  in
           the UK on the basis of their family life with a person who is  a
           British Citizen, is settled in the UK, or  is  in  the  UK  with
           limited leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
           protection (and the applicant cannot  seek  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the UK as their family member under Part 11  of  these
           rules).  It  sets  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,  in
           considering applications under  this  route,  it  reflects  how,
           under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the balance will
           be struck between the right to respect for  private  and  family
           life and the legitimate aims of  protecting  national  security,
           public safety  and  the  economic  well-being  of  the  UK;  the
           prevention of disorder and crime; the protection  of  health  or
           morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others
           (and in doing so also  reflects  the  relevant  public  interest
           considerations as  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). It also takes into account the
           need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the  UK
           , in line with the Secretary of State's duty under section 55 of
           the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

   11. Appendix FM provides for entry into the  United  Kingdom  of  various
       classes of person: partners  (in  some  instances  former  partners),
       parents, children and  "adult dependent relatives" of persons settled
       in the UK. In respect of  the  latter  paragraphs  E-ECDR.2.1  to  E-
       ECDR.2.5 set out the requirements as to the 'relationship' components
       of the eligibility criteria:

           E-ECDR.2.1.  The applicant must be the-

           (a)   parent aged 18 years or over;

           (b)   grandparent;

           (c)   brother or sister aged 18 years or over; or

           (d)   son or daughter aged 18 years or over of  a  person  ("the
           sponsor") who is in the UK.

           E-ECDR.2.2.  .If  the  applicant  is  the  sponsor's  parent  or
           grandparent they must not be in a subsisting relationship with a
           partner unless that partner is  also  the  sponsor's  parent  or
           grandparent and is applying for entry clearance at the same time
           as the applicant.

           E-ECDR.2.3.  The sponsor must at the date of application be-

           (a)   aged 18 years or over; and

           (b)   (i)   a British Citizen in the UK; or

                (ii)   present and settled in the UK; or

                (iii)   in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or   humanitarian
                protection.

           E-ECDR.2.4.  The  applicant  or,  if  the  applicant  and  their
           partner  are  the  sponsor's  parents   or   grandparents,   the
           applicant's partner,  must  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
           disability require long-term personal care to  perform  everyday
           tasks.

           E-ECDR.2.5.  The  applicant  or,  if  the  applicant  and  their
           partner  are  the  sponsor's  parents   or   grandparents,   the
           applicant's partner, must be unable, even with the practical and
           financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required  level  of
           care in the country where they are living, because-

           (a)   it is not available and there is no person in that country
           who can reasonably provide it; or

           (b)   it is not affordable.

   12.  These  'eligibility'  criteria  require  the  applicant  to  show  a
       biological relationship with her sponsor, and a necessary physical or
       mental dependency arising from illness, age or disability.  Paragraph
       EC-DR.1.1 (d) states that entry clearance will be granted where  each
       of these requirements is met, in addition to  those  set  out  at  E-
       ECDR.3.1 and E-ECDR.3.2.  The latter  provisions,  not  factually  in
       issue in this case, concern the ability of the sponsor to financially
       support the applicant. The rules in Appendix FM thus  set  out  three
       fundamental conditions that  must  be  met  for  an  adult  dependent
       relative  to  be  admitted  on  Article  8  grounds:  (i)  a  defined
       biological relationship, (ii) a real dependency and  (iii)  financial
       support.  These rules are not a 'complete code' (cf. the  deportation
       provisions considered in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192) and there will be cases failing
       outwith  that  framework  where  family  life  is  established.   The
       eligibility provisions in Appendix FM must however be  read,  at  the
       very least, to define the parameters of 'family life' as far  as  the
       ECO is concerned.

   13. In this appeal on human rights grounds the Tribunal properly directed
       itself to apply the Razgar  framework.    It  did  so  following  the
       guidance in Kaur that the Rules should be the starting point.  Having
       found the Rules met, the Tribunal was required  to  consider  whether
       there was a 'family life' for the purpose of  Article  8.  This  was,
       given the codification of Article 8  within  the  Rules,  a  somewhat
       artificial  exercise.  Having  found  that  the   three   fundamental
       requirements under FM were met (see above) the Tribunal hardly needed
       to embark on the Kugathas enquiry that it did.  Viewed in this  light
       it is hard to see why the ECO pursued the  appeal.  Where  the  Rules
       seek to codify the nature of an Article 8 'family  life',   it  is  a
       given that an applicant who  has  demonstrated  that  she  meets  the
       eligibility requirements in any given category under Appendix FM will
       have demonstrated that Article 8 is engaged.

   14. The grounds are not made out and the appeal is dismissed.

   15. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the  facts  see
       no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             4th August 2016
