
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09041/2018
                                                               HU/09043/2018
                                                               HU/09047/2018
                                                               HU/09053/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th January 2019                 |On 8th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MMRS (FIRST appellant)
                           NJM (SECOND appellant)
                            EJM (THIRD appellant)
                            NB (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr Md Tariq Bin Aziz of JS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in these  proceedings,
    I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants, nationals of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decisions of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  3rd
    April 2018 to refuse their applications for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of their private and  family  life.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C Greasley allowed the appeals in a decision promulgated on  14th
    November 2018.  The Secretary of State now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal
    with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on
    28th November 2018.

 3. The background to the appeal is that the first Appellant entered the UK
    in November 2010 as a student.  His leave to remain was extended  until
    August 2014 but an application to extend his leave  to  remain  further
    was refused in March  2015.   His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed in August 2017 when he became appeal  rights  exhausted.   He
    made a further application on 31st August 2017 for leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his private and family life in the UK.  The  Secretary  of
    State refused that application, inter  alia,  under  S-LTR.1.6  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that his  presence  in  the  UK  is  not
    conducive to the public good based on the decision of the Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant had  fraudulently  obtained  a  TOEIC  English
    language certificate from Educational Testing Service  (ETS).   It  was
    therefore considered that the Appellant's application falls for refusal
    on grounds of suitability.  The applications of his wife  and  children
    (the second, third and fourth Appellants) were  refused  in  line  with
    his.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence  in  relation  to
    the English language certificate and found at paragraph 39  that  there
    was credible evidence that the first Appellant  had  acted  dishonestly
    through the use of a third party proxy in taking three  TOEIC  speaking
    tests in May, June and July 2012.

 5. The judge went on then to consider the appeals of the second, third and
    fourth Appellants and concluded that it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave the UK and in those circumstances  allowed  all  four
    appeals.

The grounds of appeal

 6. It is contended in the Grounds of Appeal by the Secretary of State that
    the judge made a material  misdirection  in  law  by  failing  to  give
    adequate consideration to the public  interest  in  removal  given  the
    findings in relation to deception and the fact that none of the  family
    members are British citizens.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the  case  of
    Jeunesse v The Netherlands  [2014]  ECHR  1036,  paragraph  108,  which
    states that an important  consideration  is  whether  family  life  was
    created at a time  when  the  persons  involved  were  aware  that  the
    immigration status of one of them was  such  that  the  persistence  of
    family life within the host state would be precarious.   Reference  was
    also made to the case of R (on the application of Agyarko) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 which  states  that  in
    cases concerned with precarious family life it is likely to be only  in
    exceptional circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family
    member will constitute a violation of Article 8 reflecting  the  weight
    to the state's right to control its  borders  and  the  limited  weight
    generally attached to family life established  in  the  full  knowledge
    that its continuation is unlawful or precarious.  It is contended that,
    in allowing the Appellants' appeals, the judge failed to give  adequate
    weight to the fact that it is  always  considered  in  a  child's  best
    interest to remain with his parents if possible and the judge failed to
    consider the evidence in the round including the fact  that  there  are
    clear ties to Bangladesh, that the  children  have  been  raised  in  a
    household where that culture is predominant and have remaining ties  to
    that country.  Reliance was placed on the case of E-A (Article 8 - best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    acknowledged that a right to education is too narrow in scope to be  of
    assistance when assessing the best interests of the child and  that  it
    would be a material misdirection to consider such an analysis  entirely
    through the prism of education.

 7. It is contended in the second Ground of Appeal that the judge erred  in
    failing to apply the  relevant  case  law  including  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 where the Court of Appeal considered that  "if  the
    parents are removed it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to
    go with them".  The Court of Appeal also said that  it  could  not  see
    that the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK can
    outweigh the benefit to the children of remaining with  their  parents.
    "Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world so we cannot
    educate the world" [60].  The grounds also rely on the case of  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74 where the family were not British citizens and the court
    said that they had no right to future education and healthcare  in  the
    UK and that integration in the UK will have been predominantly  in  the
    context of the family  unit.   It  is  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to identify why he had chosen  not  to  apply
    the principles in these cases.

 8. At the hearing Mr Whitwell referred  to  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal where First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison restructured the
    grounds into four grounds considering it arguable that the judge  erred
    in law in:

      1) failing to give adequate consideration to the  public  interest  in
         removal when finding that the first  Appellant  had  used  a  third
         party proxy to take his English language speaking test;

      2) failing to give consideration to the fact that any private life was
         created at a time when the Appellant and his family were aware that
         their status was precarious;

      3) failing to give adequate consideration to the fact  that  the  best
         interests of the children are to  remain  with  their  parents  and
         failing to consider why they could not return as a family  unit  to
         Bangladesh when the children have been raised in a household  where
         their culture is  predominant  and  have  remaining  ties  to  that
         country; and

      4) failing to consider the appropriate case law in  placing  too  much
         weight on the children's education in the UK (E-A, EV (Philippines)
         and Zoumbas).

The hearing

 9. Mr Whitwell also submitted that at paragraph 46 the judge  relied  only
    on  two  reasons  for  deciding  that  the  position  of  the  children
    outweighed the public interest.  These were their length  of  residence
    in the UK and their education; the fact that the children  are  in  the
    education system and that the eldest daughter is about to  embark  upon
    GCSEs.  He pointed out that in the decision in KO  (Nigeria)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 at  paragraph
    18  and  19  the  Supreme  Court  indicated  that  the  assessment   of
    reasonableness is to be considered in  the  real  world  in  which  the
    children find themselves and that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable for the children to follow their  parents  to
    Bangladesh.  In his submission the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    years the children had spent in Bangladesh and the fact that the family
    will be returning to Bangladesh as a family unit.   He  submitted  that
    the judge failed to consider the precariousness of the  status  of  the
    parents when family life was established  under  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  his  submission  the
    judge's assessment is inadequate and amounts to a misdirection  of  law
    and that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons.    Mr  Whitwell
    also referred to the factual scenario of NS, one of the  Appellants  in
    the case  of  KO,  and  highlighted  consideration  of  that  issue  at
    paragraphs 46  to  52  of  the  decision  in  KO  submitting  that  the
    circumstances here were similar to those in the case of  NS  where  the
    appeal was dismissed by the Supreme Court.

10. Mr Aziz sought to distinguish the Supreme Court's decision in the  case
    of NS within KO, pointing to the last sentence in  paragraph  51  where
    the Supreme Court said "but in a  context  where  the  parents  had  to
    leave, the natural expectation would be  that  the  children  would  go
    them, and there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by  the  judge  to
    suggest that that would be other than reasonable".  He pointed that the
    difference in this case is that the evidence  reviewed  by  this  judge
    indicated that it would not be reasonable for  these  children  to  go.



11. Mr Aziz also submitted that the First-tier Tribunal clearly  considered
    the evidence in relation to the children, for example at  paragraph  43
    where the judge considered the evidence in relation to the elder  child
    who is about to take her GCSEs and has aspirations to attend college or
    university.  He suggested that the material facts in NS  are  different
    from  those  in  this  case.   Mr  Aziz  submitted  that  the   judge's
    consideration at paragraph 39 to 42 was adequate  in  relation  to  the
    deception point.  He highlighted that at paragraphs 43 and 45 the judge
    referred to the deception point and clearly balanced that  against  the
    rights of the Appellant's wife and children.  Mr Aziz submitted that it
    was clear that the judge had in mind the precariousness  of  the  first
    and second Appellants' leave because  at  paragraph  26  he  noted  the
    Appellants' immigration history in the UK and how in  August  2017  the
    Appellants became appeal rights exhausted.  He submitted the fact  that
    the Appellant had leave initially is relevant to the weight to be given
    to the precariousness.  He submitted that it was relevant there was  no
    deportation order, removal or curtailment in play in this case.

12. In terms of the third and fourth grounds identified in  the  permission
    to appeal Mr Aziz submitted that the Secretary of State's position is a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  He pointed out that  the  best
    interests of the children were considered by the judge.   He  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not required to set out  all  of
    the evidence but did consider the best interests of  the  children  and
    the reasonableness of removal.  He submitted that the  judge  had  also
    considered  the  case  law,  for  example  at  paragraph  47  where  he
    considered the decision of Azimi-Moayed & Ors.  He  took  into  account
    that the children had put down significant roots in the  UK  [49].   In
    his  submission  the  judge   considered   the   reasonableness   point
    adequately, he considered the length  of  residence,  the  age  of  the
    children, the fact that the elder child was embarking on GCSEs and that
    she had put down significant roots in the UK.  In  his  submission  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  need  to  mention  every  case  in  the
    determination.  But in his submission the judge considered the cases of
    EV, E-A and KO, all of which were in the judge's mind when  he  reached
    the decision.  In his view there was no material misdirection  in  law,
    the judge made clear findings open to him.

13. In response, Mr Whitwell submitted that NS could not  be  distinguished
    from this case.  He referred to paragraphs 49, 50 and  51  noting  that
    the Appellant's children in that case were doing well at  school,  that
    they had no experience living outside of the UK and in  his  submission
    the distinction sought to be drawn by Mr Aziz is false.  With reference
    to precariousness in his submission it was not possible to say what was
    in the mind of Judge Greasley.

14. At the end of the hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.   It  was  agreed
    between the parties that if I considered that the  Secretary  of  State
    had established the grounds I would set the decision aside and  re-make
    it on the  basis  of  the  evidence  submitted  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Aziz took instructions from the Appellant  and  indicated
    that it would not be necessary to update any evidence and that I  could
    make the decision on the basis of the evidence before me.

Error of Law

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made findings in relation to the  Article
    8 issue at paragraphs 43 to 51 of the decision.  The judge  set  out  a
    summary of the case of KO at paragraph 49 stating that the  conduct  of
    the parents is not relevant in an assessment of whether or not it would
    be reasonable for children to leave the UK.  However, the judge  failed
    to appreciate the guidance set out in KO at paragraphs 18 and 19  where
    Lord Carnwath said  that  the  assessment  of  reasonableness  must  be
    considered in the real world in which  the  children  find  themselves.
    The question in EV (Philippines) is cited at paragraph 19 which  states
    that if neither parent has  the  right  to  remain  then  that  is  the
    background against which the  assessment  is  conducted  and  that  the
    ultimate question will be is it  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of  origin.
    The judge has taken a simplistic assessment of the decision  in  KO  at
    paragraph 49.  The judge has therefore failed to consider the situation
    of the children in the real world where the parents do not  have  leave
    to remain and the parents are expected to leave the UK.

16. In his submission Mr Aziz contended that it is clear from paragraph  26
    that the judge took into account the  precariousness  of  the  parents'
    leave to remain.  However, paragraph 26 is simply a  rehearsal  of  the
    first Appellant's oral evidence.  In the assessment at paragraphs 43 to
    51 the judge made no reference to the precariousness of the  status  of
    the first and second Appellant when they established a family  life  in
    the UK.  Further, the judge made no assessment of the factors  set  out
    in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

17. The factors the judge considered by the judge to be in the  Appellants'
    favour are at paragraph 46 where the judge accepted that  the  children
    are in the UK education system and have been  for  several  years,  and
    that the eldest daughter is about to embark  on  GCSEs  and  both  have
    aspirations for university education.  The other  positive  factor  the
    judge took into account  is  the  fact  that  he  considered  that  the
    children had put down significant roots in the UK [49].

18. The only factor the judge weighed  on  the  other  side  of  the  scale
    against the Appellants is the fact that  the  first  Appellant  used  a
    third party proxy to take his English language speaking  test  [43  and
    45].  The judge  did  not  take  into  account  any  other  factors  in
    undertaking the proportionality assessment.

19. In my view the fact that the judge failed to take account of the public
    interest factors in section 117B  and  failed  to  properly  apply  the
    decision in KO. These amount to   errors of law such that the  decision
    should be set aside.

20. As indicated above Mr Aziz agreed that if I were to decide that were an
    error of law I would re-make the decision on the basis of the  evidence
    before me.

Re-making the Decision

The Immigration Rules

21. There was no submission that the Appellants meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. The grounds of appeal in the Appellant's  bundle
    are in general terms. The first Appellant does not meet the suitability
    requirements in paragraph S-LTR1.6 because of the finding that he  used
    deception in relation to the English language test and his presence  in
    the UK is accordingly not conducive to the public  good.  Therefore  he
    cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The second Appellant would have  to  establish  that  there  are
    "very significant obstacles" to her integration in Bangladesh in  order
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi). I find  that  she
    has not done so. She lived there for her childhood  and  a  significant
    part of her adult life. She  speaks  the  language.  She  has  not  put
    forward any evidence of any difficulties she would face  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.

22. The third and fourth Appellants entered the UK in July 2011 and had not
    therefore been in the UK for 7 years at the time of the application and
    cannot therefore meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv).
    They cannot meet any other provisions of the Immigration Rules.

Article 8

23. I follow the approach set out in the decision of  R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  There has been no challenge to the findings  of
    fact made by the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore approach  the  appeal
    on the basis of the findings as to the deception by the first Appellant
    and the findings in relation to the children's education.

24. I accept that the Appellants have a family life with each other in  the
    UK. There is no evidence before me as to any wider  family  members  in
    the UK. If the family return to Bangladesh together there  will  be  no
    breach of their family life.  I  accept  that  they  have  developed  a
    private life in the UK. The first Appellant has been in the UK since 11
    November 2010, according to the application form, the second third  and
    fourth Appellants came to the UK on 22 July  2011.  The  children  have
    been attending school in the UK. I accept that removal  will  interfere
    with their private life in the UK. As it  is  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules I accept that such interference is in accordance with
    the law.

25. In considering the issue of proportionality I firstly consider the best
    interests of the children. A summary of  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of children in the context of immigration is to be  found  in
    Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         "30. It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
         is automatically in the interests of any child to be  permitted  to
         remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of age, length of  stay,
         family background or other circumstances. The case law of the Upper
         Tribunal has identified the following principles to assist  in  the
         determination  of  appeals  where  children  are  affected  by  the
         decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
             of origin can lead to  development  of  social,  cultural  and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the  contrary.  What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4  is  likely  to  be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focused on their parents  rather
             than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic wellbeing of society amply justifies removal in  such
             cases."

26. In MT and ET, the Presidential panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  at
    paragraph 31 in relation to the best interests assessment:

         "... A much younger child, who has not started school  or  who  has
         only recently done so will have difficulty in establishing that her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be.  This position, however, changes over time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part."

27. At the date of the hearing before me the third appellant was  16  years
    old and had been in the UK for 7 years and 6 months.  She  submitted  a
    letter in which she said that she is in the second  year  of  her  GCSE
    studies. I accept that she is at a significant stage  of  her  studies.
    The third Appellant is 9 years old and has also been in the  UK  for  7
    years and 6 months. She is at primary school and has developed  a  life
    there with her school friends. Absent any evidence to the  contrary,  I
    find that it is in the best interests of the children  to  remain  with
    their family whether in the UK or elsewhere. I accept  that  the  third
    Appellant is at an important stage of her education and that she  would
    prefer to complete her studies in the UK, however she is still a  minor
    and her best interests are to be with her parents.

28. I have considered the proportionality of the decisions in this case. In
    the Appellants' favour I consider section 117B (6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The third and  fourth  Appellants  are
    qualifying children as at the date of the hearing they  have  lived  in
    the UK for 7 years and 6 months (section 117D).

29. In considering section 117B(6) I have taken  account  of  the  guidance
    given by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria).  Lord  Carnwath  said  at
    paragraph  16  that  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  contains  no  requirement  to
    consider the criminality or misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing
    factor and that it was impossible in his view to read it  as  importing
    such a requirement by  implication.  At  paragraph  17,  he  said  that
    section 117B(6) incorporated the substance of the Rule without material
    change, but this time in the context  of  the  right  of  a  parent  to
    remain. He inferred that it was intended to have the same  effect.  The
    question again was what is reasonable  for  the  child.  Lord  Carnwath
    endorsed as a highly  relevant  consideration  the  following  guidance
    contained in an Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) of  the  Home
    Office cited at paragraph 10:

         "It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests to
         remain with their parent(s). Unless special factors apply, it  will
         generally be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK  with
         their parent(s), particularly if the parent(s)  have  no  right  to
         remain in the UK."

30. At paragraph 18, he continued:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI Guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it would normally be reasonable for  the  child  to  be  with
         them. To  that  extent,  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave. It is only if,  even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right to remain."

31. Lord Carnwath went on to say that the point was well expressed by  Lord
    Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) -v- SSHD [2007] SLT 1245 at  22,  and  also  by
    Lewison LJ in  EV  (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at
    paragraph 58 where Lewison LJ said, inter alia: "If neither parent  has
    the right to remain, then  that  is  a  background  against  which  the
    assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question  would  be:  is  it
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain to the country of origin?" Lord Carnwath said, at 19, "There  is
    nothing in the section  to  suggest  that  "reasonableness"  is  to  be
    considered otherwise than in the real world in which the children  find
    themselves."

32. In this case the first and second Appellants have no right to remain in
    the UK. Neither has had leave to remain since  their  applications  for
    leave to remain were refused in March 2015, their appeals against these
    decisions were dismissed.  I  have  found  that  there  are  not  "very
    significant obstacles" to the second Appellant returning to Bangladesh.
    For similar reasons there are no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    first Appellant returning to Bangladesh. He came to the UK when he  was
    32, having spent most of his life in Bangladesh. He has put forward  no
    difficulties to his integration back in Bangladesh. I  have  considered
    the following additional factors in considering the public interest  in
    assessing the proportionality of their leaving the UK.

       . The Appellants do not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for the reasons set out above;

       . The first and second Appellants have not had leave to remain  since
         2015;

       . The first Appellant practised deception in relation  to  his  TOEIC
         English language test;

       . The private life of all of the Appellants was developed when  their
         status was precarious  or  unlawful  and  therefore  it  should  be
         accorded little weight (section 117B (4) and (5));

       . There is no evidence that the family are  financially  independent.
         This is a factor to be weighed against them in assessing the public
         interest (section 117B (3)).

31. It is clear on the above findings that the first and  second  Appellants
  have no right to remain in the UK. Following KO it  is  in  this  context
  that I must assess whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
  follow the parents with no right to remain to their country of origin. As
  set out above I find that it is in the best interests of the children  to
  be with both parents. I acknowledge that the third  Appellant  is  at  an
  important stage in her education and is well settled here.  However  this
  is the only strong factor in favour  of  the  Appellants  and  access  to
  education in  itself  is  not  enough  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  not
  reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the UK when her parents  have
  no right to be here and are expected to leave. The fourth Appellant was 2
  when she came to the UK and has spent the next 7 years and 6 months here,
  she is at primary school, but her life is mostly focussed on her  parents
  and immediate family.

32. Considering all of the evidence and  all  factors  I  find  that  it  is
  reasonable to expect the third and fourth Appellants to leave the UK with
  their parents. Accordingly their parents cannot meet  the  provisions  of
  paragraph 117B (6).

33. Weighing all of these factors I  am  satisfied  that  the  decisions  to
  refuse the applications are proportionate to the Respondent's  legitimate
  aim of the maintenance of an effective system of immigration control  for
  the prevention of disorder or crime or to secure the economic  well-being
  of the country.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the appeals by dismissing them on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 31st January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 31st January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
