
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 3rd July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              mr alusine kallay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Ambgah
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a decision and reasons  of  Judge  Lucas  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 3rd April 2019 following a hearing on 21st March 2019 at
    Taylor House.

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr
    Moriaty of Counsel.  The Secretary of State was not represented.

 3. The Appellant had made an application for leave to remain as  a  spouse
    which had been refused by the Secretary of State solely  on  the  basis
    that specified evidence required under the Rules had not been  provided
    with the application.   This  being  a  human  rights  appeal,  it  was
    properly accepted by Mr Moriaty before the First-tier Tribunal that the
    absence of specified evidence at the date of application meant that the
    Appellant could not succeed under the Rules.

 4. This being a human rights case the  judge  could  only  look  at  human
    rights and his first task was to consider human rights through the lens
    of the Rules i.e. does the  Appellant  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules?  Clearly, he did not.  He then looked at whether  the  Appellant
    met the substance of the Rules at the date of the  hearing.   In  other
    words, did he in fact and could he evidence that he met  the  financial
    requirements at the date of the hearing.  The judge found he could  not
    because, on the evidence that he had, it appeared that the Sponsor  was
    no longer working.  In that case he  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the financial requirements as  at  the  date  of
    hearing.

 5. He then went on to consider Article 8 and what was relied upon was  the
    relationship that the Appellant had with his wife's son and  the  judge
    noted there was no evidence about that relationship and in that he  was
    correct.  The Appellant himself makes no mention of the child at all in
    his witness statement and his wife merely says that she has  a  British
    son in full-time education in this country, but no more.

 6. The skeleton argument provided to the First-tier Tribunal by Mr Moriaty
    of Counsel refers to that child, at paragraph 17, as  living  with  his
    aunt and does not argue on that basis and does not put  the  case  that
    the child lives with this couple.  If the child does not live with  the
    couple and there was no evidence of any  meaningful  relationship  with
    his mother, let alone with the Appellant, the Appellant cannot be  said
    to have a  parental  relationship  with  his  stepson  as  required  by
    Appendix FM Ex.1.   The  case  law  in  relation  to  what  a  parental
    relationship is and what has to be  considered  refers  to  a  parental
    relationship existing if it can be said that a stepparent has  "stepped
    into the shoes" of a parent. In a situation such as this where the only
    evidence was that there is a child who lived elsewhere that  cannot  be
    said to be the case.

 7. Accordingly, the judge was entitled to find that  the  Appellant  could
    not avail himself of Ex.1 and the conclusion that he reached, based  on
    the evidence, was that the appeal should be dismissed.  I can detect no
    error  of  law  in  his  consideration  or  conclusions,  material   or
    otherwise, and so the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed [pic]                            Date 30th June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.
Signed   [pic]                   Date 30th June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
