
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17 January 2018                   |On 8 March 2018                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                         Miss MARCIA ANNMARIE MYERS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel (instructed by Divine Legal
Practice)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Landes on 9 November 2017 against the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Buchanan  who  had  dismissed  the
         appeal of the Appellant seeking settlement outside the  Immigration
         Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds on the grounds of her  relationship
         akin to marriage to a British Citizen.  The  decision  and  reasons
         was promulgated on 19 October 2017.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Jamaica, currently aged 51.   The
         Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor,  with  leave
         nominally valid for 6 months, on 12 November 2001.  She  failed  to
         leave the United  Kingdom  as  required.   From  19  November  2009
         onwards she made various applications for leave to remain,  all  of
         which were refused, as was wholly predictable as she was an illegal
         overstayer who was unable to meet any  relevant  Immigration  Rule.
         Nevertheless, she remained in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   In
         April 2002 she met her British Citizen partner, with whom  she  has
         cohabited since 2007.  It was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department that the Appellant met the Eligibility  and
         Suitability requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules,
         and that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.   There  were
         however no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave to
         remain to her.  The facts the Appellant's partner, originally  from
         Barbados but now a British Citizen, suffered from diabetes and  was
         registered as blind were not insurmountable  obstacles  as  medical
         care was available in Jamaica. There was no  disproportionality  in
         Article 8 ECHR terms when the  balancing  exercise  was  performed.
         The judge dismissed  the  appeal  on  that  basis.  (There  was  no
         discussion of Chen [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC)  and  the  impact  of
         temporary separation.)

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted  on  a  limited  basis  and  in
         qualified terms.  It was considered arguable  that  the  judge  had
         erred  in  his   approach   to   "insurmountable   obstacles"   for
         proportionality  purposes  under  Article  8  ECHR.   It  was  also
         considered arguable that the judge gave insufficient  consideration
         to the ability of the Appellant's partner  as  a  blind  person  to
         adapt to changed circumstances.

    4.     Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
         notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Plowright for the Appellant relied on the grounds of  onwards
         appeal and grant.  In summary he submitted that the judge  had  not
         addressed the central issue of insurmountable obstacles adequately.
          The Appellant's partner was from Barbados and had never  lived  in
         Jamaica.  He had not left the United Kingdom  for  some  44  years.
         The judge had applied the wrong test, as  had  been  noted  in  the
         grant of permission to appeal.  Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11  applied  to
         reasonableness.  The judge's  findings  could  not  be  related  to
         reasonableness.  There was a difference between making a  visit  to
         Jamaica (which the partner said he was willing to do) and  settling
         there.  Adaptation had not been  considered  in  sufficient  depth.
         The judge's approach was irrational.  The determination  should  be
         set aside and remade.

    6.     Mr Clarke for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice  and
         submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.   It had
         been accepted that Appendix FM had not been  met  and  the  judge's
         Article 8 ECHR findings were open to him. The substance of  Agyarko
         had been applied.  The judge had found as a fact that  family  life
         could be continued in Jamaica.  There  had  been  some  conflicting
         evidence which the judge had resolved against the  Appellant.   The
         Appellant was her partner's principal carer and she would be  there
         in Jamaica to help and support him.  That  was  obvious  and  dealt
         adequately with the adaptation question.  The perversity  threshold
         had not been reached.  Nor had there been speculation by the judge.
          The onwards appeal should be dismissed.

    7.     In reply,  Mr  Plowright  reiterated  that  the  impact  on  the
         Appellant's partner had not been sufficiently considered.   Jamaica
         would be a foreign country for him as he had never lived there.  He
         would not have the support he had in the United Kingdom.  The judge
         had not looked into the case adequately.

    No material error of law finding

    8.     In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
         generous and had the effect of prolonging an  appeal  with  limited
         merit.  Unfortunately the appeal is typical of many appeals seen in
         the First-tier Tribunal and again in the Upper Tribunal,  involving
         couples seeking to rely on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  All  manner  of
         peripheral issues for Article 8  ECHR  purposes  had  been  raised,
         which Mr Plowright (who had not appeared below) wisely avoided.  It
         has to be observed that had the Appellant returned  to  Jamaica  as
         she could and should have done long ago, she would have  been  able
         to enter the United Kingdom to join her partner under the far  less
         stringent provisions of the  now  repealed  paragraph  281  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Those Immigration Rules were replaced by from 9
         July 2012 by the much more demanding  provisions  of  Appendix  FM.
         Even so, there was no evidence that those provisions could not with
         appropriate efforts be complied with,  as  special  provisions  are
         made for  persons  in  the  Appellant's  partner's  position.   The
         current unhappy situation was created entirely by the  parties,  in
         failing to recognise the consequences of the Appellant's breach  of
         her visa conditions and overstay, and engaging in hopeless repeated
         applications.   Compliance  with  the  law  is  not  a  matter   of
         individual choice.  Time and money have  been  wasted  seeking  the
         impossible, when obvious, practical and satisfactory solutions were
         available.

    9.     The main issues before the judge were whether family life  could
         be lived in Jamaica and whether  that  would  be  proportionate  in
         Article 8 ECHR terms,  in  other  words,  whether  there  would  be
         "insurmountable obstacles": see the reasons for refusal letter.

    10.     The  evidence  before  the  judge   asserted   to   amount   to
         "insurmountable obstacles" was found by him to have  been  somewhat
         exaggerated by the Appellant, although he accepted her evidence  as
         generally credible.  There was evidence of weight which showed that
         health care was available for the Appellant's partner  in  Jamaica.
         Indeed,  that  country  background  material  as  advanced  by  the
         Respondent was uncontradicted.  It was not as though there was  any
         prospect of improvement in the partner's chronic health  conditions
         if he remained in the United  Kingdom.   By  necessary  implication
         they could only be managed, whether in the  United  Kingdom  or  in
         Jamaica, by standard medical procedures.  There was no evidence  of
         weight to the contrary.   It  was  obvious  that  the  partner  has
         adapted to his long term disabilities,  hence  his  willingness  to
         travel  to  Jamaica  if  required  to  maintain  contact  with  the
         Appellant.  It was not in dispute that the partner has  never  been
         to Jamaica, but  it  is  equally  obvious  that  there  are  strong
         cultural affinities between all of the former British  West  Indies
         colonies,   with   shared   language,   history   and    democratic
         institutions.  That means that adaptation  would  be  a  relatively
         straight forward  process,  especially  for  someone  such  as  the
         Appellant's partner who has lived in London  with  its  significant
         population of Caribbean origin or heritage. The Appellant  and  her
         partner demonstrate that shared culture in their relationship.   As
         Mr Clarke submitted, the fact that the Appellant would  be  present
         in Jamaica with her partner would enable his daily care needs to be
         met if he decided to live there with her permanently,  as  well  as
         with any other adaptation required: see [39] of the decision.

    11.    The judge examined all of the possibilities for  the  reasonable
         continuation of family life at [43] of his decision, and found that
         they were all viable in that none  was  subject  to  insurmountable
         obstacles, as opposed to  varying  degrees  of  inconvenience.   He
         directed himself in accordance  with  Agyarko  (above):  see  [45].
         Ultimately the location of family life was a question of choice for
         the Appellant, subject of course to compliance with the Immigration
         Rules if she wished to live with her partner in the United Kingdom.
          There was no need  for  the  judge  to  go  into  the  Appellant's
         partner's circumstances in any more depth than he  had  done.   The
         judge further analysed  the  facts  he  found  in  accordance  with
         section 117B of the Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  expressly
         following the "balance sheet" approach recommended by  Lord  Thomas
         in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

    12.    There was no sustainable suggestion that the  experienced  judge
         had misunderstood any of  the  evidence,  let  alone  had  taken  a
         perverse or irrational approach.  The Appellant  had  been  in  the
         United Kingdom precariously for some 15 years by the  date  of  the
         hearing and her partner was well aware of her lack of status.   The
         public interest was decisive  and  the  balance  fell  against  the
         Appellant  for  the  reasons  the  judge  gave.    Ultimately   the
         submissions made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  like  the  onwards
         grounds, amount to no  more  than  disagreement  with  the  judge's
         decision.

    13.    The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
         the decision challenged. Plainly the Appellant and her partner have
         several reasonable options open to them  for  the  continuation  of
         their family life, i.e., to live together in Jamaica or  to  travel
         there together on a visit while entry clearance  is  sought  or  to
         separate on a temporary basis while  the  Appellant  obtains  entry
         clearance on the terms prescribed by the Immigration  Rules.   With
         reference to Chen (above), there was no evidence before  the  judge
         to show that temporary separation in the United Kingdom while entry
         clearance was  sought  in  Jamaica  would  create  any  significant
         difficulties,  given  the  family  and  local   authority   support
         available to the Appellant's partner.

    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 7 March 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


