
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09251/2018 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 May 2021                       |On 3 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                             DHAN BAHADUR GURUNG
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The hearing before me on 18th May 2021 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  Neither the
      appellant nor his sponsor joined the hearing, but I was assured by Mr
      Jesurum that the appellant is aware of the hearing and is happy to the
      appeal to be heard in his absence.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil
      Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the
      same way as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing
      together.  I was satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and
      that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
      interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was
      satisfied that it is in the interests of justice and in accordance
      with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
      of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to
      avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing will ensure the
      matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate
      to the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that
      arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  At the
      end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties had been able to
      participate fully in the proceedings.


The Background


   2. The appellant is a national of Nepal. He is the son of a former Gurkha
      soldier who sadly passed away on 24th August 2005.  Following the
      death of his father the appellant lived in Nepal with his mother.  His
      mother left Nepal in May 2014, when the appellant was 28 years old,
      and came to the UK.  She was granted settlement as the widow of a
      former Gurkha soldier.  On 22nd November 2017, the appellant applied
      for entry clearance as the adult dependent relative of his mother. The
      application was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a
      decision dated 8th March 2018. The appellant lodged an appeal and
      following a review by the Entry Clearance Manager, the respondent
      maintained the decision to refuse entry clearance. The appellant's
      appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in a decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hamilton promulgated on 29th April 2019.  The appellant
      was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 16th February 2021.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton


   3. At paragraph [4] of his decision, Judge Hamilton summarised the
      appellant's claim that he was financially and emotionally dependent on
      his mother and that his mother is still emotionally dependent on him.
      At paragraph [12] of his decision, Judge Hamilton refers to the
      evidence relied upon by the appellant and at paragraph [13], he noted
      the appellant is not in the UK and therefore did not give evidence. He
      noted the appellant's mother did attend the hearing and gave evidence
      through an interpreter.  The judge's findings and conclusions are set
      out at paragraphs [25] to [51] of his decision.


   4. Judge Hamilton records at paragraphs [25] to [27] of his decision that
      the appellant appears to accept that he cannot meet the requirements
      of Annex K.  That is unsurprising since Annex K does not envisage an
      application for adult children in circumstances where the Gurkha
      soldier is now deceased.  There remains a requirement for an
      examination under Article 8 and the relevant authorities are referred
      to in paragraphs [28] and [29] of the decision.


   5. The judge accepted, at [31], that given the nature of Nepalese society
      and the fact that the appellant and his mother come from what appears
      to be a rural community, it is likely that family ties are close. He
      noted however that the appellant is now 32 years of age and has not
      been living with his mother for almost 5 years.


   6. Judge Hamilton referred to the evidence relied upon by the appellant.
      He noted the appellant had attended an 'English Boarding School',
      where he had passed exams in commerce, accountancy, computer science,
      hotel management and marketing.  Judge Hamilton referred to the
      thriving tourist industry in Nepal, and noted that despite his
      qualifications, the appellant claims he had returned to his home
      village and worked on the family farm with his mother over the course
      of the following 10 years. Judge Hamilton concluded that even if the
      appellant had been sharing the work with, or was being supervised by
      his elderly mother, it is reasonable to expect him to have learnt how
      to farm over the course of those 10 years.  Judge Hamilton referred to
      the evidence of the appellant as set out in his witness statement that
      following the departure of his mother he could not manage the crops or
      the animals.  He found the appellant's explanation as to how he had
      become dependent on his elderly and infirm mother, to be "..
      unhelpfully vague.." and in the absence of more detail,
      "..implausible..".  Judge Hamilton also referred to the evidence of
      the appellant's mother that after she had come to the UK, the crops
      and livestock died.  He said, at [37] and [38];


         "37. ... However she does not provide any detail about why this
         happened. On the appellant's own case, the sponsor has been back to
         Nepal since the family farm was said to have been devastated.
         Therefore she would have had the opportunity to see first-hand what
         had happened.


         38.  Furthermore, when she gave oral evidence, she was asked if the
         appellant still ran the family farm. She said that he used to do "a
         little bit for living but now does nothing".  When asked how she
         knew this, she said the appellant had told her on the telephone.
         She was then asked why he no longer worked the land. However she
         did not answer the question, merely repeating that the appellant
         used to work the land but no longer did so. When pressed for an
         answer she said, "there is no work" and confirmed that he lived on
         the farm but did not work on the farm."


   7. Judge Hamilton referred to the evidence before the Tribunal regarding
      the health of the appellant's mother, and accepted that she has
      visited Nepal regularly, and noted that is consistent with her having
      a continuing relationship with the appellant. He said that it was also
      consistent with her wanting to visit and friends in a country where
      she had lived the majority of her life, albeit she claims to have no
      other family in Nepal.  Judge Hamilton accepted, at [43], that the
      sponsor has been sending money to the appellant, and that is
      consistent with her claim to be supporting him financially. He also
      noted the evidence before the Tribunal regarding telephone contact and
      found it likely that the appellant and sponsor are in regular
      telephone contact. At paragraph [47] Judge Hamilton noted the force in
      the submissions made by the Presenting Officer that the large number
      of calls shown on his telephone records suggest that, at the very
      least, the appellant has a wide range of social contacts in Nepal, and
      that is consistent with his having developed an independent life, and,
      inconsistent with his claim to be living in isolation and poverty,
      although that in itself did not lead Judge Hamilton to conclude the
      appellant's account as untrue.  At paragraphs [49] and [50] Judge
      Hamilton concluded:


         "49. Looking at all the evidence, I regret to say that the
         inconsistent and implausible aspects of the appellant's evidence
         have led me to conclude that he is not being honest about his
         circumstances in Nepal either currently or at the time the sponsor
         came to the UK. It follows I am not satisfied the appellant has
         shown that he is financially dependent on the sponsor or that their
         relationship goes beyond the normal ties of love and affection that
         exist between a parent and their adult child.


         50.  It follows that he has been unable to show he can meet the
         requirements of Annex K or that he has established family life with
         his father (sic) and mother in the UK, within the meaning of
         Article 8. Therefore the refusal decision does not engage his or
         the sponsor's family life rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  This
         means I do not have to consider issues relating to the historic
         injustice suffered by Gurkhas and their families."


The appeal before me


   8. Judge Hamilton found the Article 8 right to respect  for  family  life
      was not engaged.  The appellant  advances  three  grounds  of  appeal.
      First it is said  the  decision  of  Judge  Hamilton  is  vitiated  by
      procedural  unfairness.   Second,  the  decision  is  vitiated  by   a
      misdirection of law and third, Judge Hamilton failed to  consider  the
      reciprocal ties between the appellant and his mother.  At the  hearing
      of the appeal before me, Mr Jesurum accepts that there is a degree  of
      overlap in the grounds.  He addressed grounds 2 and  3  first,  before
      addressing ground 1.  In this decision, I  address  grounds  1  and  2
      together since  they  both  concern  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
      evidence and his conclusion that Article 8 is  not  engaged.   I  then
      consider ground 1.


Grounds 2 and 3;  Misdirection of Law & Failure to consider reciprocal  ties



   9. The appellant claims that at paragraph [28]  of  his  decision,  Judge
      Hamilton  cites  the  correct  test  by  reference  to  the   relevant
      authorities, but failed to  apply  the  correct  test.  The  appellant
      claims the question  Judge  Hamilton  poses  himself  is  whether  the
      appellant has demonstrated "financial and emotional"  dependence,  and
      the test he applies is one of 'interdependence", which Judge  Hamilton
      regards as having to be necessary due to the absence of  alternatives.
      The appellant claims there is no authority for  the  proposition  that
      any support must arise from 'need'.  The appellant also claims that in
      reaching his decision Judge Hamilton fails  to  consider  whether  the
      emotional support provided by the  appellant  to  his  widowed  mother
      engages Article 8(1).


  10. Mr Jesurum submits the first question to be addressed is whether there
      is family life between the  appellant  and  his  mother.   He  submits
      factors such as whether the appellant is or is capable of  working  is
      irrelevant to that prior question of whether there is  a  family  life
      for the purposes of Article 8(1), but is relevant to the assessment of
      whether the decision is proportionate.  Mr Jesurum submits it might be
      said that the appellant is 'lazy' because he does not work,  but  that
      does not mean that he does not have a 'family life' with  his  mother.
      Mr Jesurum submits the lens through which Judge Hamilton analysed  the
      facts is one of necessity, but that is not  relevant  when  addressing
      whether there is family life.  Furthermore, he submits,  at  paragraph
      [46] of his decision Judge Hamilton was searching  for  evidence  that
      the appellant and his mother are 'interdependent', but the question is
      not once of interdependence but whether there is  real,  committed  or
      effective support. He  submits  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was that the appellant is unemployed,  single,  continues  to
      live in the family home and the land belongs to his mother.   That  is
      evidence of the support provided by the appellant's mother to him,  in
      addition to the financial support.


  11. Mr Jesurum submits that people that served the crown should  not  have
      to make the choice between continuing their family life in Nepal or in
      the UK, and the focus should be  upon  the  injustice  caused  to  the
      parent(s) more than the appellant.  He submits that at paragraph [34],
      Judge Hamilton noted that despite the appellant's qualifications it is
      reasonable to infer the  appellant  may  have  returned  to  his  home
      village and worked on the family farm with his mother because  he  may
      have felt it was his duty to assist his mother.   At  paragraph  [48],
      Judge Hamilton noted the appellant's mother is not in good health  and
      the question here is whether the appellant provides  his  mother  with
      support.  The sponsor should have  been  able  to  settle  in  the  UK
      earlier and she was entitled to say that she is coming to the  UK  for
      benefits.  Mr Jesurum referred  to  the  vignette  endorsed  upon  the
      sponsor's passport which confirms she was granted  a  settlement  visa
      valid from 15th April 2014 until 3rd October 2023. She therefore faced
      the unenviable choice of taking up settlement or  to  lose  everything
      that goes with it.  He submits it is now well established that  it  is
      an error of law to rely upon the choice that  had  to  be  made.   The
      correct question was whether the on-going contact establishes that the
      appellant provides the emotional support required  by  his  mother  by
      reason of her health, her isolation (she does not speak  English)  and
      the difficulties that she has in managing on her own.  The  Judge  was
      looking for dependence both ways, however, support  one  way  or  both
      ways, is sufficient.


  12. Mr Jesurum submits taken together, the evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      was such that it was sufficient to  engage  the  Article  8  right  to
      respect for family life.


  13. In reply, Mr Tan submits Judge  Hamilton  has  made  a  fact  specific
      assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim.   At  paragraph  [49],  Judge
      Hamilton set out his overall  conclusion  having  considered  all  the
      evidence before the Tribunal and  found  that  the  appellant  is  not
      credible about his circumstances in Nepal either currently or  at  the
      time the sponsor came to  the  UK.   He  submits  Judge  Hamilton  has
      properly carried out a qualitive assessment based on all the  evidence
      and was responding to the  case  as  it  was  being  advanced  by  the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.


  14. Mr Tan submits that at paragraphs [42], [46] and [48] of his decision,
      Judge Hamilton referred the evidence regarding the sponsor's visits to
      Nepal, their  on-going  communication  and  the  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal regarding her health.  The reference to 'interdependence', he
      submits, reflects the sponsors evidence, but  the  sponsor  had  scant
      knowledge of the  appellant's  circumstances.   The  evidence  of  the
      reciprocal emotional support provided by the appellant to  his  mother
      was limited.  Mr Tan submits Judge Hamilton  considered  the  evidence
      holistically and had in mind the relevant factors that all go  to  the
      prior question of whether Article 8 is engaged.


  15. I reject the claim that Judge Hamilton's decision  is  vitiated  by  a
      'misdirection of law' and that  having  cited  the  correct  test,  he
      failed to apply that test to his assessment of whether  Article  8  is
      engaged.  I also reject the claim that Judge Hamilto  failed  to  have
      regard to the reciprocal emotional support provided by  the  appellant
      to his mother.   Lindlom LJ referred to the relevant legal  principles
      in Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320:


         "17.  In Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley  L.J.  said  (in  paragraph  17  of  his
         judgment) that "if dependency is read down as meaning "support", in
         the personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to  the  word
         "support", then it represents ... the irreducible minimum  of  what
         family life implies". Arden L.J.  said  (in  paragraph  24  of  her
         judgment) that the "relevant factors ...  include  identifying  who
         are the near relatives of the appellant, the nature  of  the  links
         between them and the appellant, the age of the appellant, where and
         with whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of  contact  he
         has maintained with the other members of the family  with  whom  he
         claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph  25)
         that "there is no presumption of family life". Thus "a family  life
         is not established between an adult child and his surviving  parent
         or  other  siblings  unless  something  more  exists  than   normal
         emotional ties". She added that "[such] ties  might  exist  if  the
         appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa ", but it  was
         "not ... essential that the members of the family should be in  the
         same country". In Patel  and  others  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
         Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his
         judgment, with which Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed)  that  "what
         may constitute an extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what
         constitutes dependency, and a good  many  adult  children  ...  may
         still have a family life with parents who are now settled here  not
         by leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".


         18. In Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
         Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that  the
         judgments in Kugathas had been "interpreted  too  restrictively  in
         the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions
         of the domestic and Strasbourg courts", and (in paragraph 60)  that
         "some of the [Strasbourg] Court's decisions  indicate  that  family
         life between adult children and  parents  will  readily  be  found,
         without evidence of exceptional dependence". It went on to say  (in
         paragraph 61):


             "61. Recently,  the  [European  Court  of  Human  Rights]  has
             reviewed the case law, in [ AA v United  Kingdom  [2012]  Imm.
             A.R.1 ], finding that a significant factor will be whether  or
             not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If he  is
             still single and living with his  parents,  he  is  likely  to
             enjoy family life with them. ...".


         The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the  court's
         judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs  46  to  49),  which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):


             "49. An examination of the  Court's  case-law  would  tend  to
             suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who
             resides with his mother and has not yet founded  a  family  of
             his own, can be regarded as having "family life"."


         19. Ultimately, as Lord  Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
         judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph  45),  "the  question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on a careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of  the
         particular case". In some instances "an adult  child  (particularly
         if he does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish
         that he has a family life with his parents".  As  Lord  Dyson  M.R.
         said, "[it] all depends on the facts". The court expressly endorsed
         (at paragraph 46), as  "useful"  and  as  indicating  "the  correct
         approach to  be  adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of  the
         relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination
         in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) ,  including  its
         observation (at paragraph 62) that  "[the]  different  outcomes  in
         cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us that the
         issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".


         20. To similar  effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
         Burnton in Singh v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):


             "24. I do not  think  that  the  judgments  to  which  I  have
             referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the  correct
             approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.  In
             the case of adults, in the  context  of  immigration  control,
             there is no legal or factual presumption as to  the  existence
             or absence of family life for the purposes  of  Article  8.  I
             point out that the approach of  the  European  Commission  for
             Human Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include any
             requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on  the  facts.
             The love and affection between an adult  and  his  parents  or
             siblings will not of itself justify  a  finding  of  a  family
             life. There has to be something more.  A  young  adult  living
             with his parents or siblings will normally have a family  life
             to be respected under Article 8 . A child  enjoying  a  family
             life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family
             life at midnight as he turns 18 years of  age.  On  the  other
             hand, a young adult living independently of  his  parents  may
             well not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."


  16. First and foremost, Judge Hamilton concluded that the appellant is not
      being honest about his circumstances in Nepal either currently  or  at
      the time his mother came to the UK.  Judge Hamilton was not  persuaded
      that the appellant is financially dependent  on  his  mother  or  that
      their relationship goes beyond the normal ties of love  and  affection
      that exist between a parent  and  adult  child.   He  found  that  the
      appellant has not established that his relationship  with  his  mother
      constituted family life for the purposes of Article 8 and accordingly,
      he dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.


  17. In reaching his decision, Judge Hamilton had before him  the  evidence
      of the appellant as set  out  in  his  witness  statement  dated  15th
      February 2019.  He also had before him the witness  statement  of  the
      appellant's mother, who also gave  oral  evidence,  and  a  number  of
      documents from the Waling Municipality Office, together with  evidence
      relied upon by the appellant showing regular communication between the
      appellant and his mother and of money being sent to the  appellant  by
      his mother.


  18. Dependency, in the  Kugathas  sense,  is  a  question  of  fact.   The
      irreducible minimum of what family life  implies  remains  that  which
      Sedley LJ described as being whether support is real or  effective  or
      committed. The love and affection between an adult  child  and  parent
      does not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to be
      something more.  Each case is fact sensitive,  and  the  existence  of
      family life after an individual has achieved his or her majority is  a
      question of fact without any presumption, either positive or negative,
      for the purposes of Article 8.   Here,  Judge  Hamilton  considered  a
      range of factors that were relevant, and  the  main  features  of  the
      family life relied upon.   In his analysis of the  evidence  he  noted
      features that point to family life for the purposes of Article 8;


        a. Given the nature of Nepalese  Society  and  the  fact  that  the
           appellant and the sponsor, are from what appears to be  a  rural
           community, it is likely that family ties are close.   (Paragraph
           31).


        a. It is reasonable to infer that  having  obtained  qualifications
           the appellant returned to his home village worked on the  family
           farm with his mother; (Paragraph 34). Given the age and  chronic
           health  problems  the  appellant's  mother  lives  with,  it  is
           reasonable to infer that if the appellant's account  were  true,
           he would have been primarily responsible for  working  the  land
           and caring for the livestock. (Paragraph 35)


        b. The oral evidence of the appellant's mother when  asked  if  the
           appellant still ran the family farm or worked the land was  that
           the appellant lived on the farm but did not work  on  the  farm.
           (Paragraph 38)


        c. The appellant's mother is a relatively elderly lady who  is  not
           in the best of health.  (Paragraph 39 and paragraph 48)


        d.  The  appellant's  mother  has  visited  regularly,  and  it  is
           understandable that her visits since 2016 may have been shorter.
            (Paragraph 41).  The fact that the appellant's  mother  visited
           Nepal  regularly,  is  consistent  with  having   a   continuing
           relationship with the appellant. (Paragraph 42)


        e. The appellant's mother has  been  sending  the  appellant  money
           consistent with her claim  to  be  supporting  him  financially.
           (Paragraph 43)


        f. It is likely that the appellant and his mother  are  in  regular
           telephone contact (Paragraph 46)


  19. Judge  Hamilton  also  noted  the  features  that  weigh  against  the
      appellant's claim to family life:


        a. The appellant is now 32 years of age and  has  not  been  living
           with his mother for almost 5 years. (Paragraph 31)


        b. The appellant attended an 'English Boarding School' in his  home
           area and then studied in Kathmandu, where  he  passed  exams  in
           commerce, accountancy, computer science,  hotel  management  and
           marketing.    (Paragraph   32).     The    appellant    obtained
           qualifications that would enable him to find work in the tourist
           industry. (Paragraph 33)


        c. Even if the appellant were sharing the work on the farm with, or
           being supervised by his elderly  mother,  it  is  reasonable  to
           expect and to have learnt how to farm  over  the  course  of  10
           years. (Paragraph 35)


        d. The appellant's explanation for why a young healthy man, with at
           least 10 years farming experience and  qualifications  that  are
           likely to enable him to find other work, became dependent on his
           elderly infirm  mother,  who  is  herself  short  of  money,  is
           unhelpfully vague, and implausible. (Paragraph 36)


        e. The appellant's mother does not provide any detail about why the
           crops and livestock on the farm had died. (Paragraph 37).


        g. The fact that the appellant's mother visited Nepal regularly, is
           also consistent with her wanting to  visit  family  (albeit  she
           claims to have  no  other  family  in  Nepal)  and  friends  (my
           emphasis) in a country where she has lived the majority  of  her
           life.  (Paragraph 42)


        f. Although the appellant's mother has been sending  him  money  it
           does not necessarily mean that he is dependent on the money  she
           sends him or that he needs it in  order  to  survive  in  Nepal.
           (Paragraph 43)


        g. The telephone records suggest, at the very least, the  appellant
           has a wide range of social contacts in Nepal and are  consistent
           with his having developed an independent life  and  inconsistent
           with the  appellant's  claim  to  be  living  in  isolation  and
           poverty. (Paragraph 47)


        h. Although the appellant's mother is not in good health, they have
           been separated for almost 5 years.  She has the support  of  her
           brother and his wife in the UK.


  20. Judge Hamilton gave a  clear  self  self-direction  as  to  the  legal
      principles bearing on the question of whether Article 8 is engaged  at
      paragraphs [28] and [29] of his decision.   It is a question  of  fact
      whether the appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life  with
      his mother, which had existed at the time of her departure  to  settle
      in the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  such  as  to  fall
      within the scope of Article 8.  First and foremost,  in  reaching  his
      decision, Judge Hamilton concluded the appellant is not  being  honest
      about his circumstances in Nepal either currently or at the  time  his
      mother came to the UK.


  21. I am quite satisfied that in reaching  his  decision,  Judge  Hamilton
      took all relevant factors into account.  He did not give undue  weight
      to the fact that the appellant's mother left Nepal at a time when  she
      would know that there was no guarantee the appellant would be able  to
      join her. He had regard to the support that the sponsor has in the  UK
      of her brother and his wife.


  22. In reaching his decision, Judge Hamilton had regard  to  the  evidence
      before the Tribunal regarding  the  financial  and  emotional  support
      provided, the fact the appellant continued to live in family home  and
      the money sent to the appellant.  Insofar as Mr Jesurum has sought  to
      identify extracts from the decision which he  submits,  suggest  Judge
      Hamilton applied a test of 'interdependence' being  necessary,  or  by
      searching for dependence arising from 'need',  for  the  existence  of
      family life, that in my judgement is to misread the decision and fails
      to give due weight to the  adverse  finding  made  by  Judge  Hamilton
      regarding the appellant's circumstances.  In  reaching  his  decision,
      Judge  Hamilton  was  addressing  the  specific  claims  made  by  the
      appellant. A careful reading of the decision demonstrates that  having
      considered the evidence in the round; Judge Hamilton was not satisfied
      that the appellant is being honest about his circumstances  in  Nepal.
      The findings  and  conclusions  reached  are  neither  irrational  nor
      unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings and conclusions that
      were wholly unsupported  by  the  evidence.  The  decision  that  the
      refusal does not engage Article 8 is one that was in my judgment  open
      to Judge Hamilton.  It is necessary to guard against the temptation to
      characterise as  errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
      disagreements about the weight  to  be  given  to  different  factors,
      particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage  of
      hearing oral evidence.  The claim that Judge  Hamilton  erred  in  his
      analysis or failed to have sufficient regard to  various  factors,  is
      mere disagreement with the reasoning.

Ground 1 Fairness

  23. The appellant claims the respondent did not challenge  the  underlying
      facts, but disputed the conclusions to be drawn from the  facts.   The
      appellant claims Judge Hamilton  unfairly  made  adverse  findings  in
      respect of matters that had not been raised by the respondent prior to
      the hearing, or during the hearing itself, leaving the appellant  with
      no opportunity of influencing the  Judge's  mind  on  the  point.   Mr
      Jesurum submits it is now well established that a  witness  should  be
      put on notice of the issues that arise, otherwise the witness may  not
      know they need to provide an explanation.  He submits  Judge  Hamilton
      was entitled to have regard to the fact that the sponsor was unable to
      recall that the appellant could not support himself because  for  some
      reason, all the animals and crops on the family farm had died, but  he
      submits, the witness must have fair notice and if it is  going  to  be
      said that the witness is not telling the truth, that must  be  put  to
      the witness. He submits that at paragraph [37] of his decision,  Judge
      Hamilton noted that the sponsor claimed that after she came to the UK,
      the appellant told her over the telephone that the crops and livestock
      have died.  Judge Hamilton states she did not provide any detail about
      why this happened.  The sponsor confirmed in  her  evidence  that  the
      appellant lives on the farm.  Mr Jesurum submits that if the Judge was
      concerned about the evidence, that should have been put to the sponsor
      and she should have been asked for clarification.   He  submits  Judge
      Hamilton noted the sponsor's claim that she has no other relatives  in
      Nepal, but nevertheless found that the visits to Nepal were consistent
      with her wanting to visit family.  Mr Jesurum does not suggest that  a
      Judge cannot form a view of the evidence given by a  witness  or  that
      the Judge must ignore contradictions.  However, he submits, these  are
      adversarial proceedings, and the  overriding  objective  requires  the
      proceedings to be conducted fairly and it is necessary for the parties
      to set out what they do and do not accept.  Mr Jesurum  submits  Judge
      Hamilton failed to give anxious scrutiny to the  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal.


  24. Mr Tan submits the Entry Clearance Officer  and  the  Entry  Clearance
      Manager had clearly set out the reasons for refusing  the  application
      for  entry  clearance.   There  was  limited  information  before  the
      decision makers  and  the  evidence  evolved  and  more  evidence  was
      provided in support of the appeal.  There were questions asked by  the
      Presenting Officer regarding the appellant's  circumstances,  and  the
      appellant's representative had the  opportunity  to  address  anything
      that  arose,  either  in  examination  in  chief,   or   by   way   of
      clarification, in re-examination.    Mr Tan submits the appellant  had
      a proper opportunity to address the claim and there was no  procedural
      unfairness.


  25. It is useful to begin by considering  the  issues  identified  by  the
      respondent prior to the appeal.  The decision of the  Entry  Clearance
      Manager in particular, referred to the Decision of the Upper  Tribunal
      in Ghising and said:


         "I have considered whether this decision breached  the  appellant's
         rights to private and family life (Article 8).   I  note  that  the
         Entry Clearance Officer  also  considered  this  at  the  time  the
         original decision was made. The appellant is an adult; no  evidence
         of communication commensurate with emotional  dependency  has  been
         submitted with the appeal. No evidence of financial support that is
         real, committed and effective has been adduced.  I  do  not  accept
         that, without more than familial ties Article 8 is engaged..."


  26. It was in my judgment clear that the respondent did  not  accept  from
      the outset that Article 8 is  engaged,  and  that  was  known  to  the
      appellant prior to the hearing.  The appellant was aware of  the  case
      that he had to meet at the hearing of the appeal. I am quite satisfied
      that there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  was  not
      previously before the Entry Clearance Officer or the  Entry  Clearance
      Manager and in that sense, the case did evolve with evidence.   In  my
      judgement, when read as a whole, Judge Hamilton carried out  a  proper
      analysis of all the evidence before him and records  in  his  decision
      the evidence that he considered  to  be  unreliable,  giving  adequate
      reasons for his decision.


  27. It follows that in my judgement it  was  open  to  Judge  Hamilton  to
      dismiss the appeal for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  decision.  An
      appellate court should resist the temptation to subvert the  principle
      that they should not substitute their own analysis of the evidence for
      that of the Judge by a narrow textual analysis  which  enables  it  to
      claim that the Judge  below  misdirected  themselves.   It  is  not  a
      counsel of perfection. An appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  an
      opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of  the  reasons  to
      see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.   I
      am quite satisfied that the appeal was dismissed after the  judge  had
      carefully considered all the evidence before him  and  upon  a  proper
      application of relevant legal framework.  The findings and conclusions
      reached cannot be said to be perverse,  irrational  or  findings  that
      were not supported by the evidence.


  28.  In my judgement the decision reached by Judge Lewis that family  life
      was not established under Article  8(1)  was  a  conclusion  that  was
      reasonably open to the judge, on the  particular  facts  and  findings
      that he made.  I am therefore satisfied  that  there  is  no  material
      error of law capable of affecting the outcome.


  29. It follows that this appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

  30. The appeal is dismissed.



      Signed  V. Mandalia                Date; 20th July 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

