

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/09720/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 August 2017                          |On  7 September 2017           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     DS
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, instructed by Middlesex Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of FtT Judge Powell that was promulgated  on  16  May
    2017.  Judge Powell dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision of 7 April 2016 refusing the appellant's human  rights
    claim.

 2. Judge Powell made an anonymity direction.   Given  the  nature  of  the
    case, it  is  appropriate  to  preserve  that  direction  and  I  order
    anonymity, the full terms of which are set  out  at  the  end  of  this
    decision.

 3. After hearing from Ms Patyna  and  Mr  Singh,  I  was  satisfied  Judge
    Powell's decision was infected with legal error to the extent it should
    be set aside.  Given the nature of the error, and with the agreement of
    both parties, I decided the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 4. To understand my reasons  for  these  decisions,  it  is  necessary  to
    appreciate the appeal history.

 5. On 10 March 2017, notice of hearing was issued to  the  parties  and  a
    hearing was arranged for 7 April 2017 at the  Newport  Hearing  Centre.
    The day before the hearing, the  appellant's  solicitors  requested  an
    adjournment because the appellant claimed he had hurt  his  lower  back
    and was unable to travel from his home in Southall to Newport  for  the
    hearing.  The request was refused in the following terms: There  is  no
    medical evidence to show that the Appellant is unable  to  sit  through
    his appeal hearing.  Although the appeal  file  does  not  contain  any
    relevant medical evidence, it is obvious the response fails to  address
    the issue posed by the representatives, which referred to the appellant
    being unable to travel to Newport.

 6. On 7 April 2017, the appellant attended the hearing.  He became ill  at
    the hearing centre prior to the hearing and an  ambulance  was  called.
    The hearing was adjourned.  On the same day, notice  that  the  hearing
    would be  heard  on  11  May  2017  was  issued  to  the  parties  with
    directions, which included a request for medical evidence.

 7. On 21 April 2017, the appellant's solicitors requested transfer of  the
    hearing to one of the London hearing centres so  that  the  appellant's
    partner would be able to attend the hearing.  She had  a  six-year  old
    child who was at school.  The  child-care  responsibilities  meant  the
    appellant's partner would be unable to attend  a  hearing  in  Newport,
    particularly as  the  school  had  refused  to  authorise  the  child's
    absence.  The request was  refused  in  the  following  terms:  2.  The
    address is in the Newport catchment area. 3. A transfer  at  this  late
    stage, the case hearing already having been adjourned once, is contrary
    to the interests of justice.  4. Ample opportunity has been provided to
    enable any necessary arrangements to allow the witness to attend.

 8. Three points immediately arise from this reply.  First, catchment areas
    are designed for the convenience and efficiency of the Tribunal and  it
    is for a judge to balance those key principles with all other  factors.
    In other words, the fact an address is within a certain catchment  area
    does not mean  an  appeal  cannot  be  heard  elsewhere.   Second,  the
    previous adjournment was on medical grounds, which arose at the hearing
    centre, and had no bearing on the transfer request.  Third, the request
    indicated the problem the appellant had encountered in making necessary
    arrangements for his  partner  to  attend.   Those  factors  have  been
    overlooked.

 9. The appellant attended the hearing at the Newport Hearing Centre on  11
    May 2017.  At paragraph 8, Judge Powell recorded that  the  appellant's
    representative applied  for  an  adjournment  because  the  appellant's
    partner was unable to attend.  Judge Powell, after recording  that  the
    Secretary of State did not accept the appellant was in  a  relationship
    with his partner and therefore her immigration  status  would  have  no
    relevance to the appellant's case  unless  he  found  they  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, declined to adjourn.  At paragraph
    37, Judge Powell recorded that he had a statement from the  appellant's
    partner but that she had not attended because her son was at school and
    they did not wish to interrupt his schooling or be fined for  his  non-
    attendance.  At many junctures, Judge Powell concluded the  failure  of
    the  appellant's  partner  to  attend  the  appeal  hearing  meant  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate he was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with her.  He admitted at paragraph 40 that the attendance
    of the appellant's partner might have resolved a number of issues.

10. The appellant's primary ground of appeal is that  Judge  Powell  should
    have adjourned  the  hearing  because  a  fair  hearing  could  not  be
    conducted in the absence of the appellant's partner.

11. I agree with this complaint.  Judge  Powell  recognised  the  potential
    relevance of evidence from the appellant's partner so that  the  nature
    of the relationship  could  be  established.   The  Tribunal  had  been
    advised prior to the hearing of the child-care problems the appellant's
    partner had if the appeal were to proceed to hearing in  Newport.   The
    judge who refused a transfer does not appear  to  have  considered  the
    fairness of hearing the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant's
    partner and this problem is compounded by Judge  Powell's  decision  to
    proceed.   Bearing  in  mind  the  guidance  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 418, I am satisfied the  failure  to  adjourn  to
    enable the appellant to present his case  in  full  meant  there  is  a
    procedural error that amounts to an error of law because the  appellant
    did not get a fair hearing.

12. In reaching this conclusion,  I  have  considered  what  relevance  the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner might  have  to  his
    own case. On the one hand is the fact that at the date of hearing there
    was no evidence that the appellant's partner had  any  settled  status.
    This was recognised by Judge Powell at paragraph 50.  It is  trite  law
    that a person will have more difficulties  proving  they  benefit  from
    article 8 ECHR where their partner does not have a  secure  immigration
    status in the UK. On the other hand, the  appellant's  partner  is  the
    mother of a British citizen  child,  who  has  strong  article  8  ECHR
    rights.  I mention that Judge Powell did not make any  findings  as  to
    the best interests of the child or the child's wellbeing; he did not do
    so because he did not find there  to  be  a  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the child's mother.  But if there is such a relationship,
    then the wellbeing of the child is a very important factor that must be
    evaluated and  assessed.   In  light  of  such  considerations,  it  is
    impossible to say the outcome of the appeal would have  been  the  same
    even if the evidence had been heard.

13. I add the following observations.  Neither representative could  advise
    me as to the current immigration status of the appellant's  partner  or
    whether her own appeal has been  allowed  or  dismissed.   This  is  an
    additional feature of this appeal; there has been a lack of  disclosure
    by the parties, which hindered Judge Powell and also hinders the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This additional factor means it is necessary  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all matters.

14. I do so with the following directions.

        a. The appeal is to be heard de novo.

        b. The appeal is to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other
           than Judge Powell.

        c. The remitted appeal is to be heard at the Hatton  Cross  Hearing
           Centre.

        d. The parties must provide evidence as to the  immigration  status
           of the appellant's  partner,  including  any  decisions  of  the
           Tribunal relating to her.

        e. The parties are at liberty to provide further evidence  as  long
           as it is received at least seven calendar days prior to the next
           hearing.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal may amend any of these  directions,  subject
       to the overriding objective, other than the first two.

Decision

I allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
I set aside the decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Powell.
I direct the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
hearing on all issues.
I impose the directions given in paragraph 14.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"DS".



Signed                                  Date     6 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


