
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09369/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms G Pentcheva, solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Reid, promulgated on 6 June 2016. Permission to appeal was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 1 December 2016

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however owing to the appellant's
    undisputed vulnerability, a direction is set out below.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  on  25  December
    2000. He subsequently claimed asylum on 14 May 2001.  That  application
    was  refused  on  21  June  2001  however  the  appellant  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain in the United Kingdom owing  to  the  civil
    war in Sierra Leone. He did not appeal that  decision.  On  25  January
    2006, the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. The appellant was convicted of arson during 2013 and was sentenced to a
    hospital order under sections 37 and 41 of the Mental Health Act  1983.
    He has no other criminal convictions.

 5. The respondent notified the appellant of his liability  to  deportation
    under section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  in  response,
    representations were made on his behalf which resulted  in  a  decision
    dated 13 October 2015 to refuse his human rights  claim.  In  the  said
    decision, the  respondent  rejected  the  claim  that  the  appellant's
    removal to Sierra Leone would result in a breach of Article 3 owing  to
    inadequate health care for his mental disorder.  It  was  not  accepted
    that there was a complete absence of treatment in Sierra Leone nor that
    the United Kingdom had a positive obligation to provide him with  care.
    While no Article 8 claim  was  made,  the  respondent  considered  this
    aspect in accordance with paragraph 398 of the Rules. It was noted that
    the appellant had neither a partner nor child in the United Kingdom and
    his circumstances were  not  considered  to  be  very  compelling.  The
    Secretary of State considered there to be a significant public interest
    in deporting the appellant because of his conviction for reckless arson
    and the possibility that he could  relapse  and  pose  a  risk  to  the
    public.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  and  his
    treating doctor gave evidence. Submissions were made on Article 3 and 8
    grounds.  The judge found that there was  a  risk  that  the  appellant
    would not comply with treatment and without it  he  would  relapse  and
    might commit other offences.  It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    antipsychotic medication (Paliperidone) was  not  available  in  Sierra
    Leone, but that alternatives were. The judge did not  accept  that  the
    appellant would face ill-treatment as a psychiatric patient  in  Sierra
    Leone. He considered that the appellant's adult daughter could  provide
    him with limited support in Sierra Leone. Consequently, the judge found
    that Article 3 would not be breached  by  the  appellant's  removal  to
    Sierra Leone and that there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  which
    outweighed the public interest in his deportation.




The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal in support of this application were firstly, that
    the judge made a misdirection of law on a material matter and secondly,
    he failed to take relevant considerations into  account.  Specifically,
    it was argued that the judge's findings in relation to the availability
    of family support in Sierra  Leone  were  factually  flawed,  based  on
    conjecture and not  on  the  evidence.  The  judge  was  said  to  have
    misdirected himself in relation to the appellant's ability to afford to
    access medical treatment;  undertaken  a  flawed  risk  assessment  and
    failed to consider the appellant's psychological problems.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there was  "arguably
    insufficient consideration of the appellant's private and  family  life
    in the United Kingdom with his mother and other relatives, and  in  Sri
    Lanka, Sierra Leone, or wherever his daughter actually  lives.  Nor  is
    there any detailed consideration of the medical evidence or  the  other
    evidence  advanced  on  the  appellant's  behalf."  The  grounds   were
    described as arguable.

The Rule 24 response

 9. The respondent's Rule  24  response,  received  on  15  December  2016,
    indicated that the appeal was  opposed  and  that  the  judge  directed
    himself appropriately. It was argued that the judge clearly  considered
    the medical evidence in detail and had regard to the oral  evidence  of
    the appellant's doctor. The focus of the judge's decision was  said  to
    be on the medical evidence as this was how the case was argued. It  was
    said  to  be  untenable  to  argue  that  the  medical   evidence   was
    inadequately dealt with when there had been meticulous consideration of
    the various forms of medication available to the  appellant  in  Sierra
    Leone.

10. It was further argued that the grounds did not take any real issue with
    the judge's findings on the appellant's private and family life in  the
    United Kingdom; the  focus  being  on  the  lack  of  support  for  the
    appellant in terms of taking  his  medication  and  his  mental  health
    issues. The judge's mistake in relation to the location of the daughter
    was said to be immaterial given that wherever she  was,  she  would  be
    separated from the appellant. The gist of the judge's findings was that
    monitoring of the appellant can continue at a  distance.  In  addition,
    the case for the appellant did not appear to have been  argued  on  the
    basis that he has family life with any of his family. It was noted that
    none of the appellant's relatives attended the  hearing  to  give  oral
    evidence, choosing only to send letters of support.

11. Even taking the appellant's case at its highest, it was argued that  it
    was bound to fail. It was contended  that  it  could  not  sensibly  be
    argued that his was an Article 3 case in the terms of D and N and  that
    there was no example of a successful Article 8 claim in a mental health
    case since Bensaid in 2001. Owing to this being a deportation case with
    the public interest this imported, there was said to be no prospect  of
    the appellant succeeding on any medical basis.




12. On 29 December 2016, those representing the  appellant  sent  a  notice
    pursuant to Rule 15[2A] of the Procedure  Rules,  requesting  that  the
    Upper Tribunal consider new evidence which  included  two  new  medical
    reports, two supporting letters  from  organisations  and  one  from  a
    family member.

The hearing

13. Ms Pentcheva alluded to the Rule 15[2A] notice as well as the fact that
    there were four further witnesses who had attended the  hearing  before
    me, however I indicated that I would consider the application to  admit
    new evidence, once I had made a decision as to whether or not there was
    a material error of law.

14. Without referring to the original grounds, other than to apologise  for
    their length, Ms Pentcheva proceeded to argue that there was a lack  of
    reasoning in relation to the Article 8 balancing exercise and a lack of
    factual accuracy in relation to the appellant's family  in  the  United
    Kingdom and abroad. Secondly, she argued that the judge's assessment of
    the Article 3 risk to the appellant was incomplete and inaccurate.

15. I was taken to references in the judge's decision  to  the  appellant's
    daughter living in Sri Lanka where it should have read Sierra Leone and
    at [43] the judge had indicated that the daughter  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that she  would  be  in  a  position  to  support  him.  Ms
    Pentcheva contended that there was no evidence before the judge to show
    that the daughter was able to do so and this was directly  relevant  to
    the risk to the appellant on return to Sierra Leone.  Furthermore,  the
    judge did not address the appellant's family in the United Kingdom  and
    made no finding as to whether it amounted to relevant family life.  She
    asserted that it had been argued before the judge that there was a high
    level of dependency between the  appellant  and  his  family.  At  this
    juncture, I asked Ms Pentcheva to identify the evidence or arguments to
    that effect among the material which was before  the  judge.  She  was,
    despite looking through the  appellant's  bundles  for  a  considerable
    time, unable to do so but indicated that  there  was  such  information
    among the new material she wished to adduce. I noted that  the  reports
    she referred me to used words like support and contact when  describing
    the appellant's relationship with his relatives in the  United  Kingdom
    and the letter from his sister made no reference to any dependency.  Ms
    Pentcheva asked me to note that the family had intervened  in  2013  by
    contacting mental health service when the appellant appeared unwell.

16. Ms Pentcheva argued that the judge was wrong to focus  on  two  of  the
    reports before  him  and  to  find  that  Risperidone  was  a  suitable
    alternative medication  for  the  appellant's  mental  disorder.  Other
    evidence before the judge showed that Risperidone was not available  in
    state facilities and the appellant could not afford to pay for it.  The
    judge had not assessed whether there were very compelling circumstances
    and there were no concrete findings and insufficient detail as  to  why
    the appellant's removal was proportionate.




17. Mr Avery argued that the judge understood that the appellant's daughter
    lived in the  country  where  he  was  being  removed  and  indeed  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal had made the same error in that there was
    a reference to Sri Lanka. The judge had a proper understanding  of  the
    issues. He argued that the judge looked at the  medical  evidence  with
    care and the effect on the  appellant's  health,  making  detailed  and
    fully sustainable findings; both on the basis of  removal  as  well  as
    remaining in the United Kingdom.

18. The judge had demonstrated at [43] that  he  was  fully  aware  of  the
    daughter's circumstances and his reference to support was  in  relation
    to emotional support and checking up rather than financial support. The
    judge had been entitled to  find  she  might  be  able  to  offer  this
    support.

19. In relation to the Article 2 and 3 case, Mr Avery argued that the judge
    findings on access to treatment in Sierra Leone were  sustainable.  His
    findings that the appellant's circumstances did not meet the very  high
    threshold were sustainable in the light of the case law of  N  and  GS.
    This was a deportation case, where the judge correctly found  that  the
    Rules were a complete code and made positive findings including that it
    was unlikely that the appellant would  reoffend  and  that  his  mental
    state was under control [62], however after looking at the  deportation
    Rules, he found that they were  not  met.   The  findings  at  [63]  re
    compelling circumstances were brief, however this had to viewed against
    the findings he made elsewhere in the decision. The grounds amounted to
    no more than disagreement with the findings of the judge.

20. In reply, Ms Pentcheva argued that there  was  no  exploration  of  the
    situation faced by the appellant on return to  Sierra  Leone  including
    his inability to pay for medication.

21. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the arguments  put  forward
    on the appellant's behalf did not  establish  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law and  I,  accordingly,  upheld  his  decision.  My
    reasons are below.

Decision on error of law

22. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there  was  arguably
    insufficient consideration of the appellant's private and  family  life
    with relatives in the  United  Kingdom  and  elsewhere.   As  indicated
    above, there was never any claim that the appellant enjoyed family live
    relevant for these purposes with his relatives in the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no submission that he was dependent upon these  relatives  in
    any way  as  can  be  seen  from  [8]  of  the  decision  and  reasons.
    Furthermore, the skeleton argument, reports and supporting letter  made
    no such claim. The evidence before  the  judge  went  no  further  than
    stating that the appellant's relatives kept an eye on him  and  checked
    up on him. None of the relatives attended the hearing. Therefore, there
    was no family life in the United Kingdom for the judge to consider.

23. The judge wrongly referred to the appellant's daughter residing in  Sri
    Lanka. As Mr Avery pointed out, the grounds of  appeal  made  the  same
    error.



24. At [43] of the decision, the judge also referred to an  adult  daughter
    in the UK. Despite these  errors,  the  judge  noted  the  respondent's
    submissions at [7] that the daughter was in fact in Sierra Leone and at
    [42], when discussing the  expert  evidence  of  the  ill-treatment  of
    mental health patients in Sierra Leone by their relatives; it is  clear
    that the judge was aware of the daughter's whereabouts, given  that  he
    found that she was the only relative in Sierra Leone and that there was
    no suggestion that she would ill-treat  her  father.  Furthermore,  the
    error made as to the country of residence  of  the  daughter,  which  I
    consider to be no more than typographical errors, are immaterial  given
    that at [43] the judge accepted that any support likely to be given  by
    the her would be "relatively limited given her age and given  that  she
    is currently living with  her  mother."  When  read  as  a  whole,  the
    decision and reasons adequately reflects and addresses the evidence and
    arguments adduced.

25. The grounds argue that the  judge  made  findings  relating  to  likely
    future family assistance to the appellant which were unsupported by the
    evidence before him. This ground was not touched upon by Ms  Pentcheva.
    In any event, the judge did not err in  finding  at  [43]  that  family
    members in the United Kingdom "can  still  support  him  in  medication
    compliance from  a  distance  particularly  if  they  liaise  with  the
    appellant's daughter."  Given  that  this  was  the  extent  of  family
    involvement in the United Kingdom, according to the evidence before the
    judge, these were findings the judge was entitled to make. Furthermore,
    the judge has not found that this support would  be  available  to  the
    appellant  but  merely  that  it  could  potentially  be.  This  was  a
    sustainable conclusion based on the evidence before him. I was directed
    to no further factual errors in the decision and reasons.

26. The grounds are wrong to say that the judge based his findings  on  the
    medical treatment available to the appellant on out of  date  material.
    In particular, the judge made multiple references to the report  of  Mr
    Vandi, a clinical team leader who volunteered in  Sierra  Leone  during
    the Ebola  crisis  in  2014  and  who  was  involved  in  developing  a
    comprehensive mental health  service  for  Ebola  survivors  and  their
    families.

27. There is a reference in the grounds to the judge's apparent failure  to
    consider the appellant's psychological problems. Again, this point  was
    not mentioned or developed by Ms Pentcheva. However, an examination  of
    the report in question reveals that  these  symptoms  were  "mild"  and
    linked in part to the appellant's "paranoid conditions."  This  appears
    to be a reference to the  appellant's  primary  diagnosis  of  paranoid
    schizophrenia. The judge did not materially err in failing to refer  to
    this evidence, given that he has referred  to  the  report  and  indeed
    heard oral evidence from the author of that  report.  Furthermore,  the
    appellant's mild symptoms of psychological disturbance  were  given  no
    separate attention in the submissions on his behalf.

28. Paragraph [8-10] of the grounds overlook the fact that  the  judge  did
    indeed consider the issue of the  circumstances  likely  to  greet  the
    appellant in Sierra Leone; that he had originally sought asylum and the
    existence of compelling circumstances.  Again,  Ms  Pentcheva  did  not
    allude to these matters in her submissions.

29. While  the  grant  of  permission  said  that  there  was  no  detailed
    consideration of the medical evidence, Ms  Pentcheva  did  not  address
    this in her submissions nor expand upon the grounds of  appeal.  It  is
    manifestly not the case that the judge failed in this regard. From [23]
    to [29] the judge considered the appellant's  medical  treatment  since
    his conviction, with multiple references to the medical evidence in the
    appellant's bundles. At [30] to [46], the judge  considered  the  risks
    posed by the appellant both with and without medication and  made  many
    references to the medical reports in doing so. From [38] to [46], there
    was detailed consideration of the availability of medical treatment  in
    Sierra Leone as well as an assessment of risks from those with  hostile
    attitudes to mental health patients. All the findings of the judge  are
    supported by references to evidence mainly submitted on the appellant's
    behalf.

30. In a  very  detailed  decision,  the  judge  came  to  the  sustainable
    conclusion that medical treatment was available for  the  appellant  in
    Sierra Leone and that his rights under Articles 2 and 3  would  not  be
    breached for that or any other reason. I heard no submissions  from  Ms
    Pentcheva which suggested that the appellant's  circumstances  met  the
    high threshold,  referred to in D, N or GS (India) &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40.

31. It is not in dispute that the appellant is unable to meet  any  of  the
    exceptions to deportation set out in paragraphs 399a 399b  or  399A  of
    the  Rules.  The  circumstances  relied  upon  which  are  said  to  be
    compelling relate only to the appellant's mental state, which the judge
    considered under his consideration of Articles 2 and  3  of  the  ECHR.
    Given what was said in GS at [86];

         "If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual  element  which  brings  the  case  within  the  Article  8
         paradigm."


32. No separate or additional factual element was brought to the  attention
    of the judge who heard this appeal. Ms Pentcheva  attempted  to  argue,
    referring to the fresh  evidence  which  was  not  admitted,  that  the
    appellant was dependent upon his family members in the United  Kingdom.
    I have, accordingly, had regard to MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at
    [23] as follows;

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage  Article  8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependence
         on the family here for support, together establish  'private  life'
         under Article 8. That conclusion would  not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe."


33. It may well be that there is now available evidence of  the  dependency
    of the appellant on his  relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  this
    evidence was not adduced before the judge and he cannot  be  criticised
    for failing to make findings on non-existent evidence. It remains  open
    for those representing the appellant  to  make  a  fresh  human  rights
    application, relying on this new evidence.




Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 21 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

