
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09511/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2017                           |On 26 January 2018            |
|Prepared 15 December 2017                     |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               ECO- NEW DHELI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SURAJ KUMAR GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alexander, counsel instructed by Kent
                    Immigration & Visa Advice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Nepal, appealed against  an  ECO's  refusal
    of leave to enter dated 21 September 2015.  The appeal was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm  on  3  February  2017  (the  Judge).
    Permission to appeal was given to the ECO on 19 October  2017  and  the
    Claimant made a Rule 24 response which was served on 17 November  2017.



3.   The ECO's challenge is founded upon the view that  the  judge  had  not
    made a proper analysis of the family life ties and relationship between
    the Claimant and family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  grounds  were
    settled by a very experienced officer and to some extent the criticisms
    seem unrelated to the actual decision: I do not exclude the possibility
    that the officer did not have a full set of correct papers.  Be that as
    it may, Mr Walker quite properly accepts  that  the  reasoning  of  the
    Judge does address relevant case law.

4.    The grounds do not challenge the findings  of  fact  which  the  Judge
    made. It is fairly said that the Judge made findings of fact which  any
    reasonable Tribunal considering those same evidence  would  have  found
    engaged Article 8 and therefore the appeal  succeeded.   It  was  clear
    also that the Judge did address  the  issue  of  family  ties  and  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his family in the UK.

5.    For  those  reasons  therefore,  whilst  understanding   the   general
    criticism that the ECO was making, albeit it may have been misplaced as
    a fact, I do not find that there is demonstrated any error of law which
    is material made by the  Original  Tribunal's  decision.  The  Original
    Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

6.   The appeal is dismissed.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
