


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09673/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |S E                                               |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify SE's children.  I  take  the  view
that disclosure of SE's name risks disclosing the identity of her  children.
I therefore issue an anonymity order which extends  to  SE.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.
This direction  applies  to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bahja, of Counsel, instructed by Anthony
                    Ogunfeibo & Co. Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (the "Secretary of State") against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Saunders (hereafter the "judge" unless otherwise  stated)
    who, following a hearing on 29 February 2016, allowed the appeal of  SE
    (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of Jamaica born on 9 April 1980,
    on human rights grounds (Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  for
    the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR)) against
    a decision of the Secretary of State of 12 October 2015  by  which  she
    refused to revoke a deportation  order  made  on  16  June  2009  under
    section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The deportation order was  signed  after  the  claimant  exhausted  her
    appeal rights following the dismissal  of  her  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 February 2009 by a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Immigration Judge Freestone and Ms PL Ravenscroft) against a  decision
    to make a deportation order of 1 October 2008.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision to make a deportation order  followed
    the claimant's conviction on 10 August 2006 at Portsmouth  Crown  Court
    of an offence of possessing Class A controlled drugs (crack cocaine and
    heroin) with intent to supply and supplying Class  A  controlled  drugs
    (crack cocaine) to another and sentence of 5 years' imprisonment passed
    on 11 September 2006.

 4. The claimant arrived in the UK in 2000 without a visa and has  remained
    in the United Kingdom illegally throughout. She  has  three  daughters,
    born (respectively) on 28  February  2004,  11  September  2011  and  2
    February 2016 (hereafter "D1", "D2" and "D3"  respectively)".   By  the
    date of the hearing before Judge Saunders, D2 had been registered as  a
    British citizen. The judge accepted that the claimant intended to  make
    an application for D1 to be registered as a British citizen  but  could
    not raise the necessary funds to make such an  application.  The  judge
    treated D1 as a person whose position was akin to  a  British  citizen,
    i.e. as de jure a British citizen, although  she  also  said  that  she
    noted that D1 was presently a Jamaican national.

 5. Before the judge, the  claimant  placed  reliance  upon  Ruiz  Zambrano
    [2011] EUECJ C-34/09. The  judge's  attention  was  not  drawn  to  the
    Opinion of Advocate General  Szpunar  in  Marin  v  Administracion  del
    Estado, Secretary of State for the Home Department v  CS  (articles  20
    TFEU and 21 TFEU-Directive 2004/30/EC), joined cases  C-165/14  and  C-
    304/14, delivered on 4 February 2016. At para 8 of  her  decision,  the
    judge said that she became aware of the  Opinion  in  Marin  after  the
    hearing, as a consequence of which she gave the parties an  opportunity
    to file written submissions as to the effect  of  the  Opinion  on  the
    appeal. She stated that she received submissions  from  the  claimant's
    solicitors but nothing from the Secretary of State despite allowing  an
    extended time of approximately two weeks after the stated  deadline  to
    take account of the Easter holiday period.

 6. The judge noted that, as the claimant had been sentenced to a  term  of
    imprisonment of more than four years, it was necessary for her to  show
    that there were very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2 provided for in s.117C(4)  and  (5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002  Act")  and
    which are reflected in para 398(c) of the Statement of Changes  in  the
    Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)   (hereafter   referred   to
    individually as a "Rule" and collectively the "Rules").

 7. The judge found that  the  claimant  had  shown  that  very  compelling
    circumstances existed over and above those contained  in  Exceptions  1
    and 2. She gave her  reasons  at  paras  18-38  of  her  decision.   In
    relation to D2's right to reside in the territory of  the  EU  and  the
    principle established  in  Zambrano,  the  judge  found  that,  if  the
    claimant were to be deported, the three children  would  be  forced  to
    return to Jamaica with her. Importantly, she stated that Mr  O'Monaghan
    (the Secretary of State's representative before the  judge)  explicitly
    accepted in his submissions that the children would be forced to return
    to Jamaica with the  claimant.  Their  fathers  were  absent  and  D1's
    elderly paternal uncle, whilst  a  not-insignificant  presence  in  her
    life, had shown himself incapable of caring for  her  full  time.   She
    found that it would be unduly harsh for D1  to  live  apart  and  in  a
    different country from her mother and sisters and that it  was  equally
    self-evident that the younger girls need to be with their mother  also,
    as well as with each other.

 8. At para 35, the judge found that, being a British citizen, D2 was to be
    regarded as an EU citizen, following Zambrano, and that if she were  to
    leave the UK with her mother, her right to reside in the  EU  would  be
    interrupted and she would lose the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance
    of her rights as a Union citizen, as least until she is able to  travel
    to the UK independently as an adult.

 9. In relation to D1, the judge noted her "de jure entitlement to  British
    citizenship" and treated the decision in Zambrano as again relevant  to
    the broader proportionality exercise.

10. In relation to the Opinion in Marin, the judge said, at para  37,  that
    she considered that the Opinion potentially shifted the proportionality
    exercise to align the position of a third-country  national  who  is  a
    Zambrano-carer and who faces deportation  with  current  EU  protection
    against removal of EEA nationals, by requiring an assessment of whether
    the third-country national poses a "genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society" so as to
    "exceptionally" permit deportation in line with the enhanced protection
    of the "imperative grounds of public security" presently applicable  to
    EEA nationals with 10 years' continuous residence.

11. The judge went on to find (at para 38), that there  was  an  "extremely
    low likelihood" of the claimant reoffending in the future and that  the
    passage of time since the  decision  in  the  previous  appeal  of  the
    claimant meant that her own conclusions on the issue  were  permissibly
    different from those of the previous Tribunal  whose  conclusions  were
    now outdated. Accordingly, she said that she  did  not  find  that  the
    claimant can now be said to pose a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  even
    though she did in the past. The judge said that she found that this was
    an important additional consideration  to  be  applied  in  making  her
    overall proportionality assessment under Article 8, at  the  same  time
    stressing that she did not treat this as  determinative  and  that  her
    overall approach was still framed by Part V of the  2002  Act  and  the
    Rules.

12. The judge summarised her conclusions at para 39. Whilst I  consider  it
    helpful to quote para  39  at  this  juncture,  I  stress  that  it  is
    nevertheless necessary to read (as I have) the entirety of the  judge's
    decision to appreciate the full breath and extent of her reasoning  and
    findings. Para 39 reads:

         "... I conclude that [the claimant] has shown that very  compelling
             circumstances exist over  and  above  those  contained  in  the
             Exceptions set out in section 117C(6), and including paragraphs
             390A and 398(c). This is because, notwithstanding  the  onerous
             public interest presumptions and considerations  in  favour  of
             deportation contained in the relevant  legislation,  Rules  and
             caselaw which I have applied with care, there are several  very
             weighty factors  which  collectively  I  find  amount  to  very
             compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   Exceptions
             contemplated. These include, in summary,  the  very  compelling
             psychological and practical best  interests  of  the  children,
             including those of [D1], coupled  with  the  very  considerable
             damage to these  best  interests  if  deportation  occurs;  the
             profound impact upon the EU rights of [D1] and [D2] if deported
             to Jamaica with their mother; the [Secretary of State's]  delay
             in seeking to deport [the claimant] during which time  many  of
             the children's ties  took  root;  the  demonstrably  successful
             efforts of [the claimant] to  rehabilitate  herself  since  her
             release into the community in October 2008, such that she is no
             longer a present or genuine  society's  fundamental  interests.
             All these matters lead me to the conclusion that there has been
             such a material alteration in the situation of  [the  claimant]
             that the deportation should be revoked."

The grounds

13. The main point which emerges from the grounds is that the  judge  erred
    in the weight she gave to the Opinion in Marin and that the application
    of the "imperative grounds" protection to a third-country national  who
    is a Zambrano carer is inconsistent with the Directive  itself.  It  is
    contended that, despite the fact that the judge had said that  she  had
    not treated the Opinion in Marin as being  determinative,  she  had  in
    fact applied too high a standard against deportation as  a  consequence
    than is demanded by Article 8.

14. The remaining grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  The judge failed to identity anything compelling  over  and  above
         the Exceptions listed in s.117C or paras 399 or 399A of  the  Rules
         and that it is difficult to  see  how  the  factors  identified  in
         allowing the appeal differ in  any  way  to  those  listed  in  the
         exceptions. The judge had failed to  identify  anything  which  was
         exceptional about the instant case.

    (ii) In this regard, the grounds draw attention to the following:

         (a)  The starting point  is  that  deportation  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (b)  The judge had attempted  to  reduce  the  public  interest  or
             mitigate it in some way and in so doing undermined the Rules.

         (c)  The judge had ignored the  deterrent  effect  of  deportation,
             society's expression of revulsion and the need  to  build  and
             maintain  public  confidence  in  the  treatment  of   foreign
             criminals. The grounds contend that a low risk of re-offending
             does not in a normal case reduce the public interest.

         (d)  It had not been established that it would be unduly harsh  for
             the children to relocate to Jamaica and  that  the  judge  had
             erred in placing the interests of the children over and  above
             that of the public interest because her reasoning concentrated
             solely on the interests of the children. It is contended  that
             the correct approach was that a child's best interests were "a
             primary consideration" not "the" primary consideration

Submissions

15. At the hearing, I referred Mr Tarlow to para 8 of the decision  of  the
    judge from which it was clear that the Secretary of State had failed to
    submit her representations on the Opinion in Marin. I asked  Mr  Tarlow
    whether the Secretary of State  was  attempting  belatedly  to  advance
    arguments in this respect that she should have advanced to the judge. I
    also asked Mr Tarlow to address me on the question whether, even if the
    judge had erred in proceeding to apply the Opinion in Marin, the  error
    was material.

16. Mr Tarlow informed me that that he could only say that he  relied  upon
    the grounds. It was the Secretary of State's position that the Zambrano
    principle is not determinative in  a  deportation  case  and  that  the
    criminality of individual concerned must be taken into account. I asked
    Mr Tarlow whether it was the Secretary of State's case that  the  judge
    had failed to  take  into  account  the  criminal  convictions  of  the
    claimant and the public interest considerations that arose  on  account
    of her criminal convictions. Mr Tarlow replied to  say  that  he  could
    only rely upon the grounds.

17. I then informed Mr Bahja that I did  not  need  to  hear  from  him.  I
    announced that there was no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the judge which would stand for reasons to be writing in writing, which
    I now give.

Assessment

18. I shall first deal with the issue taken in the grounds in  relation  to
    the judge's application of the Opinion in Marin. The grounds attempt to
    take an argument that should have been made to the judge. It  is  plain
    that the judge gave both parties an opportunity to address her  on  the
    issue. Whilst the claimant's solicitors lodged their  submissions,  the
    Secretary of State failed to  do  so  notwithstanding  that  the  judge
    extended the deadline by two weeks. In my  view,  it  would  be  simply
    unfair and unjust to permit the Secretary of State to take a  point  on
    appeal that may potentially be determinative when she  failed  to  take
    the opportunity she was given in the proceedings before the  First-tier
    Tribunal to advance the point. This is not a question of the  Secretary
    of State  being  punished  for  failing  to  comply  with  the  judge's
    directions but an acknowledgement of the fact that it does little to an
    independent observer's perception of the fairness  of  the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal if the Upper  Tribunal  were  to  permit  the
    Secretary of State to take a point on appeal  that  she  was  given  an
    opportunity to take before the First-tier Tribunal but failed to do so.



19. In any event, I am satisfied that, even  if  the  judge  had  erred  in
    applying the Opinion in  Marin,  the  error  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome, given the many cogent reasons that the judge gave for reaching
    her overall conclusion. In saying this, I refer to the entirety of  the
    judge's reasoning and findings, set out at paras 18-36 of her decision.
    Her decision speaks for itself and I consider it unnecessary for me  to
    repeat at length her assessment or findings. It  is  self-evident  from
    paras 18-36 that her assessment was not only very detailed, it was fair
    and balanced.  She did not leave out of account  any  relevant  factors
    contrary to the assertions to the contrary in the grounds. For example,
    in relation to the grounds as summarised at my para 14(ii)(a)-(d) above
    and using the same numbering as at my para 14(ii)(a)-(d):

    (a)  Not only did the judge state at paragraph  28  that  she  reminded
         herself, pursuant to Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered) [2015]
         UKUT 00629 of the "very great "potency" of the public  interest  in
         deportation appeals", she said in terms at para  29  that  she  had
         this "starting point" firmly in mind.

    (b)  The suggestion that the  judge  attempted  to  reduce  the  public
         interest or mitigate it in some way and so undermined the Rules can
         only be a reference to para 24 of the decision where the judge drew
         attention to the fact that there was considerable delay  in  taking
         deportation action against the claimant  since  she  exhausted  her
         appeal rights in February 2009, over 7 years previously.  There  is
         nothing else in the remainder of the decision which can support the
         submission that she "attempted to reduce  the  public  interest  or
         mitigate it in some way".

         However, on the issue of delay, the judge said, at  para  24,  that
         whilst the Secretary of State had pointed  towards  non-cooperation
         by the claimant, there was no evidence to support  the  claim  that
         the claimant was responsible for the  delay.  The  judge  gave  her
         reasons for finding that a significant  portion  of  the  delay  in
         executing the deportation orders against the claimant  and  D1  was
         attributable to unexplained inaction and confusion by the Secretary
         of State.

         It is evident from the judge's decision that  the  significance  of
         the delay in this particular case is that: (i)  it  enabled  D1  to
         strengthen her ties in the UK, such that,  although  she  lost  her
         appeal in 2009, she had by the time of the appeal before the  judge
         lived in the UK for a period  since  her  birth  sufficient  to  be
         entitled  to  British   citizenship   upon   an   application   for
         registration; (b) that, in the intervening period,  D1  had  forged
         ties in the  UK  such  that  it  would  be  extremely  distressing,
         confusing and disruptive for her to leave the  UK  now,  given  her
         age, long residence, integration and personal ties (para 36 of  the
         decision); and(c) during the period of the delay, the claimant  had
         two more daughters one of whom is also a British  citizen  and  who
         has been registered as a British citizen.

         If the submission that "the judge attempted to  reduce  the  public
         interest or mitigate it in some way and so undermined the Rules" is
         a reference to an issue other than the Secretary of State's  delay,
         I could find nothing else in the decision to support the submission
         which (if maintained)  demonstrates  (in  my  view)  a  failure  to
         appreciate the reasons the judge gave for allowing the  appeal.  To
         the contrary, it is clear from paras 28-30, in particular, that she
         considered the specific public interest  considerations  that  were
         engaged in the case and stated that there was a very strong  public
         interest in deporting the claimant. She said in terms, at para  39,
         that  "the  balancing  exercise  thus  begins  with  all  of  these
         extremely important  considerations  weighing  very  heavy  in  the
         balance, at the outside, against [the claimant]".

    (c)  The judge took into account, in terms at para  30,  the  deterrent
         effect of deportation and the need to express society's  revulsion.
         It is clear from para 29 that she took into account the maintenance
         of immigration control, because she referred to this  consideration
         in terms.

    (d)  The submission in the grounds that it  had  not  been  established
         that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  children  to  relocate  to
         Jamaica simply ignores the judge's  reasoning;  in  particular,  at
         paras 35-36 of her decision. At para 33, she specifically said that
         the best interests of the children were  a  primary  consideration,
         not the primary consideration. It is not the case  that  the  judge
         concentrated  solely  on  the  interests  of  the   children.   She
         considered other factors, such as the Secretary of State's delay.

20. I turn now to the submission in the grounds that is  summarised  at  my
    para 14(i). In relation to the submission that it is difficult  to  see
    how the factors identified by the judge in allowing the  appeal  differ
    in any way to those listed in Exceptions 1  and  2,  we  now  have  the
    benefit of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662. It is clear from paras 28-30 of NA (Pakistan),  in
    particular, that the submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  identify
    factors that differ  from  those  listed  in  Exceptions  1  and  2  is
    misconceived. Although the judge  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the
    judgment in NA (Pakistan), it is nevertheless plain from  her  decision
    that she found that the factors identified in Exceptions 1 and  2  that
    were  applicable  in  the  claimant's  case  "were  of  an   especially
    compelling kind ... going well beyond what would be necessary  to  make
    out a bare case in Exceptions  1  and  2"  so  as  to  amount  to  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2. Indeed, she said, in terms at para 39, that there were  "several
    very weighty factors" which  collectively  amount  to  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those Exceptions.  For  example,  that  D2
    would be deprived of education and would also lose her right to  reside
    in the EU until she is able to travel as an independent adult and  that
    D1 has forged relationships in the UK in the  formative  7-year  period
    since the last previous, a period during which the Secretary  of  State
    delayed in effecting removal.

21. For all of these reasons, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err
    in law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  therefore  dismissed.  The
    decision of the judge stands.




    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date:  25 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

