
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/09916/2016

                                                  HU/09920/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 October 2017                         |On 12 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                             1) MR DEBINDRA RAI
                            2) MR RAM CHANDRA RAI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State from  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated on 17 July 2017.  The
    matter relates to a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  regarding
    the first and second appellants who are siblings and the children of  a
    previously serving officer in the Gurkha army.

2.   The grounds settled on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  make  two
    substantive criticisms of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The  first  is
    the paucity of factual findings and insufficiency of  reason;  and  the
    second is the lack of rigour in the consideration  of  public  interest
    considerations under Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.
3.   Mr Tarlow, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  took  me  to  what  he
    says is an absence of positive findings in relation to the  nature  and
    extent of any substantive family life between  the  parents  and  their
    adult children.  He  submits  that  the  section  117B  assessment  was
    coloured by too strong a regard for the historic injustice meted out to
    Gurkha servicemen and their families, exemplified in decisions such  as
    Ghising & Others [2013] UKUT 567.  This is not the fullest of decisions
    and it is one which might have been improved by additional text on some
    or all of the issues identified by Mr Tarlow.

4.   Against this, Mr Layne who acts for the respondents to the appeal,  has
    taken me through the decision in some detail making  express  reference
    to findings at paragraph 38 dealing with money transfers supporting the
    appellants  in  Nepal  and  what  the  judge  describes  as  "emotional
    dependence", evidenced by at least monthly contact with  the  children.
    Mr Layne conceded that the term contact used in  this  context  by  the
    Judge referred not to physical meetings but indirect contact whether by
    telephone,  Skype  or  other  means.   Mr  Layne  took  me  further  to
    paragraphs 55, 56 and 57 dealing with other material findings.

5.   What I need to be satisfied about is whether the decision  discloses  a
    material error of law. The fact that a decision  might  be  capable  of
    improvement is not of itself a ground for setting it  aside.   In  this
    case, although the conclusions were briefly expressed,  the  Judge  did
    fully take into account all evidence and all material that  was  before
    the tribunal. Her conclusions as to the  existence  of  a  family  life
    cannot be categorised as irrational because her reasons are  clearly  -
    though succinctly - stated.  The fact that the Secretary of State might
    disagree with those findings is not a ground for appeal.

6.   Equally, in looking at the  decision  holistically,  all  the  relevant
    features under section 117B were considered by the Judge. Paragraphs 55
    and following are short and concise, but the Judge's reasoning is clear
    in that she places into the scales  those  factors  which  militate  in
    favour of the  appellants  (as  they  were)  and  those  countervailing
    factors which militate in favour of the public interest.

7.   It is possible that a different judge on a  different  day  might  have
    reached a different conclusion but I am not satisfied that there  is  a
    material error of law enabling me to set aside the decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     11 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
