
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/09810/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decision made pursuant to Rule 34  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 August 2020                  |On 19 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                         PARULBEN YOGESHKUMAR PATEL

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Not represented

For the  Respondent:     Ms  R  Pettersen,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer




1. This appeal was listed before  me  on  13.8.20  and  by  consent  of  the
   parties as a remote hearing. The form of remote  hearing  was video  by
   Skype (V). A face to face hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
   practicable, and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.


2. However, whilst Ms Pettersen attended on behalf of the respondent,  there
   was no attendance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  who  has  not
   registered any legal representative with the Tribunal.  I  was  satisfied
   from the information in the Tribunal's case file that the  appellant  had
   been properly notified of the remote hearing. After some delay  and  with
   the making of further enquiries, a telephone number  was  found  for  the
   appellant and she was contacted. I spoke to her directly. She informed me
   that she had received the Notice of Hearing, sent by  email  on  29.7.20,
   and the subsequent email containing the Skype invitation. She  could  not
   adequately explain why, if she did not intend  to  attend,  she  had  not
   informed the Tribunal of that fact, or of any difficulties she faced. She
   told me that she had passed the  information  to  a  person,  possibly  a
   solicitor, who was handling her affairs, and had heard nothing else. Over
   the telephone, I agreed to  adjourn  the  remote  hearing,  and  have  it
   relisted so that she could attend or instruct legal representation.


3. Later the same day, however, the Upper Tribunal received  an  email  from
   the appellant stating that she wished for the hearing to proceed  in  her
   absence, relying on the grounds of application  for  permission  and  her
   witness statement, together with her bundle  put  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.


4. As the hearing had  already  been  adjourned,  it  was  not  possible  to
   reconvene. However, the respondent was contacted and Ms Pettersen invited
   to make brief written submissions of what she would have  said,  had  the
   remote hearing gone  ahead,  which  were  received  on  14.7.20  and  are
   summarised below.


5. I have in effect acceded to the appellant's request for the matter to  be
   dealt with in her absence and have taken into account all  the  documents
   and evidence she relies on, making the decision on the papers  without  a
   hearing under Rule 34.


6. Ms Pettersen's brief  written  submissions  accept  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in not taking into account the  partner's  grant  of
   Indefinite Leave to Remain but submit that the  error  was  not  material
   because (i) the appellant was unable to bring herself within  the  Rules;
   and (ii) the First-tier Tribunal considered the question of  whether  the
   appellant's partner could go to India with her and took into account  the
   medical evidence. It is submitted that the  grounds  do  not  demonstrate
   that the judge erred in the proportionality assessment.


7. Whilst the appellant may not have seen these submissions, they are,  with
   respect to Ms Pettersen, unremarkable and unsurprising. I have  carefully
   considered whether the appellant is in any  way  disadvantaged  by  these
   brief submissions. However, as I have already noted,  the  appellant  was
   content for the hearing to proceed in her absence and all  that  has  now
   happened is that Ms Pettersen has put into bullet-point  notes  what  she
   undoubtedly would have submitted orally at the remote hearing.   Had  any
   novel issue been  raised,  I  would  certainly  have  invited  a  written
   response from the appellant. On the limited submissions made, however,  I
   am satisfied that seeking a reply from the appellant is not necessary for
   me to deal with this case  fairly  and  justly  in  accordance  with  the
   Tribunal's overriding objectives.


8. The appellant, who is an Indian national born on 20.11.80,  has  appealed
   with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal promulgated 4.3.20,  dismissing  her  human  rights  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 29.5.19, to  refuse
   her application for Leave to Remain on private life grounds only.


9. The  grounds  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
   himself in law in the article 8 ECHR  assessment  by  failing  to  accord
   appropriate  weight  to  material  matters,  in   particular   that   the
   appellant's partner had  been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  on
   12.6.19.


10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
   on 18.5.20, citing GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ  1630,  to  the  effect
   that "the proportionality test  to  be  applied  in  considering  appeals
   outside the Rules is whether a "fair balance" is struck between competing
   public and private interests (and not one of  exceptionality),  that  the
   test is to be  applied  on  the  circumstances  of  the  individual  case
   evaluated in the "real world". The court also said that  a  court  has  a
   duty to do what is right and consistent with human rights  law  and  must
   take account  of  the  most  up-to-date  information  of  an  appellant's
   circumstances."


11. It was noted that at [10] of the decision the judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant's partner has  been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  on
   12.6.19 but the judge considered "that was post decision and  the  change
   in his status is therefore a new matter for the purposes of this  appeal.
   I may not consider it without the consent of the Respondent which has not
   been given. For reasons which will become apparent below  it  has  little
   bearing on the issues I must consider."


12. Judge O'Garro considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
   in law in not taking the appellant's partner's grant of Indefinite  Leave
   to Remain into account in the proportionality assessment,  and  that  "in
   the light of the guidance given by GM, it is arguable that by failing  to
   do so, the judge made a perverse or irrational finding on a  matter  that
   was material to the outcome."


13. There was no issue but that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  enjoy  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship. They have no children.


14. The judge stated at [10] the partner's change of immigration status  had
   little bearing on the outcome of  the  appeal.  Whilst  at  the  date  of
   application the partner had not yet  been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
   Remain, that was the case by the date of the appeal hearing on 12.2.20. I
   am satisfied that as this was  a  human  rights  appeal,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal should have taken into account the appellant's circumstances  as
   they were at the date of the hearing. As  stated  above,  the  respondent
   also accepts that this was an error. However, for  the  reasons  set  out
   below, I am not satisfied that this error was material to the outcome  of
   the appeal.


15. The appellant has never had lawful leave to enter or remain in  the  UK.
   She has made a number of unsuccessful applications under different routes
   for leave to remain. In the application made on 24.12.18,  which  led  to
   the impugned decision, the appellant stated, "I  am  not  applying  as  a
   family member - I am only applying on the basis of private  life  in  the
   UK." Her covering or supporting letter of 7.1.19 asserts that she and her
   partner had established a private  life  in  the  UK  and  that  she  had
   establish strong ties since her arrival in 2006.  Although  she  was  not
   relying on family life, the respondent's decision considered both private
   and family life within and without the Rules.


16. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  drafted  in
   entirely generic and unparticularised terms in which no reference is made
   to family life and it is difficult to see on what  basis  she  wished  to
   appeal. However, in her witness statement  prepared  for  the  First-tier
   Tribunal appeal  hearing,  the  appellant  erroneously  claims  that  she
   applied for leave to remain as the spouse of her partner. The reality  is
   that she specifically did not want to be  considered  under  the  partner
   route. In the statement, the appellant accepted that she  was  unable  to
   meet the requirements of Appendix FM and disclosed that her  husband  was
   unemployed and in receipt of benefits. It was  perhaps  for  that  reason
   that she relied on private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi)  and,
   alternatively,  outside  the  Rules,  claiming  that  there   were   very
   significant obstacles to her integration in India, a country  with  which
   she claimed to be "thoroughly unfamiliar." However, I note at [14] of the
   witness statement that she claimed family life with her husband,  relying
   on human rights grounds. In the premises, it appears that  the  appellant
   has changed the basis upon which she sought leave to remain  in  the  UK.
   Nevertheless, the respondent and the First-tier Tribunal both  considered
   family and private life grounds.


17. The refusal decision noted that in October 2017  the  partner  had  been
   granted Discretionary Leave to Remain until 17.10.20. It is  not  at  all
   clear  on  what  basis  the  appellant's  partner   was   granted   first
   discretionary and then indefinite Leave to Remain. The grounds of  appeal
   to the Upper Tribunal suggest that the grant of discretionary  leave  was
   because he could not return to India. From  the  judicial  review  papers
   contained  within  the  appellant's  bundle,  I  note  the   respondent's
   complaint that the partner never mentioned the appellant or any dependent
   in any of his applications for leave to remain. Evidently,  when  he  was
   granted  discretionary  leave,  the  respondent  was   unaware   of   any
   relationship between the appellant and the partner. As  stated  above,  I
   accept that the judge should have taken into account that the partner now
   has settled status in the UK. However, as also  stated,  I  am  satisfied
   that the change of circumstances of the partner made little difference to
   the merits of the appellant's claim.


18. The appellant could not succeed under Appendix FM  because  she  was  in
   breach of the immigration status eligibility requirement and EX1 did  not
   apply, because  there  were  not,  as  the  judge  found,  insurmountable
   obstacles (very significant difficulties which could not be overcome)  to
   family life continuing outside the UK. If there were such  obstacles,  as
   the appellant now asserts, they were not clearly identified in any of the
   grounds or submissions  made  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Whilst  the
   partner had Indefinite Leave to Remain, there appeared no reason  why  he
   and the appellant could not live in India, if he chose  to  accompany  or
   join her there. As the judge noted at [12], they are both Indian citizens
   and lived in India until coming to the UK in  2006,  at  which  time  the
   appellant was 25 and her husband 36. Although they wished to live in  the
   UK, the judge did not accept that they  would  be  thoroughly  unfamiliar
   with India, as the appellant claimed. Neither did  the  judge  accept  at
   [13] that there were very significant obstacles to integration in  India.
   All of those findings were entirely open to the judge on the evidence. It
   follows that the appellant could never have succeeded  under  the  Rules,
   which fact is highly relevant to the article 8 proportionality assessment
   outside the Rules.


19. In considering the matter outside the Rules, the judge noted R  (on  the
   applications of Agyarko and Ikuga) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2017] UKSC 11 and that it is likely to be only in exceptional
   circumstances that removal where the Rules cannot be met would constitute
   a violation of article 8. Agyarko noted that there was not a condition of
   exceptionality, but quoting Lord Bingham:


      "the ultimate question for the  appellate  immigration  authority  was
      whether the refusal of leave to  enter  or  remain,  in  circumstances
      where the life of the family could not reasonably be  expected  to  be
      enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations  weighing
      in favour of the refusal, prejudiced the family life of the  applicant
      in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of  article  8.
      If the answer to that question was affirmative, then the  refusal  was
      unlawful. He added:


      "It  is  not  necessary  that  the  appellate  immigration  authority,
      directing itself along the lines indicated in this opinion,  need  ask
      in addition whether the case  meets  a  test  of  exceptionality.  The
      suggestion that it should is based on an observation of  Lord  Bingham
      in Razgar [R (Razgar) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368], para 20.


      He was there expressing an expectation, shared  with  the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal, that the number of claimants not covered by the rules
      and supplementary directions but entitled to succeed under  article  8
      would be a very small minority. That is still his expectation. But  he
      was not purporting to lay down a legal test." (para 20)


      60. It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
      balance should be struck between the competing public  and  individual
      interests involved, applying a proportionality  test.  The  Rules  and
      Instructions in issue in the present case  do  not  depart  from  that
      position.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  imposed  a   test   of
      exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham had in mind:  that  is
      to say, a requirement that the case should exhibit some highly unusual
      feature,  over  and   above   the   application   of   the   test   of
      proportionality.  On  the  contrary,  she   has   defined   the   word
      "exceptional", as already  explained,  as  meaning  "circumstances  in
      which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
      individual such that the refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be
      proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions  that
      leave can be granted outside the Rules where exceptional circumstances
      apply involves the application of the test of proportionality  to  the
      circumstances of the  individual  case,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as
      incompatible with article 8.  That  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the
      express statement in the Instructions that "exceptional" does not mean
      "unusual" or "unique": see para 19 above."


20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge cited Agyarko at [16] of the decision  and
   at [17] accepted that the ultimate question was one  of  proportionality.
   The judge went on to consider the R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2004] UKHKL 27 stepped approach. The judge also  applied
   section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which
   sets out the public interest considerations.  The  fact  is  that  little
   weight could be accorded to the private of family life developed  in  the
   UK whilst the appellant's immigration  status  was  both  precarious  and
   unlawful.


21. I am satisfied that nothing in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   was  inconsistent  with  the   proper   approach   to   the   article   8
   proportionality balancing exercise outside the Rules. On the findings  of
   the judge and on the evidence, there  was  nothing  to  demonstrate  that
   there were such circumstances in the appellant's case that refusal  would
   result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.  Even   had   the   judge
   specifically taken into account the grant of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain
   in the proportionality balancing exercise, I am entirely  satisfied  that
   the balance would inevitably have fallen against  the  appellant  and  in
   favour of removal being proportionate. In this regard, I  have  carefully
   considered what difference the Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  could  have
   made. It would perhaps have removed one obstacle under Appendix FM but as
   stated above, the appellant  still  could  not  succeed  because  of  the
   eligibility requirement and, under EX1, the absence of  very  significant
   obstacles to integration in India.


22. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Decision


      The making of the decision in the appeal did not involve the making of
      an error of law.


      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.


      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       14 August 2020





