








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09362/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 29 October 2018               |On: 14 November 2018                     |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                         Mrs Patricia Iziegbe Okosun
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, counsel, instructed by Calices
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on  10  August  1975.  She
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Moore dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision dated 17 March 2016, refusing her application for  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled here.

   2. In granting the appellant permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Martin noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  her  appeal,
      finding that this was not a genuine and subsisting marriage  and  that
      the  evidence  of  finances  was  inadequate.  Those   findings   were
      challenged in the application for permission to appeal to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal but were refused by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

   3. The grounds before her however "unusually argue" that the Judge  erred
      in dealing with the appeal at all as he had no jurisdiction to do  so.
      This was an  appeal  under  the  old  regime  under  the  transitional
      provisions. Accordingly, the "old section 82 applied." As at the  date
      of refusal, the appellant had existing leave until March  2017.  There
      had been no decision to curtail that leave and there was therefore  no
      appealable decision.

      The decision before the First-tier Tribunal

   4. Judge Moore noted as a preliminary issue at [5], that  the  presenting
      officer contended that the issue of human rights  in  the  appeal  was
      irrelevant since the appellant had existing 3C leave when  the  appeal
      was lodged. It was accepted that there was a  valid  appeal  regarding
      leave to remain, but in relation to human rights grounds,  no  removal
      was proposed by the respondent.

   5. Ms Pinder, who represented the appellant  at  the  hearing,  submitted
      that the Tribunal could indeed consider Article 8 rights even  if  the
      respondent did not  propose  to  remove  since  she  could  become  an
      overstayer.

   6. Jude Moore decided to hear the appeal. There had been  no  curtailment
      of the appellant's leave and he considered the matter 'as  of  today'.
      He noted that the appellant had s. 3C leave from the time this  appeal
      was lodged.  He  would  consider  whether  the  respondent's  decision
      breached her Article 8 rights and in doing so 'will pay due regard  to
      paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules in particular' [5].

   7. In a detailed decision, Judge Moore found  the  evidence  relating  to
      cohabitation to be unreliable and inconsistent. There was  a  lack  of
      credible and reliable evidence demonstrating a subsisting relationship
      between the appellant and her husband. He was not satisfied  that  the
      evidence given at the hearing established that this is a  genuine  and
      subsisting  relationship,  or  indeed  that   there   has   been   any
      cohabitation [25].

   8. Nor did he accept that there had been  any  exceptional  circumstances
      entitling the appellant to succeed under Article 8 outside the rules.

   9. Counsel who represented the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      prepared grounds in support  of  her  application  for  permission  to
      appeal. On 4 March 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  refused
      that application. She noted  that  the  Judge  gave  a  well  reasoned
      decision. Judge Birrel gave a detailed decision refusing permission to
      appeal. She found that the findings were open to  the  Judge  and  the
      grounds constituted no more than an attempt to re-litigate the appeal.



  10. Following the refusal of the initial  application  for  permission  to
      appeal the appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. She to rely on a new ground of  appeal,  namely,  the  Judge
      erred by proceeding to hear the appeal  as  there  was  no  appealable
      decision before the Tribunal.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  granted
      permission to appeal on that ground.

  11. Mr Malik, who did not prepare the application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      for permission to appeal,  stated  that  he  had  only  recently  been
      instructed.

  12. He adopted the current grounds of appeal. He noted that the  appellant
      entered the UK with valid leave to remain as a student on 18  December
      2009. That leave was due to expire on 30 April 2012. On 3  April  2012
      she applied for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person  settled
      here. That application was made under the pre-Appendix FM  Provisions.
      That application was granted after 9 July 2012, expiring on 28 January
      2015.

  13. Before  the  expiry  of  that  leave,  she  made  an  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain, which was refused on 22  March  2015.  She
      was however granted instead limited leave to  remain  expiring  on  22
      March 2017.

  14. On 12 October 2015 she applied for indefinite leave  to  remain.  That
      was refused by the respondent on 17 March 2016 and was the subject  of
      the First-tier Tribunal decision in this case.

  15.  Mr  Malik  referred  to  the  transitional  provisions  in  the  2012
      Immigration Rules. The statement  of  changes  dated  16  August  2012
      introduced various changes to the family life provisions.

  16. There were however transitional provisions, one of which is set out at
      Part 8 - Family Members. He submitted that none of the new  categories
      of appeal in the 2014 Act applied to the appellant's application dated
      12 October 2015. Nor did the savings provisions in  the  2014  Act  or
      related orders apply  either.  He  submitted  that  those  immigration
      applicants who were covered by the transitional provision in Paragraph
      A280 of the 2012 Immigration Rules would continue  to  be  subject  to
      s.82 of the 2002  Act  as  it  was  prior  to  its  amendment  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014.

  17. Accordingly,  in  the  appellant's  case  there  was  no  "immigration
      decision" within the meaning of  s.82(1)  of  the  2002  Act,  as  the
      appellant still had extant leave expiring on 22 March 2017 at the date
      of the respondent's refusal on 17 March 2016.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Avery submitted, in  reliance  on  the
      skeleton argument  provided,  that  the  appellant's  submissions  are
      founded on the provisions of the 2002 Act prior to  its  amendment  by
      s.15, which had held that under s.82(1) as then in force, a  right  of
      appeal lay only against "immigration decisions" prescribed by s.82(2).



  19. Decisions on applications under that regime only constituted  such  an
      immigration decision where they were  refusals  to  vary  leave  as  a
      result of which the subject had  no  leave  (s.82(2)(d)).  Under  that
      regime, the decision under appeal  would  indeed  on  the  appellant's
      reasoning not  have  been  appealable.  However,  the  decision  under
      appeal, taken in March 2016, was plainly one subject  to  the  amended
      appeals provisions produced by the 2014 Act. It constituted a  refusal
      of an application made on  12  October  2015  and  represented  itself
      consistently in the decision letter as a refusal  of  a  human  rights
      claim, appealable only on the ground that the  decision  was  unlawful
      under s.6 of the Human Rights Act.

  20. He submitted that this is in accordance with the provisions  governing
      the commencement of s.5 of the 2014 Act. Article  8  referred  to  the
      amendments coming into force on 6 April 2015. There was a substitution
      for Article 9 of a new Article 9.

  21.  The  substituted  Article  9  provided   that   notwithstanding   the
      commencement  of  the  relevant  provisions,  the   saved   provisions
      continued to have effect and  the  relevant  provisions  do  not  have
      effect so far as  they  relate  to  the  following  decisions  of  the
      secretary of state. Article 9 (1)(c) relates to a decision made on  or
      after 6 April 2015 (so far as that is not a decision mentioned in  sub
      paragraph (a) or (b)) to refuse an application  made  before  6  April
      2015, where that decision is:

        i. to refuse leave to enter;

       ii. to refuse entry clearance;

      iii. to refuse a certificate of entitlement under s.10  of  the  2002
           Act;

       iv. to refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or remain and  where
           the result of the decision is that the person has  no  leave  to
           enter or remain, unless the decision is also  a  refusal  of  an
           asylum, protection or human rights claim.

  22. Mr Avery submitted that there is no link between the saved  provisions
      and the transitional provisions.

  23. Furthermore, he submitted that the provisions say nothing about rights
      of appeal. The purpose of the transitional provisions was to enable an
      applicant to continue on the same immigration path as before.

      Assessment

  24. I accept the respondent's contention that the appellant's  submissions
      relate to the provisions of the 2002 Act prior to its amendment by  s.
      15, which held that under s82(1) as then in force, a right  of  appeal
      only lay  against  'immigration  decisions'  prescribed  by  s  82(2).
      Decisions under that  regime  only  constituted  such  an  immigration
      decision where they were refusals to vary leave as a result  of  which
      the subject had  no  leave  (s.  82(2)(d)).  Under  that  regime,  the
      decision under appeal would as asserted by  the  appellant,  not  have
      been appealable.

  25. The decision under appeal however was made on 17 March 2016, and was a
      decision subjected to the amended appeals provisions introduced by the
      2014 Act. It constituted the refusal of  an  application  made  on  12
      October 2015, and represented  itself  consistently  in  the  decision
      letter as a refusal of a human rights claim, appealable  only  on  the
      grounds that the decision was unlawful under s.6 of the  Human  Rights
      Act.

  26. As noted, with effect from  6  April  2015  the  relevant  provisions,
      including the new Part 5 of the 2002 Act applied, unless the case fell
      into a category specified in the revised Commencement Order, which  it
      did not.

  27. The respondent, when refusing the appellant's application, noted  that
      the appellant had a right of appeal against the decision under section
      82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  the
      secretary of state has decided to refuse her human rights claim.

  28. There was accordingly a valid appeal against the  decision  to  refuse
      the appellant's human rights claim.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






               Signed      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                8 November 2018

