
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09681/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 09 March 2020                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                           Appellant
                                    -and-
                                MUHAMMAD [Q]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                             Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. E. Turfan, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                   Mr A. Rizvi, legal representative,
Salam & Co. Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Pakistan.  He initially arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 25 November 2009, as a student.  He was  subsequently
    granted further leave to remain  as  a  student  until  6  March  2014.
    However, his leave was curtailed on 2 July 2012. He reapplied for leave
    to remain as a student on 30 August 2014 and on 22 October 2014 he  was
    granted further leave to remain in this capacity until 22 January 2015.



2.   The Appellant applied for asylum on 30 May  2013  but  his  application
    was refused and certified as clearly unfounded on 24 November 2014.  He
    made further submissions and his  asylum  claim  was  reconsidered  but
    refused on 15 June 2017 and he became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  9
    February 2018.

3.   He made a human rights claim on 27 March 2019, which was refused on  10
    May 2019.    The Appellant appealed against this  decision  and  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal  allowed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 September 2019. The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department appealed against her decision and First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grant granted her permission to appeal on 6 January 2020.   When  doing
    so he stated  "in finding that an uncle who is named on an  educational
    and healthcare plan has a "parental relationship" with his nephew,  the
    judge has arguably misdirected himself as to what constitutes  parental
    responsibility and has consequently erred in law in the application  of
    section 117B(6) and in allowing the appeal".

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer and Counsel for the Respondent  both
    made oral  submissions  and  I  have  referred  to  them  below,  where
    relevant.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The Respondent does not assert that he is entitled to leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules. Instead, he submits that he is entitled to
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules in order to  ensure  that
    no breach of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    occurs.

6.   Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal was correct  to  apply
    R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27. The Appellant does not submit that the Judge erred in law when
    she found in paragraphs 27 to 30 of her decision,  that  the  Appellant
    had established a family and private life in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    refusing him leave  to  remain  would  give  rise  to  consequences  of
    sufficient gravity so as to  breach  these  rights.  The  parties  also
    agreed that for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the ECHR such  breaches
    would be in accordance with the law as the Respondent was not  entitled
    to leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)  or  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules and that it was also  potentially  justified  as  the
    Appellant was entitled to maintain effective immigration rules in order
    to protect the economy of the United Kingdom and ensure  public  order.



7.   The question at issue between the  parties  was  whether  it  would  be
    proportionate to fail to grant the Appellant leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom in the context of the family's particular  circumstances
    for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. As a consequence, sections 117A, B and D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had to be applied.

8.   In particular, section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 states:

     "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public
    interest".

9.   However, it also states that:

     "(6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".


10.      It  is  not  disputed  that  the  Appellant's  nephew,  MSQ,  is  a
    qualifying child, for the purposes of section 117D of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  he  is  a  British  citizen.  At
    paragraph 35 of her decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Hawden-Beal
    also noted that the  Appellant  had  conceded  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Respondent's nephew, MSQ, to leave the  United
    Kingdom, where his mother and sister, who were also  British  citizens,
    resided and where he was settled in a special school and in receipt  of
    appropriate services from the NHS and his local  authority.   This  was
    not challenged by the Appellant in her grounds of appeal.

11.  In R (on the application of RK) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (s117B(6) "parental relationship")  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  00031
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

     "1. It is not necessary for an individual to have "parental
    responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.
      2. Whether a person who is not a biological parent is in a "parental
    relationship" with a child for the purposes of s.117B(6) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 depends on the individual
    circumstances and whether the role that individual plays establishes he
    or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent".

12.  At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that,  in
    order to "step into the shoes" of a parent, a person would have to be a
    step-parent. However, I find that this analysis does not  conform  with
    the view formed by the Upper Tribunal in RK where the Tribunal stressed
    in its headnote  that  an  assessment  had  to  be  undertaken  of  the
    individual circumstances of the child and the person who was not his or
    her biological parent and also the role that person plays in  the  life
    of that particular child.

13.  By submitting that the ratio in RK could only apply  to  "step-parents"
    the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department's  representative  was
    trying to reinstate a legal precondition to the concept of a  "parental
    relationship". In paragraph 34 of that decision, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb correctly noted  that  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  provides  no
    definition of  what  amounts  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship.

14.  At paragraph 40 of his decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb also  added
    that:

     "It was common ground that the definition of a "parent" in para 6 of
    the Immigration Rules was not determinative of whether the applicant
    had a "parental relationship" with her grandchildren...para 6 has no
    direct application to Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002".

15.  This is  important  in  my  view  as  it  is  in  paragraph  6  of  the
    Immigration Rules where an analogy is drawn between a birth parent  and
    a step or adoptive parent. No such analogy is drawn in Part 5A.

16.  In addition, in paragraph 42  of  his  decision  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb stated:

     "Whether a person is in a "parental relationship" with a child must,
    necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances. Those
    circumstances will include what role they actually play in caring for
    and making decisions in relation to the child. That is likely to be the
    most significant factor..."

17.  Therefore, it is clear from RK that the  Respondent  did  not  have  to
    acquire a parental responsibility or special guardianship order  before
    he could be recognised as having entered into a  parental  relationship
    with MSQ. By analogy it is also clear that MSQ's mother did not have to
    enter  into  any  legal  relationship,  such  as  marriage   or   civil
    partnership, before the person caring for and  making  decisions  about
    MSQ could be said to be in a parental relationship with him.

18.  The Home Office Presenting Officer sought to rely on  paragraph  42  of
    Ayinde and Tinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015] 560  (IAC).  The
    ratio of this case did  not  address  the  definition  of  a  "parental
    relationship" but looked at the rights of elderly relatives of  British
    citizens who would prefer to be cared  for  by  a  family  member.  The
    extent to which social services in  England  could  provide  additional
    services to MSQ was not determinative of the question  of  whether  the
    Appellant had a parental relationship with MSQ.

19.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal had  considered  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions relied upon in RK. They did not directly apply
    to the use of the phrase "parental relationship" in section 117B(6) but
    offered a useful guide to the  factors  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    believed  to  be  relevant  when  considering  the  phrase  within  the
    Immigration Rules. Paragraph 11.2.1 of the Instructions  did  say  that
    "this means that an applicant living with a child of their partner  and
    taking a step-parent role in the child's life could have a 'genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with them...". However,  the  guidance
    did not suggest that being a step-parent was a pre-condition of  having
    such a relationship. It went on to list a number of other factors which
    cumulatively could give rise to the existence of such  a  relationship.
    They included being willing and able to look after  the  child,  living
    with the child, the views of the child and  the  extent  to  which  the
    person makes an active contribution to the child's life.

20.  In the current appeal,  MSQ's  individual  circumstances  included  the
    fact that his father had no direct or indirect contact with him and had
    been prohibited by the Family Division of the High Court from doing  so
    for the foreseeable future. This was clear from  the  judgment  of  Sir
    James Munby, then President of the Family Division, in the case of Q  v
    Q (No 3), handed down on 28 January 2016. He noted  that  MSQ's  father
    had been convicted of two sexual offences involving male  children  and
    that MSQ had not seen or had contact with his father since very shortly
    after his father's first  arrest  in  February  2009.  There  had  been
    protracted  family  court  proceeding  in  which  the   father   sought
    supervised and/or indirect contact with  MSQ.  However,  the  President
    found that it was not in his best interests for an order for supervised
    or indirect contact  to  be  made;  given  the  risk  that  his  father
    continued to pose to male children. The risk to MSQ was also  found  to
    be an enhanced one due to his  special  educational  needs  which  were
    likely to render him  more  vulnerable  to  being  groomed  for  sexual
    purposes.

21.  Therefor MSQ had not had a male  parental  figure  in  his  life  since
    early in 2009. In contrast MSQ's mother's  letter,  dated  26  December
    2018, confirmed that the Respondent had been living with her,  MSQ  and
    his older sister for the past 9 years. This was also confirmed  by  the
    Appellant's GP records which indicated that he was  registered  at  the
    same address as his sister and that he first sought assistance  from  a
    doctor at the practice on 20 June 2011.

22.  MSQ had also written a letter, which was in  the  Respondent's  Bundle,
    which referred to the Respondent as "his father and his  big  brother".
    AA, who has cared for MSQ's sister, who has special educational  needs,
    for a few hours each weekend since April 2014, also said in her letter,
    that she "would be extremely upset to see [the  Respondent]  leave  the
    family he has brought a positive outcome  with  the  children  and  has
    helped towards the children up bringing". She  also  described  him  as
    being a father figure to MSQ and his sister.

23.  In my view it is also relevant that in paragraph 21 of his  report  the
    independent social worker also concluded that "if [the Respondent]  was
    to be removed from the family  unit,  it  will  potentially  compromise
    [MSQ's mother's] ability to care for the children on her own". This was
    in the context of Dr. Tuna, a Neurology Consultant, confirming  in  her
    letter,  dated  3  September  2018,  that  MSQ's  mother  suffers  from
    epilepsy, had to take medication for this condition  twice  a  day  and
    would not be fit to drive until she had been free from any seizures for
    six months. A further letter from Poplar Grove Practice, dated 8 August
    2019 also indicated that she suffered from  low  haemoglobin  requiring
    blood transfusions due to being severely anaemic. The letter also noted
    that she was extremely reliant on her brother. This reliance  had  also
    been confirmed in the evidence given by the Respondent and  his  sister
    and the fact that MSQ's older sister has a  number  of  conditions  and
    disabilities which require close attention from his mother. In  such  a
    situation  the  support  of  another  adult  who  offers   a   parental
    relationship is even more significant.

24.  The appellant in RK lost her appeal as both parents were still  in  the
    family unit;  albeit  that  the  mother  was  suffering  from  multiple
    sclerosis. In the current case, MSQ had no  contact  at  all  with  his
    father and his mother's medical conditions and responsibility for MSQ's
    sister somewhat limits her parenting abilities.

25.  For all of these reasons, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-
    Beal did not err in law when he allowed the Respondent's appeal on  the
    basis that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with MSQ and
    where the Appellant had conceded that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect MSQ to leave the United Kingdom.

26.  In her second ground of appeal, the Appellant asserted at  paragraph  7
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal had erred in law by  placing
    weight on  the  Respondent's  private  life  in  paragraph  27  of  her
    decision. However, in that paragraph, the Judge merely noted  that  for
    the purposes of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights
    the Respondent would have formed some level  of  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom on account of the  time  that  he  had  lived  here.  In
    paragraphs 33 and 34 of her decision she made it  clear  that  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights  it
    was not disproportionate for the Appellant to refuse his application on
    private life grounds.

27.  Therefore, she did not err in law in relation to her  decision  on  his
    private life rights.

28.  For all of these reasons, I uphold First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-
    Beal's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal's decision stands.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                                Date 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


