
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/09379/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                               |                                        |
|On 6 June 2019                       |        On 25 June 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     l m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Royston of Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Burns (the Judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 3rd December 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male Zimbabwean citizen born 10th June 1986.

 3. On 6th April 2018 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  human  rights
    application to remain in the UK and refused his application to revoke a
    deportation order made against him on  13th  September  2011.   On  7th
    November 2018 the Respondent issued a supplementary refusal decision.

 4. The appeal was heard by the Judge on 27th  November  2018.   The  Judge
    considered the Appellant's claim that returning him to  Zimbabwe  would
    breach Articles 3 and 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights
    (the  1950  Convention).   The  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's mother, sister and  ex-partner.   The  Judge  considered  a
    bundle of documents submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  comprising
    sections  A  and  B.   This  included  a  report  from   a   consultant
    psychiatrist, Dr D Bell.

 5. The Judge noted that the Appellant's Article 3 claim  was  put  on  the
    basis that firstly the Appellant is at risk of being ill-treated  in  a
    mental health institution in Zimbabwe, and secondly that he is at  risk
    of suicide/self-harm and/or  a  serious  deterioration  in  his  mental
    health.

 6. The Judge did not find that the Appellant was likely to be detained  in
    a mental health institution in Zimbabwe, and found that there was anti-
    psychotic medication available in  Zimbabwe,  and  was  satisfied  that
    there was outpatient treatment available for the Appellant in Zimbabwe.
     The Judge found  the  Appellant  could  expect  to  receive  financial
    assistance from his family in the UK.  The Judge did not find that  the
    Appellant would  be  subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment, and did not find that the Appellant was  able  to  meet  the
    very high threshold to show that he would be at risk of treatment  that
    would breach Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

 7. With reference to Article 8, the Judge found the Respondent's  decision
    to be proportionate.

 8. The appeal was therefore dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. It was contended that the Judge's approach to the medical  and  country
    evidence was materially flawed in four particular  areas  and  reliance
    was placed upon Dr Bell's report.

10. It was submitted that the Judge had firstly erred  in  considering  the
    risk of detention in Zimbabwe.  It was submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to address her  mind  to  what  would  actually  happen  to  the
    Appellant in the event of return and the likely impact upon his  mental
    state.

11. Secondly, it was contended that the  Judge  had  erred  in  considering
    access to treatment/medication in Zimbabwe.  It was submitted that  the
    Judge had failed to engage with the country evidence which demonstrated
    acute shortages in the supply of adequate medication, a severe lack  of
    adequately trained personnel at all levels of psychiatric care,  and  a
    widespread pervasive stigma, with high  levels  of  discrimination,  of
    those found to be suffering from mental illness in Zimbabwe.  There was
    no reference by the Judge to stigma/discrimination,  although  Dr  Bell
    had identified it as representing a potential potent stressor.

12. Thirdly, it was submitted that the Judge had erred in  considering  the
    impact of removal upon the Appellant.  The Judge had not considered the
    significance  in  terms  of  the  Appellant's  mental  health  of   his
    relationships with his family in the UK, particularly his  son.   There
    was no assessment as to the prospective  impact  upon  the  Appellant's
    mental health  of  separation  from  his  family  although  psychiatric
    evidence indicated that this would cause a serious deterioration in his
    psychiatric state.

13. Fourthly, it was submitted that the Judge had erred  in  considering  a
    risk of suicide.   The  psychiatric  evidence  indicated  the  risk  of
    suicide was currently low but this would be elevated to  very  high  if
    the Appellant learned that he was to be removed to Zimbabwe.  The Judge
    at paragraph 36 had recorded that she did not accept there was  a  real
    risk of suicide but provided no reasoning for that finding.

14. A second aspect of the application for permission to appeal related  to
    the Appellant's claim that there  were  very  compelling  circumstances
    which would render his removal from the UK disproportionate.  The Judge
    had  erred  in  considering  this  aspect  of  the  appeal,  which  was
    considered at paragraphs 58-73, by considering another  Appellant,  who
    apparently originated from Somalia.  It was  submitted  that  this  was
    clearly a material error of law.

Permission to Appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Froom in the following terms;

         1.   Permission to appeal is granted because  it  is  arguable  the
             FtTJ erred by referring in the section of her decision dealing
             with the Art 8 balancing exercise to another case involving  a
             Somali Appellant (see [68] and [69]).

         All grounds may be argued.

16. Following the grant of permission to  appeal,  directions  were  issued
    that there should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such that the decision  must
    be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

17. Mr Royston relied upon his skeleton argument dated 6th  June  2019  and
    argued that the FtT decision should be set aside in  its  entirety  and
    remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.

18. In summary Mr Royston firstly addressed paragraphs  58-73  of  the  FtT
    decision which appeared to  deal  with  a  completely  different  case.
    Reliance was placed upon ML (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  844.   It  was
    submitted that because of  the  significance  of  the  error,  fairness
    required the quashing of the FtT decision  in  its  entirety.   It  was
    submitted that even if paragraphs 58-73 were cut and pasted  in  error,
    and the  factual  errors  displayed  did  not  consciously  infect  the
    reasoning in other parts of the judgment, the evidence of lack of  care
    meant that neither the Appellant nor any impartial  observer  could  be
    confident that the Appellant had received a fair hearing.

19. With reference to the consideration by the Judge  of  the  medical  and
    country  evidence  and  the  submission  that  this  consideration  was
    materially flawed in  four  particular  areas  Mr  Royston  relied  and
    expanded  upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the  application   for
    permission to appeal.

20. It was submitted that the Judge had not rejected a  submission  that  a
    person with psychosis is likely to be deprived of liberty  in  Zimbabwe
    where there would be a real risk of a breach  of  Article  3,  but  the
    Judge had rejected the proposition that there was a real  risk  of  the
    Appellant suffering psychosis in Zimbabwe.  It was submitted  that  the
    Judge had failed to give reasons and consider evidence on  this  point.
    The Appellant's case was supported  by  a  psychiatric  report  and  no
    express reasons were given for rejecting the psychiatric opinion.

21. With reference to medication, it was contended that the Judge  appeared
    to accept that the  Appellant  would  need  to  continue  taking  anti-
    psychotic medication in Zimbabwe and when considering the  availability
    of medication and treatment, the Judge had not addressed whether  there
    was a real risk that the Appellant would not receive them.   The  Judge
    had not considered whether satisfactory  treatment  would  actually  be
    obtainable  notwithstanding  the  theoretical  availability   of   some
    treatment, and had not considered whether the Appellant would lack  the
    insight into his condition to seek the necessary treatment, and had not
    considered that the Appellant's family would be unable  to  assist  him
    from the UK.

22. Mrs Aboni, on behalf of the Respondent  conceded  that  the  Judge  had
    materially erred in law in appearing to consider a  Somalian  Appellant
    from paragraph 58 onwards.  It was accepted that the  decision  of  the
    FtT must be set aside because of that material error of law.

23. However Mrs Aboni  submitted  that  the  error  had  not  infected  the
    reasoning of the Judge in relation to Article 3 and submitted that  the
    findings made in relation to Article 3 should be preserved.

24. Mrs Aboni submitted that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  psychiatric
    report prepared by Dr Bell and on  the  issue  of  Article  3  and  the
    availability of mental health treatment in Zimbabwe, the Judge had made
    findings and provided adequate reasons for those findings.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. In my view the  concession  made  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that
    paragraphs 58-73 disclosed a material error of  law  is  rightly  made.
    The Judge has unfortunately referred  to  a  different  Appellant  when
    considering  the  public  interest  considerations  and  the  balancing
    exercise.

26. The Judge at paragraph 60 finds the Appellant  is  not  able  to  speak
    English.  The Appellant can speak English.  At paragraph 63  the  Judge
    refers to reintegration to Somalia, with  the  Appellant  speaking  the
    language of Somalia and having retained his cultural ties.   That  does
    not apply to this Appellant who is from Zimbabwe.

27. At paragraph 68 the Judge makes reference to treatment being  available
    in Somalia which could be paid for by  the  Appellant's  clan.   It  is
    clear that cannot apply to this Appellant.

28. At paragraph 69 the Judge makes reference to the Appellant being  apart
    from his mother for ten years, lacking a basic  education,  and  having
    been away from Somalia for many years and not wanting to return.  There
    is reference to the Appellant's mother being  a  British  citizen  with
    five small children.  The Appellant's mother is not a  British  citizen
    and does not have five small children.  There is further  reference  in
    this paragraph to Somalia.

29. At paragraph 72 there is reference to the Appellant being a  young  man
    previously of good character having committed only one offence.  Again,
    it is clear that this description does not fit the Appellant, who has a
    significant number of criminal convictions.

30. As conceded by the Respondent,  because  of  the  material  error,  the
    decision of the FtT must be set aside.

31. I do not find that it is  appropriate  to  preserve  findings  made  in
    relation to Article 3.

32. I am persuaded that the Judge has  erred  in  law  in  considering  the
    medical and country evidence.  With reference to  detention  the  Judge
    finds at paragraph 32 that the Appellant would not be  detained  as  he
    has been discharged from inpatient care in the UK  despite  the  stress
    and certainly caused by the current immigration proceedings.  The Judge
    also finds that the Appellant  is  not  currently  suffering  from  the
    positive symptoms of psychosis but is in a disassociated state.

33. In my  view  the  Judge  has  erred  by  failing  to  engage  with  the
    psychiatric opinion of Dr Bell.  Under the heading of "Consequences  of
    Return" in the report Dr Bell at paragraph (i) gives the  opinion  that
    it is clear that return  to  Zimbabwe  will  cause  a  significant  and
    serious deterioration in the Appellant's psychiatric state,  and  makes
    reference to the Appellant's relationship with  his  mother,  siblings,
    cousin, and his son and concludes that the  sudden  breaking  of  these
    attachments  would  be  experienced  as  a  traumatic,  violent  event,
    sufficient  to  cause  a  serious  deterioration  in  the   Appellant's
    psychiatric state.  At paragraph (ii) Dr Bell  concludes  that  contact
    with the Appellant's family is a major  factor  in  preventing  further
    deterioration, and removal of that contact would act as a major  factor
    in the deterioration in his psychiatric state.

34. The Judge errs by not analysing the opinion of Dr  Bell  and  does  not
    give adequate reasons for finding that the evidence does not indicate a
    real risk that the Appellant would suffer a further psychotic episode.

35. With reference to access to treatment, the Judge finds that there are a
    number of anti-psychotic medications available in  Zimbabwe,  but  does
    not engage with the country evidence, which indicates acute  shortages,
    a lack of adequately trained psychiatric personnel, and the stigma  and
    discrimination of those found to be suffering from  mental  illness  in
    Zimbabwe.  A failure to engage  with  and  make  findings  on  evidence
    relied upon by the Appellant amounts to an error of law.

36. With reference to the risk of suicide, the Judge at paragraph  36  does
    not accept that there is a real risk of suicide, but does  not  provide
    reasons for that conclusion.  Dr Bell's opinion was that currently  the
    risk of suicide was low, but would be elevated  to  very  high  if  the
    Appellant learned that he was to be removed to Zimbabwe.

37. For the reasons given above, I find that there are errors of law in the
    FtT decision, such that  the  decision  must  be  set  aside.   I  have
    considered paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statements
    and conclude that the appropriate course is to remit this  appeal  back
    to the FtT to be heard afresh with no findings  preserved,  because  of
    the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary
    in order for this decision to be remade.

38. The appeal will be heard at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge Burns.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   This  direction  is
made because of the mental health issues suffered by the Appellant.

Signed                              Date: 16th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date: 16th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
