
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Numbers:
HU/09027/2018

                                          HU/09033/2018

                                          HU/09038/2018

                                          HU/09040/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2019                     |    On 08 May 2019                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     I W
                                    K R B
                                    A J W
                                    A H W
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E Lagunju, of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction because  the  third  and
fourth appellants  are  children.  For  the  same  reason,  I  continue  the
anonymity  direction  under  r.14(1)  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellants.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them.
This direction applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal E.M.M. Smith who, in a decision promulgated on 2 October  2018
    following a hearing on  19  September  2018,  dismissed  their  appeals
    against the respondent's decision of 3 April 2018 which  refused  their
    applications for leave to remain on the basis of their rights to  their
    family and private lives in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellants are nationals of Senegal. The first appellant,  born  on
    20 December 1975, is the husband of the second  appellant,  born  on  3
    April 1985. They are the parents of the  third  appellant,  born  on  6
    September 2006 in the United Kingdom, and the fourth appellant, born on
    1 December 2008 in the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent refused the appellants' applications because he was  not
    satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that   they   met   the
    requirements of Appendix FM and para 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.
    Before the judge, it was accepted (para 20  of  the  judge's  decision)
    that the appellants could not satisfy the requirements of Appendix  FM.
    It was argued that para 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    relevant because the fourth appellant had  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom since he was born in 2008 and that it was not reasonable
    to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.

 4. The judge found that it was reasonable  for  the  fourth  appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom for the purposes of para  276ADE(1)(iv)).  She
    gave her reasons at paras 20-22). She then  considered  the  Article  8
    claims of the appellants outside the Immigration Rules at  paras  23-31
    and concluded that the respondent's decision to refuse  them  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom was not disproportionate (para 32).

 5. On 7 February 2019,  I  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal because I considered it arguable  that,  notwithstanding  that
    the judge had stated  at  para  29  of  her  decision  that  the  minor
    appellants "cannot be visited with the conduct of the parents", she may
    erred in law in taking into account the adverse immigration history  of
    the first and second appellants and/or dishonest or  other  conduct  on
    their part in reaching her finding that it would be reasonable for  the
    fourth appellant to leave the United Kingdom, contrary to the  guidance
    of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53.  I  did
    not limit the terms of the grant of permission and stated that all  the
    grounds may be argued.

 6. At the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  Ms  Lagunju  and  Mr  Whitwell
    confirmed that they did not object to my hearing these appeals.  I  did
    not see any reason to recuse myself. In granting permission, I was only
    considering whether it was arguable that the judge materially erred  in
    law, whereas I would now  have  to  decide  whether  she  did  in  fact
    materially err in law.

Application for permission to make an application at the  hearing  to  amend
the grounds

 7. Ms Lagunju requested permission to make an application at  the  hearing
    to amend her grounds.

 8. I asked Ms Lagunju to explain  why  I  should  entertain  such  a  late
    application given that the appellants were notified of the hearing date
    by a Notice of Hearing dated 14 March 2019. Ms Lagunju informed me that
    she was able to take responsibility for two days of the period  because
    she was only able to  read  the  papers  the  day  before  the  hearing
    although she received them two days earlier. Upon reading  the  papers,
    she noticed that she did not have the judge's decision which  she  then
    requested and which she received on the morning of the hearing.

 9. Whilst I accept that the appellants ought not to be prejudiced for  the
    two-delay for which  Counsel  had  accepted  responsibility,  the  fact
    remained that I was provided with no explanation for the  remainder  of
    the delay. Ms Lagunju suggested that it might be  possible  that  there
    had been an oversight on the part  of  her  instructing  solicitors  in
    instructing her late but this amounted to no more than  speculation  on
    her part. There  was  simply  no  evidential  or  other  basis  for  Ms
    Lagunju's suggestion that the delay should not  be  attributed  to  the
    appellants. There was simply no explanation for the  delay  apart  from
    the two-day delay for which Ms Lagunju took responsibility.

10. The judge's decision was promulgated on 2 October 2018. The  appellants
    have therefore had from that time to lodge the grounds upon which  they
    sought to rely. They were represented when they made their  application
    of 8 October 2018 to the First-tier Tribunal for permission  and  their
    application of 17 January 2019 to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission.
    Permission was granted on 7 February 2019. The Notice  of  Hearing  was
    sent to them on 14 March 2019. They have had ample  time  to  lodge  an
    application for permission to amend their grounds.  I  had  no  written
    notice in the form of a skeleton argument of the  proposed  grounds  so
    that I could evaluate the merits of the proposed grounds without having
    to permit Ms Lagunju to argue them at the  hearing.  There  were  other
    cases in the list to  be  heard,  including  one  by  an  unrepresented
    appellant which required a full re-hearing of the evidence.

11. Relying upon the Court of Appeal's judgment in Kaur [2018] EWCA Civ 411
    and the overriding objective, I refused to allow Ms Lagunju to make  an
    application at the hearing to amend the grounds.

Background

12. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on 1  December
    2003. The second appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  in
    2005. They met in the United Kingdom in 2005  and  married  later  that
    year. Their two children were born in the United Kingdom.

13. In 2012, the second  and  third  appellants  returned  to  Senegal  and
    remained there for two years. In 2014, they entered the United  Kingdom
    illegally via France. The second appellant made use of forged documents
    to travel from France to the United Kingdom.

14. The first and second appellants  have  each  worked  illegally  in  the
    United Kingdom and made  use  of  fraudulent  identification  documents
    whilst in the United Kingdom. On 14 June 2017, the first appellant  was
    sentenced to a 6-month suspended sentence for possession of  fraudulent
    documents. On 26 April 2017, the second  appellant  received  the  same
    sentence for similar offences.

The issues

15. I have already stated the reason  why  I  granted  permission  (para  5
    above). At the commencement of the hearing,  I  asked  the  parties  to
    address me on the question whether,  in  essence,  I  had  misread  the
    judge's decision, in that, it appeared that para 29 of her decision, to
    which I referred when I granted permission, did not concern the judge's
    assessment of the requirement in para 276ADE(1)(iv) but her  assessment
    of the Article 8 claims outside the Immigration Rules.

16. The appellants' written grounds contend that:

    (i)     The judge erred in law by failing to provide  powerful  reasons
          why the fourth appellant's removal was reasonable. In this regard,
          the grounds rely upon the judgment  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (the
          President and Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley) in MT and ET (child's
          best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).
          In this regard, the grounds rely upon para 34 of MT and ET.

    (ii)    The judge gave insufficient weight to the fact that the  fourth
          appellant had lived in the United  Kingdom  for  nine  years  nine
          months from birth.

Submissions

17. Ms Lagunju submitted that the judge failed to identify powerful reasons
    for leave to remain to be refused in the  fourth  appellant's  case  or
    state why, in the absence of such powerful reasons, para  276ADE(1)(iv)
    was not satisfied.

18. Ms Lagunju submitted that the judge had applied the wrong test at  para
    22, when she referred to it  not  being  unreasonable  for  the  fourth
    appellant to be refused leave whereas the correct test was  whether  it
    was reasonable for the fourth appellant to leave the United Kingdom. As
    I informed Ms Lagunju at that time, this was  not  in  the  appellants'
    grounds.

19. In relation to KO (Nigeria), Ms Lagunju submitted that it  was  unclear
    why the judge concluded that it was reasonable for the fourth appellant
    to leave the United Kingdom other than the adverse immigration  history
    and criminal convictions of the first and second appellants. Ms Lagunju
    submitted that the judge must have relied upon the adverse  immigration
    history and criminal convictions of the first and second appellants.

20. Ms Lagunju accepted that, in assessing the  Article  8  claims  of  the
    appellants outside the Immigration Rules, the  judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account the immigration history and criminal  convictions  of
    the first and second appellants, at para 29 of her decision.

21. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge did give reasons for finding  that
    it would be reasonable for the fourth appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, i.e. that he would be leaving with his parents (para  21)  and
    therefore the family unit would be intact; that  the  fourth  appellant
    had no health issues (para 22); that the fourth appellant was not at  a
    critical juncture in his education (para 22); and that there was a lack
    of evidence for a finding that it would be unreasonable for the  fourth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom (para 22).

22. Mr Whitwell referred me to the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  the
    appeal of NS in the judgment in KO (Nigeria). He asked me to note  that
    the Supreme Court had not disturbed the finding in the case  of  NS  in
    the judgment in KO (Nigeria),  that  it  was  reasonable  for  NS'  two
    qualifying children to leave the  United  Kingdom  notwithstanding  the
    length of residence of the children.

23. Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  requirement  in  R  (MA  (Pakistan)  &
    Others) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 for "powerful reasons" to be  given  for  a
    decision not to grant leave to remain in a case involving a  child  who
    has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  or  more   was
    inconsistent with para 18 of the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria).

24. In any event, Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had  considered  the
    facts of the instant case and, given the  lack  of  evidence,  she  was
    entitled to conclude  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  fourth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

25. Pursuant to his duty of candour, Mr Whitwell brought  to  my  attention
    the current Home Office guidance where at page 64 of 104, it is  stated
    that "... we would not normally expect a qualifying child to leave  the
    UK".

26. Ms Lagunju submitted that para 49 of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in
    MA  (Pakistan)  stating  that  powerful  reasons  were   required   for
    concluding that it is reasonable for a  child  who  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom in excess of seven years to leave the United Kingdom was
    not inconsistent with KO (Nigeria). In KO (Nigeria), the Supreme  Court
    said that it  was  "inevitably  relevant  ...  to  consider  where  the
    parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to  be,  since
    it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them" and that,
    it was only if, even on that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for
    the child to leave that the provision may give the parents a  right  to
    remain. She submitted that the respondent's guidance  stated  the  same
    thing and was not inconsistent with KO (Nigeria).

27. Ms Lagunju submitted that, in any event, KO (Nigeria)  was  not  before
    the judge and therefore the judge  had  to  follow  MA  (Pakistan)  and
    explain what powerful reasons there were to conclude that it  would  be
    reasonable for the fourth appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom.  She
    relied upon MT and ET which also involved the use of a  false  document
    by a parent and  the  parent's  poor  immigration  history.  The  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that the parent's conduct  was  not  so  bad  as  to
    demonstrate powerful reasons for concluding that it was reasonable  for
    the child to leave the United Kingdom. Ms Lagunju  submitted  that  the
    facts of the instant case were similar.

28. I reserved my decision. I heard submissions  from  Ms  Lagunju  and  Mr
    Whitwell concerning the appropriate disposal of the appeal following in
    the event that I concluded that the judge had materially erred in law.

Assessment

29. At paras 44 and 49 of MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ said:

      "44.  ... It seems to me that there are powerful reasons  why,  having
            regard in particular to the need to treat the best interests of
            the child as a primary consideration, it may  be  thought  that
            once they have been in the UK for seven years, or are otherwise
            citizens of the UK, they should be allowed  to  stay  and  have
            their position legitimised if it would  not  be  reasonable  to
            expect them to leave, even though  the  effect  is  that  their
            possibly undeserving families can remain with them.  I  do  not
            accept that this amounts to a reintroduction of the old  DP5/96
            policy. As the  Court  of  Appeal  observed  in  NF  (Ghana)  v
            Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 906,
            the starting point under that policy  was  that  a  child  with
            seven years' residence could be refused leave to remain only in
            exceptional circumstances. The current provision falls short of
            such a presumption, and of course the position with respect  to
            the children of foreign criminals is even tougher.

      49.   ... the fact that the child has been in the UK for  seven  years
            would  need   to   be   given   significant   weight   in   the
            proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:   first,
            because of its relevance to determining the nature and strength
            of  the  child's  best  interests;  and  second,   because   it
            establishes as a starting point that leave  should  be  granted
            unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

      (my emphasis)

30. The concluding words in para 49 should not be taken out of context.  It
    is quite clear from the first sentence of para 44 that  Elias  LJ  said
    that the child should be allowed to stay if it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. In  other  words,  the
    mere fact that the child has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven
    years or more does not obviate the need to consider whether it would be
    reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom. It is also  clear
    from the final sentence of para 44 that Elias LJ did not consider  that
    there was any presumption that leave to remain should only  be  refused
    in exceptional circumstances.

31. However, I recognise that the panel in MT and ET said at para 33:

      "33.  On the present state of the law, as set out in MA,  we  need  to
             look for "powerful reasons" why a child who  has  been  in  the
             United  Kingdom  for  over  ten  years   should   be   removed,
             notwithstanding that her best interests lie in remaining."

32. I recognise that the  panel  in  MT  and  ET  may  have  considered  it
    unnecessary to report the case for what it said at para 33  because  it
    considered that the point was established.

33.  Nevertheless,  for  the  reasons  given  in  paras  34-38  below,  the
    proposition,  in  reliance  upon  MA  (Pakistan),  that  there   is   a
    presumption or starting point that leave should be granted to  a  child
    who has lived in the United Kingdom continuously  for  seven  years  or
    more unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary is  inconsistent
    with, and cannot survive, the judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria). I must therefore follow the judgment in KO (Nigeria).

34. At paras 17-19 of the Supreme Court's judgment in  KO  (Nigeria),  Lord
    Carnwath said:

      "17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the substance  of
             the rule without material change, but this time in the  context
             of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it was
             intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
             "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in  MA  (Pakistan)
             Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ
             705, [2016] 1 WLR 5093,  para  36,  there  is  nothing  in  the
             subsection to import a reference to the conduct of the  parent.
             Section 117B sets out a number of  factors  relating  to  those
             seeking leave to enter or remain, but criminality is not one of
             them. Subsection 117B(6) is on its face free-standing, the only
             qualification being that the person relying on it is not liable
             to deportation. The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI
             guidance (para 10 above) seems to  me  wholly  appropriate  and
             sound in law, in the context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph
             276ADE(1)(iv).

      18.   On the other hand, as the IDI guidance  acknowledges,  it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts  to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to
             be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to  be
             with them. To that extent the record of the parents may  become
             indirectly material, if it leads to their  ceasing  to  have  a
             right to remain here, and having to leave. It is only if,  even
             on that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to
             leave that the provision  may  give  the  parents  a  right  to
             remain. The  point  was  well-expressed  by  Lord  Boyd  in  SA
             (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  2017
             SLT 1245:

                 "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an  assessment  of
                  whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                  UK one has to address the question, 'Why would the  child
                  be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case  such
                  as this there  can  only  be  one  answer:  'because  the
                  parents have no right to remain in the UK'.  To  approach
                  the question in any other way strips away the context  in
                  which the assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."



      19.   He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar  point  in
             considering the "best interests" of children in the context  of
             section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
             in  EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                 "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the  best
                  interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
                  the facts are as they are  in  the  real  world.  If  one
                  parent has no right to remain, but the other parent does,
                  that is the background against which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. If neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,
                  then that is the background against which the  assessment
                  is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be:  is  it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent  with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?"

                 To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise
             in MA (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree.  There
             is nothing in the section to suggest that  "reasonableness"  is
             to be considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the
             children find themselves.

            (My emphasis)

35. MA (Pakistan) was considered at length  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria). Lord Carnwath did not quote  para  49  or  any  part  of  MA
    (Pakistan) that referred to such a presumption or starting  point.  Nor
    did Lord Carnwath approve of any such presumption or starting point  in
    terms. To the contrary, the fact that Lord Carnwath said in terms  that
    "it seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
    the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
    since it will normally be reasonable for the child  to  be  with  them"
    plainly indicates that there is no such presumption or starting point.

36.  It  is  also  relevant  to  take  account  of  the   Supreme   Court's
    consideration of the appeal of NS in KO (Nigeria), at paras 46  to  51.
    There were two qualifying children in  the  appeal  of  NS.  They  were
    qualifying children by reason of their length of residence. One of  the
    children had lived in the United Kingdom for ten  years.  Both  parents
    had been involved in a scam by which they (and numerous others) falsely
    claimed to have  successfully  completed  postgraduate  courses  at  an
    institution called Cambridge College of Learning. At  para  50  of  the
    judgment in KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court quoted from  paras  198-199
    of the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins where  he  said,  inter
    alia, that:

            "Given [the behaviour  of  the  parents]  I  would  consider  it
             outrageous for them to be permitted to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom. They must go and in all of the  circumstances  I  find
             that the other appellants must go with them."

37. Lord Carnwath then said this:

      "51.  Mr Knafler supports the other appellants in their  challenge  to
             the reasoning of MM (Uganda). He says that it is  even  clearer
             in the context of section 117B that parental misconduct  is  to
             be disregarded. I accept that UTJ Perkins' final conclusion  is
             arguably open to the interpretation that  the  "outrageousness"
             of the parents' conduct was somehow relevant to the  conclusion
             under section 117B(6). However, read in its full context  I  do
             not think he erred in that respect. He had  correctly  directed
             himself as to the  wording  of  the  subsection.  The  parents'
             conduct was relevant in that it meant that they  had  to  leave
             the country. As I have explained (para 18  above),  it  was  in
             that context that it  had  to  be  considered  whether  it  was
             reasonable for the children to  leave  with  them.  Their  best
             interests would have been for the whole family to remain  here.
             But in a context where the parents had to  leave,  the  natural
             expectation would be that the children would go with them,  and
             there was nothing in the evidence  reviewed  by  the  judge  to
             suggest that that would be other than reasonable.

38. There was simply no mention of any presumption  or  that  the  starting
    point is that leave must be granted unless there are  powerful  reasons
    to the contrary.

39. I am grateful to Mr Whitwell who referred me to the current Home Office
    guidance. He said that page 64 of 104 states that  "...  we  would  not
    normally expect a qualifying child to leave the UK".   A  copy  of  the
    guidance was not submitted because the point only arose at the hearing,
    although both Ms Lagunju and Mr Whitwell had an opportunity to consider
    the relevant part of the guidance which Mr Whitwell was able to  access
    on his laptop in court.

40. I accessed on the internet a copy of the Home Office guidance entitled:
    "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as  a  Partner
    or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes", version 4.0, published 11
    April 2019. The relevant page was page 68,  not  64,  of  104.  It  may
    therefore be that I was not able  to  find  the  same  version  of  the
    guidance as the version that Ms Lagunju and Mr Whitwell  considered  at
    the hearing. Nevertheless, the relevant wording  is  the  same.  It  is
    necessary to quote  the  following  paragraphs  from  page  68  of  the
    guidance:


        "Will the consequence of refusal of the  application  be  that  the
        child is required to leave the UK?


        The decision maker must consider whether the effect of  refusal  of
        the application would be, or would be likely to be, that the  child
        would have to leave the UK. This will not be  the  case  where,  in
        practice, the child will, or is likely to, continue to live in  the
        UK with another parent or primary carer. This will be likely to  be
        the case where for example:


             (    the child does not live with the applicant
             (    the child's parents are not living together on a permanent
               basis  because  the  applicant  parent  has  work  or  other
               commitments which require them  to  live  apart  from  their
               partner and child
             (    the child's other parent lives in the UK and the applicant
               parent has been here as a visitor and therefore undertook to
               leave the UK at the end of their visit  as  a  condition  of
               their visit visa or leave to enter


        If the departure of the parent or carer would  not  result  in  the
        child being required to leave the UK, because the child will (or is
        likely to) remain living here with another parent or primary carer,
        then the question of whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child
        to leave the UK will not arise. In these  circumstances,  paragraph
        EX.1.(a) does not apply.


        However,  where  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
        relationship between the applicant and the child,  the  removal  of
        the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that child.
        For that reason, the decision maker will  still  need  to  consider
        whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is  appropriate  in
        light of all the real-life circumstances of the case,  taking  into
        account the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration
        and the impact on the child of the applicant's departure  from  the
        UK, or them having to leave the UK with them. If it  is  considered
        that refusal would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
        applicant, the child or their family, leave will fall to be granted
        on the basis of exceptional circumstances.


        Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?


        If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is  likely
        to be, that the child would have to  leave  the  UK,  the  decision
        maker must consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
        child to leave the UK.


        Where there is a qualifying child


        A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child  who  has
        an automatic right of abode in the UK, to  live  here  without  any
        immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
        British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
        period of at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of
        application, which recognises that over time children start to  put
        down roots and to integrate into life in the UK. The starting point
        is that we would not normally expect a qualifying  child  to  leave
        the UK. It is normally in a child's best  interest  for  the  whole
        family to remain."

            (my underlining and italicising)

41. It is plain from the words I  have  underlined  that  the  Home  Office
    guidance has not been updated to take account of the  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) notwithstanding that it was published  on
    11 April 2019 and the Supreme Court's  judgment  was  delivered  on  24
    October 2018. In any event,  the  words  I  have  both  underlined  and
    italicised above are inconsistent with the Supreme Court's judgment  in
    KO (Nigeria) where Lord Carnwath said that it was "inevitably  relevant
    ... to consider where the parents, apart from the  relevant  provision,
    are expected to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child
    to be with them."

42. I turn to consider the instant case.

43. The first issue is whether the judge  took  into  account  the  adverse
    immigration history and conduct of the first and second  appellants  in
    reaching her finding that it was reasonable for the fourth appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom for the purposes of para 276ADE(1)(iv).

44. The judge considered this issue at paras 20-22, which read:

      "20.  Mr Azmi accepted that  the  appellants  could  not  satisfy  the
            provisions of appendix FM but argued that  paragraph  27ADE(iv)
            was relevant in that the [fourth appellant] was born in  the UK
            in 2008 and has lived his entire life here and it would not  be
            reasonable to expect him to leave the UK. I have considered the
            numerous documents in relation to  this  appellant's  schooling
            (AB p61-69) and his witness statement (AB p71).  He  is  now  9
            years of age and I have little doubt he  is  engaged  with  his
            friends at school and follows the  normal  social  pursuits  of
            football with his friends. He is in good health  and  has  been
            brought up in a family environment excluding the  2  years  his
            brother and mother went to Senegal when he was 4 years of age.

      21.   I have taken note of the authorities referred to by Mr  Azmi  in
            his skeleton  argument  in  regard  to  the  best  interest  of
            children. I also  take  note  that  this  appellant  cannot  be
            visited with  the  immigration  and  criminal  conduct  of  his
            parents. I have of course considered section 55 of the 2009 Act
            in  that  the  best  interest  of  a  child   are   a   primary
            consideration. In R (on the application of Osanwenwenze) v SSHD
            2014 EWHC 1563 the claimant's 14-year-old stepson from  Nigeria
            had been in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years  and  had
            leave to remain in his own right. It was held that this was  an
            important but  not  an  overriding  consideration  and  it  was
            reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant's  family  including  the
            stepson to relocate to Nigeria.  The  parents  had  experienced
            life there into adulthood and would be able to provide for  the
            children and help them to reintegrate.

      22.   There are no health issues in regard to [the fourth  appellant],
            he appears to be a normal 9-year-old child who has settled well
            into school but has not yet reached secondary school age. There
            is no evidence  before  me  that  should  he  with  his  family
            relocate to Senegal that it would be unreasonable for him to be
            included. He is at an early stage in his education and there is
            no evidence before me it cannot be continued in Senegal. Having
            considered all the material before me l am  satisfied  that  it
            would not be unreasonable to expect [the fourth  appellant]  to
            relocate with his family, should they return to Senegal.  There
            are no features in his case that would make it unreasonable  to
            refuse leave under paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules.  The  fourth
            appellant is therefore not a qualifying child.

45. Having reached her finding that it would not be  unreasonable  for  the
    fourth appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom,  the  judge  turned  to
    consider the appellants' Article 8 claims in line  with  the  five-step
    approach explained at para 17 of R (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL  27,  at
    paras 23-32 which read:

      "23.  However, I am satisfied that as a whole these appeals should  be
            considered outside the Rules under article 8.

      24.   ...

      25.   ...

      26.   ...

      27.   Having considered the above authorities and  the  facts,  it  is
            for me to decide whether any interference is proportionate.


            28.   The 1st and 2nd appellants' conduct whilst in  the  UK  is
            quite appalling. They have remained here illegally and  did  so
            well before their children  were  born.  Each  has  used  false
            documents at will for employment purposes.  The  2nd  appellant
            has used false documents to leave the UK and  enter  again  via
            France. The lst appellant secured employment in a school in the
            name of his cousin and the usual CRB checks  that  are  carried
            out would not have been carried out against the lst   appellant
            but his cousin. Such conduct potentially undermines the  safety
            of children at school and will  be  perceived  by  the  general
            public as reprehensible. The lst  and 2nd  appellant's  private
            life of which there is no evidence before me  would  have  been
            achieved during their time unlawfully in the UK. In  regard  to
            section 117B I must have regard to the public interest and I am
            satisfied that taking the 1st and  2nd  appellants'  conduct  I
            have no hesitation finding that their removal from the UK is in
            the public interest.


            29.  However, this family must be considered as  a  single  unit
            and not least the interest of the 3rd and  4th  appellants  who
            cannot be visited with the conduct of the parents.  Each  child
            is in school and each is doing well. I have read all the school
            material (AB p16-69) and the statements they each made (AB p70-
            72). I have already found that paragraph 276ADE does not  apply
            to the 4th appellant but  my  assessment  under  article  8  is
            performed taking his and the entire  families  [sic]  interests
            into account. The family life that exists, exists between them.
            The 1st and 2nd appellants spent many years in  Senegal  before
            coming to the UK.  The  2nd  and  3rd  appellants  returned  to
            Senegal and lived there for 2 years during  the  ill-health  of
            the 2nd appellant's mother. There was no concern for the return
            of the 3rd appellant to Senegal where he remained for 2 years.

            30.   Mr  Azmi  suggests  in  his  skeleton  argument  that  the
            appellants have integrated in the UK  (para  17)  however,  the
            extent of the 1st and 2nd appellants' integration is to act  in
            a dishonest way for many years. Indeed as Mr Smith argued it is
            possible the criminal courts when sentencing the 2nd  appellant
            were unaware of the extent of her criminality (RB  D12):  In  a
            letter to the 2nd appellant her solicitors  indicated  that  if
            the Crown had been aware that  the  appellant  had  been  using
            forged documents for work she would have been  charged  with  a
            more serious indictable only  offence  which  would  have  been
            dealt with at the Crown Court. Therefore the  extent  of  these
            appellant's [sic] integration into the  LJK  is  undermined  by
            their dishonest actions. However, I accept that the 3rd and 4th
            appellants have integrated into the UK and each has developed a
            circle of friends and are doing well. None of  the  appellants'
            relatives gave evidence even though a relative  drove  them  to
            court but did  not  come  inside.  However,  if  they  do  have
            relatives with whom they mix it serves to  establish  that  the
            2nd and 3rd appellants have been brought  up  in  a  Senegalese
            culture.

            31.  It is for this court to balance all  the  evidence  it  has
            both for and against the appellants. The public  interest  must
            be factored in. Having done so I am satisfied  that  they  will
            return as a family  unit  and,  therefore,  there  will  be  no
            disruption to their  family  life.  I  am  satisfied  that  any
            private life in regard to the 1st and 2nd appellants  has  been
            achieved during their unlawful stay in the UK and in regard  to
            the 3rd and 4th appellants any private life is in  its  infancy
            and their  return  with  their  parents  will  not  cause  such
            disruption to be disproportionate.

            32.  I am satisfied that to refuse leave to these appellants  to
            remain in the UK is not disproportionate."

46. As can be seen from the structure of the judge's decision that  it  was
    in connection with her  consideration  of  the  appellants'  Article  8
    claims outside the Immigration Rules in line with Razgar that she  took
    into account the adverse immigration history and conduct of  the  first
    and second appellants at para 30, having made clear at para 29 that the
    third and fourth appellants could not be 'visited' with the conduct  of
    their parents.

47. Accordingly, having had the benefit of considering the judge's decision
    in greater detail than I may have done when I was  considering  whether
    to grant permission, I am satisfied that the judge did not in fact take
    into account the adverse immigration history and conduct of  the  first
    and  second  appellants  in  reaching  her  finding  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the fourth appellant to leave the UK for the  purposes
    of para 276ADE(1)(iv).

48. Ms Lagunju submitted that it is difficult to see  why  else  the  judge
    concluded that it would not be unreasonable for the fourth appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom. This submission simply  ignores  the  reasons
    the judge  gave  at  paras  20-22  of  her  decision.  As  Mr  Whitwell
    submitted, the judge's reasons were:  (i)  that  the  fourth  appellant
    would be leaving with his parents and therefore the family  unit  would
    be intact (para 21); (ii) that  the  fourth  appellant  had  no  health
    issues (para 22); (iii) that the fourth appellant was not at a critical
    juncture in his education (para 22); and (iv) that there was a lack  of
    evidence for a finding that it would be  unreasonable  for  the  fourth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom (para 22).

49. I have already dealt with the submission that  MA  (Pakistan)  requires
    powerful reasons to be given by a judge for finding that  it  would  be
    reasonable for a child who has lived in the United Kingdom in excess of
    seven years to leave the United Kingdom. As I have said above, this  is
    inconsistent with KO (Nigeria) which is binding on the Tribunal.

50. Ms Lagunju submitted that, given that the judgment in KO (Nigeria)  had
    not been delivered at the time of the decision of the judge whereas  MA
    (Pakistan) had been, the judge was nevertheless bound to have explained
    what powerful reasons  there  were  for  concluding  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the fourth appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  The
    difficulty with this submission is that, as I have the benefit  of  the
    judgment in KO (Nigeria), I must apply it in order to decide whether or
    not the judge had materially erred in law notwithstanding that she  did
    not have the benefit of the judgment in KO (Nigeria).

51. As I said at para 18 above, Ms Lagunju did not have permission to argue
    that the judge had applied the wrong  test  when  she  referred  to  it
    being not unreasonable for the fourth appellant  to  be  refused  leave
    when the test was whether it was reasonable for the fourth appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom. In any event, there is no substance  in  this
    submission,  given  that  it  is  abundantly  clear  from  the  judge's
    reasoning as a whole that she was  deciding  the  question  whether  it
    would be in breach of Article 8 if the fourth appellant  had  to  leave
    the United Kingdom if he lost his appeal.

52. Finally, Ms Lagunju sought to compare the facts  of  the  instant  case
    with the facts in MT and ET. However, as the courts have said  on  many
    occasions, it is unhelpful to make factual comparisons  between  cases.
    In MT and ET, the child ET had lived in the United Kingdom for over ten
    years, as at the date that the Upper Tribunal re-made the  decision  on
    the appeal, from the age of four years. She was fourteen years  old  at
    the date of the Upper Tribunal's decision. As the Tribunal  (President,
    Blake J) and Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor)  said  in  Azimi-Moayed  and
    others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    00197(IAC) seven years from age four is likely to be  more  significant
    to a child that the first seven years of life.

53. In contrast, as at the date of the decision before  the  judge  in  the
    instant case, the fourth appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for
    nine years nine months from birth. The parent in MT and ET had received
    a community order for using a false document to obtain  employment.  In
    the instant case, both parents had received suspended sentences  for  6
    months. More importantly, the first appellant had secured employment in
    a school in the name of his cousin. The judge said that the  usual  CRB
    checks would have been carried out against the name of his  cousin  and
    not the first appellant, that such conduct potentially  undermines  the
    safety of children at school and  will  be  perceived  by  the  general
    public as reprehensible.

54. This is the context in which it fell to be considered whether,  on  the
    hypothesis that the first and  second  appellants  have  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom because of their conduct and immigration history, it was
    unreasonable for the fourth appellant to leave the United Kingdom  with
    his parents. The judge in the instant case took into account that   the
    fourth appellant had lived his entire life in the United Kingdom  since
    his birth on 2008; that he was 9 years old and  had  no  doubt  engaged
    with  his  friends  at  school  and  followed  normal  social  pursuits
    (football). She took into account that he was settled well into  school
    but also notified that he had no health issues, that  he  had  not  yet
    reached secondary school,  that  he  was  at  an  early  stage  in  his
    education and that there was no evidence before her that his  education
    could not be continued in Senegal.

55. I have concluded that the judge was fully entitled to reach her finding
    that there were no features in the fourth appellant's case  that  would
    make it unreasonable for him leave the United Kingdom.

56. I have noted that the judge said in the  final  sentence  of  para  22,
    having found that it would not be unreasonable for the fourth appellant
    to leave the United Kingdom, that he was "therefore  not  a  qualifying
    child". Plainly, he was a qualifying child because he had lived in  the
    United Kingdom continuously for at least seven years. As the judge  was
    plainly aware of that fact and considered whether it was reasonable for
    him to leave the United Kingdom, the error in  the  final  sentence  of
    para 22 was immaterial.

57. For all of the reasons given above, I have concluded that the judge did
    not materially err in law in reaching  her  finding  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the appellant to leave the United Kingdom. His  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.

58. No separate issues were raised in relation to the appeals of the first,
    second and third appeals. Their  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    therefore also dismissed.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E. M. M Smith did  not
    involve the making of any material  errors  of  law.  Accordingly,  the
    decision of the judge to dismiss the appeals of the appellants  against
    the decision of the respondent stands.

      The appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.





[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 5 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
