

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU094542015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 July 2017                           |On 31  July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                 GRETA GJOKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Harris, counsel instructed by Morgan Pearse,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION
   1. The appellant, who is a citizen  of  Albania,  applied  for  leave  to
      remain on the basis of rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR. That
      application was refused by the respondent who also gave directions for
      her removed from the United Kingdom. The  appellant's  appeal  against
      that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell on 9 March
      2017.


   2. The judge recorded that the appellant had specifically requested  that
      the appeal be determined on the papers without  an  oral  hearing  and
      said, at paragraph 2 of his determination:
           "I  further  noted  that  despite  having  had  the  benefit  of
           representation, the appellant had not taken any steps to  adduce
           evidence in support of her appeal. Given  the  history  of  this
           case, which includes requests for further evidence made  by  the
           respondent prior to deciding the application; requests that were
           not complied with, I formed the  view  there  was  no  point  in
           adjourning the matter as the appellant had  not  co-operated  in
           the past nor was there any suggestion that she might  do  so  in
           the future....
           The appellant has not submitted a bundle of documents nor  given
           a detailed written response to the notice of refusal..."
      Having made clear that the failure of the appellant to submit evidence
      was a matter to be held against her, the judge went on to explain  why
      the appeal was dismissed, saying:
           "The appellant has made no effort to establish her  case...  The
           inference  must  be  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  her  to
           provide....
           ...
           Given the failure of the appellant to produce any evidence it is
           not  possible  to  find  that  requiring  her   to   leave   the
           jurisdiction.... Would result in any unjustly harsh consequences
           for her or her daughter."
      And a little later, the judge said:
           "In the absence of evidence,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
           failed to prove that  she  meets  the  requirements  of  section
           117B(6)..."
   3. The  difficulty  is  that  in  fact  the  appellant's  solicitors  had
      submitted a bundle of documentary evidence to  be  considered  in  the
      determination of the appeal. The appellant's solicitors have  produced
      evidence that the bundle was signed for, as proof of receipt,  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal at 09.48 hrs on 3 March 2017 and by the  HOPOU  at
      10.32 hrs on 6 March 2017, and as directions issued  by  the  Tribunal
      required any documentary evidence relied upon to be  provided  by  8th
      March, that evidence was  provided  in  time  and  the  appellant  was
      entitled to see that it would be considered.


   4. Permission to appeal having been granted, the matter was considered by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul who gave the following directions  on  18
      April 2017:
           "It is my preliminary view that, through no fault of the  judge,
           a procedural error has occurred which amounts  to  an  error  of
           law; and  accordingly,  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal should be set aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.
           Unless either party objects to this course of action in  writing
           within 5  working  days,  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  allow  the
           appellant's appeal on the above basis, and remit the decision to
           the First-tier Tribunal."

   5. The only communication in fact received  after  that  was  a  rule  24
      letter from the respondent in which it was said that  the  appellant's
      appeal would be opposed  because  the  respondent  has  not  seen  any
      evidence that the appellant's bundle had in  fact  been  submitted  as
      asserted. And so the appeal now comes before me.


   6. Having examined the Tribunal's file and having had regard to all  that
      has been said, I am entirely satisfied that, unknown to the judge, the
      appellant's solicitors had indeed submitted the bundle and  that  this
      should have been put before the judge. As it was not, there has been a
      procedural irregularity giving rise to unfairness  such  to  establish
      that the determination of  this  appeal  discloses  an  error  of  law
      material to the outcome. Therefore, the decision of the judge  is  set
      aside and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent
      that the appeal will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      determined afresh.
Summary of decision:

   7. The determination of this appeal discloses a  material  error  of  law
      error of law and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell  is
      set aside.


   8.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh.




                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 28 July 2017

