
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09594/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decisions and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16th July 2019                       |On 18th December 2019              |
|And Field House on 19th November 2019   |                                   |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Mr TAITEI [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni (16th July 2019), Mr P Deller (19th
                    November 2019) Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent     Mr S Vokes instructed by Cartwright King solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
         the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  who  had
         allowed the appeal by Mr [M] against the decision of  the  SSHD  to
         refuse his human Rights claim following the making of a deportation
         order.

      2. In brief, the judge, in reaching her decision that  it  was  unduly
         harsh for the children and his wife to remain  in  the  UK  without
         him, improperly took into account the more  general  issues  of  Mr
         [M]'s  immigration  status  and  history,  his  remorse   and   the
         conviction in addition to the circumstances  of  the  children  and
         partner.

      3. Although submitted by Mr Vokes that the findings made by the  judge
         were  sufficient  to  meet  the  'threshold'  of  'very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those required to meet Exceptions 1/2'
         despite the First-tier Tribunal judge not  having  considered  that
         issue, we are satisfied that the findings and the  evidence  before
         the First-tier Tribunal judge was  insufficient  to  reach  such  a
         finding. The judge had  not  considered  whether  there  were  very
         compelling circumstances. Ms Aboni submitted that the  findings  of
         the judge did not meet the  threshold  required  and  the  decision
         should be set aside.

      4. We were satisfied that the errors of law are such that we set aside
         the decision to be  remade;  findings  reached  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge were retained.

         19th November 2019 hearing

      5. Mr [M] filed a small bundle of additional documents which  included
         updating witness statements and a social worker report.  There  was
         no challenge by the SSHD to the content of those documents,  or  to
         the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge;  we
         heard no oral evidence. Mr Deller and Mr  Vokes  filed  a  speaking
         note/skeleton argument and we heard oral submissions from  each  of
         them.

      6. The background and retained factual findings are as follows:

          i) The appellant was arrested on 16th January  2004  and  gave  a
             false name. He was convicted on 23rd January 2004 of obtaining
             property  by   deception,   resisting/obstructing   a   police
             constable  and  driving  whilst  uninsured.  He   received   a
             financial penalty and points on his  licence.  He  was  served
             with  administrative  removal  paperwork  as   a   result   of
             deception. He absconded.

         ii) He was due to appear in the Sheriff Court  on  19th  September
             2006 having been charged with being concerned in the supply of
             Class A controlled drugs. He absconded.

        iii) On 16th January 2009 he was  arrested  for  domestic  assault,
             gave his real name and was linked to the above.  A  PNC  check
             showed he had pending prosecutions.  No  criminal  proceedings
             ensued from the domestic violence arrest.

         iv) An application made to the SSHD on 30th April 2015 resulted in
             him being given leave to remain on 4th  September  2015  until
             4th March 2018 (30 months).

          v) On 18th July 2016 he was convicted at Aberdeen  Sheriff  Court
             for supply, perverting the course of justice  and  failing  to
             attend  proceedings  in  the  Sheriff  Court.  He  received  a
             sentence of 42 months imprisonment.

         vi) An application made on 1st March 2018  for  further  leave  to
             remain was refused; on 13th April 2018 a deportation order was
             signed in accordance with s32(5) UK Borders Act 2007. It is Mr
             [M]'s appeal against  the  concurrent  refusal  of  his  human
             rights appeal that is the subject of these proceedings.

        vii) He has a wife with whom he cohabits, Ms [M], with whom he  has
             one child born 10th October 2016 (C6).  His  partner  has  two
             children from an earlier relationship, one born 23rd May  2002
             (C1) and one born 21st September 2009 (C5). All three children
             and his wife are British Citizens. Their relationship  started
             in 2009, started living together in 2010 and were  married  in
             November 2015.

       viii) Mr [M] also has a child born 30th June  2006  (C4)  who  is  a
             British citizen from an earlier relationship.

         ix) He has two other children born 15th August 2003 (C2) and  30th
             January 2006 (C3) from an earlier relationship. Those children
             are Zimbabwean citizens, have indefinite leave to  remain  and
             live with their maternal  grandparents.  Their  mother  is  in
             another relationship with other children.

          x) There is no evidence Mr [M] has committed any further offences
             since the drugs offence  in  2006,  save  for  perverting  the
             course of justice.

         xi) Mr [M]  informed  his  criminal  solicitors  of  his  previous
             criminal activity and this was  what  led  to  his  subsequent
             arrest  and  conviction  in  2016.  He   also   informed   his
             immigration solicitors who had applied for  him  to  be  given
             limited leave to remain in 2015.

        xii) Mr  [M]  plays  an  active  role  in  all  of  his  children's
             upbringing; C4 visits every three weeks and spends part of the
             summer holidays with him and his wife; C2 and C3 live close by
             and spend holidays and weekends with him  and  his  wife.  The
             relationship with C4 was broken whilst he was  in  prison  and
             her behaviour deteriorated but it has now settled  down  since
             he came out of prison.

       xiii) Ms [M], who is a qualified social worker and works full  time,
             struggled to cope emotionally and financially when Mr [M]  was
             in prison; her mother visited from Zimbabwe for  three  months
             during that time to assist her.  She  would  not  be  able  to
             continue working full- time if Mr [M] were deported.

        xiv) The older children became withdrawn and  spent  more  time  in
             their rooms when Mr [M] was in prison.

         xv) The SSHD accepts that it would be unduly harsh for any of  the
             children to go to Zimbabwe in order not to be  separated  from
             their father.

        xvi) The SSHD accepts that it would be unduly harsh for his wife to
             go to Zimbabwe in order not to be separated from her husband.

      7. The social workers report was prepared  by  an  experienced  social
         worker who has worked in both Zimbabwe and the UK. She has over  17
         years' experience and this was evident from the care with which her
         report is written. She not only had telephone interviews  but  also
         undertook home visits at Mr [M]'s home and the grandparents.

      8. Her conclusions include:

             "17. [C2] and [C3] have enjoyed the consistent and stable care
             of their grandparents. This has in some  way  helped  children
             from having multiple carers as they could have moved from  one
             parent to the other then extended family member to  the  other
             due  to  a  range  of  difficulties  with  each  of  the  care
             arrangements. [C2] and C3] have a  strong  bond  and  positive
             attachment with their grandparents.

             18.  [C2] and C3] have regular contact and communication  with
             their mother  and  father  in  the  form  of  regular  visits,
             telephone contact, on holidays, at  Christmas  and  birthdays.
             This has helped  the  children  cultivate  a  warm  and  close
             relationship with their mother and  father  from  their  early
             childhood and has been a  source  of  emotional  and  material
             support.

             19.  [Mr] [M] had done  well  to  keep  all  his  children  in
             contact with  each  other.  Research  shows  siblings  can  be
             comforters, caretakers, role  models,  spurs  to  achievement,
             faithful allies, and best friends. No matter  how  close  they
             are, most brothers and sisters share years of experiences that
             form a bond, a common foundation they do not have with  anyone
             else...if parents are unable to provide the necessary care  or
             are not available sibling attachments can be even closer....

             ...

             21.  The importance of grandparents in  caring  for  [C2]  and
             [C3] is well documented. Grandparents play an  important  role
             in the lives  of  their  grandchildren,  though  it  is  often
             indirect. Most of  their  significance  to  children  is  seen
             through the support and  help  they  give  to  their  parents.
             Grandparents  are  often  seen  as  "stress  buffers",  family
             "watchdogs", "roots", "arbitrators" and "supporters".

             22.  Research suggests that children find unique acceptance in
             their relationships  with  grandparents  which  benefits  them
             emotionally and mentally. Grandparents can be a major  support
             during family disruptions. Sometimes they  are  playmates  for
             their grandchildren.  They  are  also  historians  -  teaching
             values, instilling ethnic heritage,  culture  and  passing  on
             family traditions.

             23.  I therefore respectfully submit that [C2]  and  [C3]  are
             receiving consistent  and  stable  care  from  their  maternal
             grandparents. The father and mother have regular contact  with
             [C2]  and  [C3]  and  their  half  siblings  on  holidays  and
             weekends.

             24.   ...During  interviews,   the   children   stressed   the
             importance of their father in their lives  as  the  glue  that
             brings and keeps the half siblings together. They always  look
             forward to family gatherings with their father on holidays and
             family events, and his presence completes the children's sense
             of family. The father's direct involvement in  his  children's
             lives and the children's comments lead me to conclude that the
             father and his role is increasing as the children grow old, as
             he now has a stable family with his wife.

             25.  Research shows that high father involvement (as  measured
             by reading, discipling, taking on trips)  is  associated  with
             fewer child  behaviour  problems  and  lower  criminality  and
             substance misuse all of which tend to be played out in  school
             and impact on development. ...

             26.  If Mr Taitei [M]  was  to  be  removed  from  the  United
             Kingdom the relationship with his children and the attachments
             is most likely to be significantly disrupted and the  children
             particularly the youngest one will be  at  risk  of  suffering
             significant emotional harm as a result of  separation  anxiety
             because the father has been the main carer while mother is  at
             work most of the time. Contact between the father and children
             will be very difficult to maintain even via the  social  media
             as there is a serious problem  with  electricity  in  Zimbabwe
             where load sharing has resulted in  households  going  for  11
             hours, sometimes longer, without electricity. It is  therefore
             in the children's best interest for Mr Taitei to remain in the
             United Kingdom where regular contact will remain possible.

             27.  ... Mr [M] will not be able to provide [economically] for
             his children from Zimbabwe in the same way he would be able to
             do while in the United Kingdom, once his immigration status is
             regularised."

      9. Rai Legal, who previously represented Mr [M], write to the SSHD  on
         28th April 2015 and stated, inter alia,

             "We  have  supplied  evidence  of  the  Applicant's   previous
             convictions. These have been recorded on the application  form
             itself.

             The  applicant  is  remorseful  and  regretful  for  his  past
             behaviour, ...

             The Applicant also has pending matters  in  Scotland,  and  we
             make  reference  to  the  letter  from  George  Mathers  &  Co
             referencing the same. The covering letter is  self-explanatory
             and contains relevant attachments.

             As you will note, the Applicant wishes to be fully  frank  and
             honest in this application with a view to moving passed  (sic)
             his past behaviour and moving onwards with his family life  in
             the United Kingdom. You will  also  note  that  the  documents
             supplied from the Applicant's Disclosure Records from the Home
             Office and the records from George Mathers & Co, the name used
             was a different name ...

             The Applicant however again wishes to  be  totally  frank  and
             honest, has made this application in his correct name and  has
             also disclosed the previous name that he used."

     10. The Mr Vokes stated that it had not been possible to obtain a  copy
         of the George Mathers letter  referred  to.  It  is  therefore  not
         possible to ascertain exactly what was said in it.

     11. The applicant was served on 17th December 2009, with the indictment
         for possession and supply of Class A drugs on 19th September  2006,
         giving a false name and failing to appear on 17th May 2007  without
         reasonable excuse, with a first appearance on 5th January 2010  and
         trial date of 18th January 2010 notified.  It  is  not  clear  what
         happened on that date save that the actual conviction did not  take
         place until 2016. On 21st June 2016 he was remanded in custody  and
         on 18th July 2016 was convicted of the drugs  offences,  attempting
         to pervert the course of justice and failing to attend the  Sheriff
         court.

     12. Mr [M] pleaded guilty (in his false name) on 18th July 2016 and was
         sentenced that day. The  judge's  sentencing  remarks  include  the
         following:

             "... I appreciate ...that  you  are  essentially  a  different
             person from the person who was due to appear in court  on  the
             19th September 2006.

             The fact that this has taken so long to  resolve  is  not,  it
             appears to me, the fault of the crown on  this  occasion,  but
             entirely attributable to your  failure  to  face  up  to  your
             responsibilities. There was a significant quantity of class  A
             drug diamorphine involved in this case. The matter would  have
             been disposed of in 2006 or 2007 and, probably at  that  time,
             the sentences that would have been  imposed  would  be  longer
             than they are now, so to that extent you have probably escaped
             some  justice  and  simply  by  not  appearing.  ...   in  the
             circumstances in this case, I can see no  alternative  but  to
             imposing a lengthy custodial  sentence.  Again,  I  appreciate
             that you see yourself as a pawn in this,  but  I'm  sentencing
             you as a courier not as a main player in relation to this drug
             dealing and for those reasons I feel I can impose a relatively
             restricted sentence.

             ... I take Charge 3 [concealing identity] as simply  a  rather
             amateurship attempt to evade justice at the initial stage when
             you were detained. I don't intend  to  impose  any  additional
             penalty in relation to that. ...

             In relation to charge 5 (failure to attend without  reasonable
             excuse) I propose to impose an additional penalty  because  of
             your failure to appear for ... indictment. I do  not  consider
             that there was any significant utilitarian value in  the  plea
             being tendered and therefore that will  be  an  non-discounted
             penalty ..."

         Discussion

     13. There is no doubt but that it is in the best interest  of  all  the
         children and his wife, both individually and collectively,  for  Mr
         [M] to remain in the UK. As stressed by Mr Vokes, Mr [M] has played
         a critical part in enabling the children  to  have  productive  and
         supportive  relationships  with  each  other  despite   living   in
         different places and despite having  different  day-to-day  carers.
         His absence will be a loss to the children. We note that  his  wife
         has not said  that  she  would  not  continue  to  facilitate  such
         contact; nor has she explained what  difficulties  there  would  be
         given in particular that the grandparents  and  other  adults  have
         been  positive  about  the  continued  relationships  between   the
         children.

     14. We appreciate that Ms [M] struggled financially when Mr [M] was  in
         prison; we appreciate that the children's  behaviour  deteriorated.
         We appreciate that high father involvement reduces  adverse  social
         and behavioural issues for children. And  we  appreciate  that  the
         attachments formed between the children and their father  would  be
         likely to be significantly disrupted and that the children would be
         at risk of suffering  from  significant  emotional  harm.  We  note
         however that there is no distinction drawn in the  social  worker's
         report as to how each individual child may be affected or how their
         present supportive parent/grandparent/sibling would enable them  to
         deal with the departure of their father. We recognise that  it  can
         be difficult to foresee the future, but the report does not  assist
         us  in  identifying  any   particular   harsh   or   unduly   harsh
         repercussions on the children. Financial difficulties cannot amount
         to an unduly harsh outcome - it is a consequence of a family losing
         the day to day presence of a person who is able to care for younger
         children.

     15. We note that  the  social  worker  refers  to  there  likely  being
         difficulties in maintaining contact through social media because of
         electricity outages. We take note of the economic problems faced by
         Zimbabweans but find it difficult to understand on what basis  that
         prevents social media contact. Although there may be outages for 11
         hours a day in some areas some of the time, the  evidence  was  not
         before us that social media would  be  disrupted  to  such  a  high
         degree as to render it very difficult for contact to take place.

     16. The social worker does not reach a conclusion that separation  from
         their father/husband would be unduly harsh - or  even  harsh.  That
         there would be great sadness and upset is almost  inevitable.  That
         the family as a whole may well take some  time  to  adjust  to  new
         methods of  contact  is  perhaps  inevitable.  But  these  are  the
         consequences of criminality and the deportation regime  implemented
         through statute.

     17. The evidence is not before us that separation  from  their  father/
         husband would,  either  individually  or  collectively,  be  unduly
         harsh.

     18. We were addressed by Mr Vokes on whether, if we were to  find  that
         separation would not be unduly harsh, there  were  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above exceptions 1 and/or 2  such  as  would
         render deportation disproportionate. Mr Vokes relied not only  upon
         the unifying impact of Mr [M] and what he submitted were  the  very
         great benefits that brings to the children as an  element  of  very
         compelling circumstances but also on the fact that  despite  having
         serious charges pending, the SSHD granted him 30  months  leave  to
         remain.  He  submitted  that  this  reduced  the  perceived  public
         interest in deportation, enabled Mr [M] and his family  to  develop
         their public and private lives on the  implied  understanding  that
         such would continue and that 'an ordinary person' would perceive it
         that way. He did not seek to rely on 'legitimate  expectation'  but
         referred to the submissions made which  led  to  the  grant  of  30
         months leave to remain included the  'George  Mathers  letter'.  He
         relied upon Mr [M] being a  model  prisoner,  that  there  were  no
         further convictions since 2006 and  that  the  risk  of  committing
         further crime was very low; that Mr [M] was  very  remorseful,  and
         these were all  matters  which  fell  within  the  rubric  of  very
         compelling circumstances.

     19. We acknowledge and take into account the cumulative effect  of  the
         various matters relied upon by Mr Vokes. We have placed very little
         weight on Mr [M]'s remorse or  that  he  is  at  low  risk  of  re-
         offending - these are matters which should  be  the  norm  and  not
         matters which could contribute to compelling  reasons  for  him  to
         avoid deportation. In so far as the 30 months  grant  of  leave  is
         concerned, we do not know what the 'George Mathers letter said  but
         have taken the view that it accurately described the drugs  charges
         on the indictment and that  it  may  have  described  a  charge  of
         failing to appear without reasonable excuse. Despite  the  lack  of
         actual evidence, we have also  taken,  at  its  highest,  that  the
         George Mathers letter stated that Mr [M] intended to  plead  guilty
         at  the  first  opportunity.  Whilst  it  may  possibly,   although
         unlikely, be  surprising  that  the  SSHD  in  the  light  of  that
         indication chose to grant Mr [M] 30 months leave to remain,  it  is
         not apparent whether a date for trial had been fixed  at  the  time
         the April 2015 submissions  were  made.  We  note  that  leave  was
         granted in September 2015, but the trial was not  until  18th  July
         2016 and it therefore seems unlikely that the trial date was  known
         when the submissions were made.

     20. It is our view that at the date the decision  to  grant  leave  was
         made, Mr [M] was not a convicted criminal such  that  he  would  be
         liable to deportation. For the SSHD to delay taking a  decision  on
         his application for leave until  after  some  unspecified  criminal
         proceedings had taken place - even though there may  have  been  an
         intimation of a plea of guilty, would have been unreasonable. There
         is no indication in the April 2015 submissions that  the  SSHD  was
         informed of the scale of the  drug  offences  or  of  the  possible
         sentence that could be  imposed.  The  SSHD  could  not  rationally
         speculate as to the outcome of criminal proceedings. It  cannot  be
         rationally concluded that the SSHD should take a decision to  grant
         a different period of leave  to  that  which  was  usually  granted
         following   applications   of   that   nature   given   the   vague
         circumstances. That he was granted leave to remain  for  the  usual
         period of time does not,  in  his  case,  amount  to  a  compelling
         circumstance.

     21. It is of course correct that Mr [M] and his family have  been  able
         to develop and enhance their  family  and  private  life.  That  is
         almost inevitable given the passage of time. That  the  family  re-
         established itself after his  release  from  imprisonment  and  the
         children  settled  down  cannot  be  described  as   a   compelling
         circumstance. It is to be expected.

     22. We do not accept Mr Vokes  submission  that  'an  ordinary  person'
         would view the factual matrix as one which should lead  to  Mr  [M]
         avoiding deportation. Although he has been in the UK  for  some  18
         years, he was unlawfully present after the expiry of his visit visa
         in 2000.  His  first  crimes  were  committed  4  years  after  his
         arrival; he committed very serious drugs  offences  6  years  after
         arrival and absconded from justice for almost 10 years. He did  not
         regularise his immigration status until he made his application  in
         2015.  The  adverse  impact  on  his  children  and  wife  of   his
         imprisonment is as a direct result of his criminal activity and  is
         not mitigated by his plea that he has been given 30 months leave to
         remain after having been an  absconder.  The  consequences  of  his
         criminality on his wife and  children  are  not,  on  the  evidence
         before us,  compelling  circumstances  that  mitigate  against  his
         deportation. The public interest, as now set out in statutory  form
         and in the Immigration Rules and jurisprudence, requires  Mr  [M]'s
         deportation.

     23. In summary we find that Mr [M]'s deportation would  not  result  in
         unduly  harsh  consequences  for  his  children  or  wife,  whether
         individually  or  collectively.  There  are  no   very   compelling
         circumstances   such   as   would   render   his   deportation    a
         disproportionate interference with his or their right to respect to
         family life.

    Conclusion

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision to be remade.

    We remake the appeal by dismissing Mr [M]'s appeal against the  refusal
    of his human rights claim.


     Date 16th December 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
