
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09132/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 September 2016                   |On 5 October 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                 Fahmida [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Khosla, solicitor, D J Webb & Co
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis,

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.    This is an appeal against a decision of Judge Manjit  Obhi  sitting
      at Birmingham.  The appellant was born in  Bangladesh  on  10  January
      1987, and in 2014 she was given leave to  enter  as  a  student  until
      August 2015 when she applied, in time, for further leave to remain  on
      the basis of her private and family life with  her  husband,  who  had
      been given indefinite leave to remain on 24 February last year.

2.   On 12 October further leave to remain was refused,  and  the  appellant
    appealed, on the basis that she was now expecting her husband's  child,
    who was in fact born on 8 November.  On 8 December both the  appellant,
    who was acting in person at that stage, and her husband sent  in  typed
    letters to the judge at Birmingham, signed by them, with a copy of  the
    child's  birth  certificate  attached,  and  a   copy   of   all   that
    correspondence was faxed  on  the  same  day  to  the  Home  Office  at
    Birmingham where it appeared on their file.

3.   The judge dealt with the case without a  hearing  on  19  January,  and
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that she accepted the child had  been
    born; but not the child was a British citizen by birth.  That being so,
    the case did not come within E-LTRP.2.2 or EX.1 of the  Rules  and  she
    took the view that there would be nothing to stop the appellant and her
    husband returning to Bangladesh together with their new  baby,  and  it
    would be reasonable to expect that child to go with them.

4.   The main ground of appeal was that  the  child  was  indeed  a  British
    citizen by birth since, as I have already  mentioned,  her  father  had
    been given indefinite leave earlier  in  the  year.  However  the  Home
    Office say in their r. 24 response that this was a new matter under  s.
    85(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  as  it  now
    stands; so the judge had had no jurisdiction to consider the child as a
    person at all.  S. 85(6) of the 2002 Act provides that a  matter  is  a
    "new matter" if it constitutes a human rights ground, and has not  been
    previously considered by the Secretary of State.  Mr Jarvis is prepared
    to accept  that  the  notice  of  appeal,  mentioning  the  appellant's
    pregnancy, might be taken as a section 120 statement on her  part;  but
    the permissible evidence before the judge went no further than that.

5.   It is of course quite true that pregnancies  do  usually  lead  to  the
    birth of children and the Home  Office  guidance  itself  'Version  3.0
    Rights of Appeal' mentions at page  25  as  a  case  amounting  to  new
    evidence but not a new matter, one where "an application has been  made
    for leave to remain as a parent but additional children had been born".
    That is just an example; but it seems to me that it raises a  different
    kind of point from the one we are discussing in this case.  At the time
    the notice of appeal was given the  appellant  could  not  put  herself
    forward as a parent at all.  She only became one on 8 November and that
    fact was duly notified to the Home Office on 8 December.

6.   The problem was that nobody on the Home Office side then considered  it
    before the judge reached her decision on 19 January  this  year.   This
    was, to say the least, not helpful.   When  the  judge  did  reach  her
    decision she did not consider whether or not the birth of the child was
    a new matter.  That point had not been raised by the Home  Office.   If
    it had not been a point going to her jurisdiction to consider it,  then
    there would have been no problem; but s. 85(5) of the 2002 Act,  as  it
    now stands, says in terms that the Tribunal must  not  consider  a  new
    matter unless the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent  to
    do so.

7.   With the best will in the world, I do not think  I  can  spell  consent
    out of the Secretary of State's  silence  between  8  December  and  19
    January,  although  some  reaction  to  the  letters  and   the   birth
    certificate would have been desirable to say the least.  It seems to me
    that the judge did not have jurisdiction to  consider  the  appellant's
    situation as a parent, and the question is  what  the  result  of  that
    conclusion should be.

8.   The main point on which permission was given was  the  judge's  mistake
    about the child's nationality, although it was said, as  a  consequence
    of this, that  it  was  arguable  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    appellant's family life in the correct context.

9.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  should  not  have  considered  the
    applicant's situation as a parent at all, although, as it  turned  out,
    she did so on the wrong basis that the child was not a British citizen.
     Looking at the reality of this case, it seems to me that that was  the
    only substantial ground on which this appeal could and no doubt  should
    have been allowed, subject to the Secretary of State's consent  to  the
    judge considering the birth of the child, and the result  is  that  the
    challenge for which permission was granted fails and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal stands.

10.  However, the case does not stop there by any means, because  Mr  Jarvis
    has  considered  the  evidence  about  the  birth  of  the  child,  and
    undertaken that, on a fresh application, the appellant would be granted
    leave to remain.  Given the fact that the appellant and her husband did
    their level best to make the Home Office  aware  of  the  situation  by
    sending in the letters and birth certificate on  8  December,  and  the
    fact that she was acting in person at that time it seems to me that she
    ought not to be required to pay any fee for that application.

Appeal
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)
                               5 October 2016
