
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/09827/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th July 2017                        |On 04th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                gurjit singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Greenwood, Counsel instructed by Bail for
Immigration
     Detainees (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India.  On 23 March  2016  a  deportation
    order was issued against him.

2.   Thereafter followed two decisions of the respondent.  The  first  dated
    4th April 2016 refusing a human rights claim,  considered  through  the
    prism  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A   of   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Certification under Section 94B of the 2002 Act was imposed.
3.   Following that decision, certain representations were  made  on  behalf
    of the appellant on 6th April 2016, which resulted in  a  supplementary
    decision of 25th April 2016.

4.   As was made clear in both decisions, the appellant did not have  an  in
    country right of appeal, not least because of  the  certification  that
    had been applied.

5.    Notwithstanding  that  matter,   somehow   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    entertained an appeal  which  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colyer on 12th December 2016.

6.    The Judge specifically noted the certification under  Section  94B  in
    the determination and cited the brief history of the appeal. The matter
    had come before a Duty Judge on 10th May 2016 on  a  timeliness  point,
    seemingly the question of an in country right of appeal was not  raised
    at that stage or indeed at the Case  Management  Review  on  23rd  June
    2016.  The Judge makes  no  finding  one  way  or  the  other  on  this
    important issue.

7.    Miss  Greenwood,  who  represents  the  appellant,  in   her   written
    submissions makes no concession as to whether or not the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction and contends that it has on the basis  that  the  Tribunal
    accepted jurisdiction and the respondent seemingly did not object.   Mr
    Duffy, who represents the respondent,  invited  me  to  find  that  the
    Tribunal does not have jurisdiction by reason of the certification that
    had been applied.  In general terms, as he indicated, challenge to  the
    certification normally proceeds by way of judicial review  rather  than
    by substantive hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   How the matter came  to  reach  a  hearing  stage  in  the  First  tier
    Tribunal, is far from clear from the papers, but I am in no doubt  that
    in this case there  was  no  jurisdiction  for  the  Tribunal  to  have
    entertained the appeal and consequently  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside as a nullity.

9.   In any event, even on the substantive merit of the  decision  Mr  Duffy
    concedes  that  there  is  a  conspicuous  element  of  unfairness   in
    permitting the decision to stand.  In brief terms the appellant was  at
    the material time in custody.  He had sought an adjournment of his case
    because he was unable to attend but had not indicated in terms that  he
    was in custody.  He had engaged a firm of solicitors who no longer were
    acting and a further firm of solicitors purported to act.  The Judge in
    the  determination  gave  anxious  consideration  to  the   matter   of
    adjournment.   Indeed,  both  solicitors  were  consulted,  the  latter
    solicitors giving the indication that they were  without  instructions.
    Nobody seemed to appreciate that  the  appellant  was  in  custody  and
    therefore took it to be that he was on bail but not co-operating in the
    progress of his appeal, which was  far  from  the  case.   Although  no
    criticism can be attached to the Judge in refusing the  adjournment  on
    the basis of the facts that were then presented, it is clear that those
    facts were misunderstood and that the reality was otherwise  the  case.
    It is important that justice is not only done but seen to be  done  and
    in those circumstances, regardless of any other submissions which  Miss
    Greenwood made in her skeleton argument, Mr  Duffy  concedes  that  the
    decision should not stand.

10.  For those reasons also the decision of the First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is set aside.

11.  The future conduct of the matter was then considered.  So  far  as  the
    certification that has been  applied  that  has  been  the  subject  of
    criticism by the Supreme Court in Kiarie  [2017]  UKSC  42.   In  those
    circumstances Mr  Duffy  applied  to  withdraw  both  of  the  relevant
    decisions which were the subject of appeal,  namely  decisions  of  4th
    April and 25th April 2016.  I granted that permission.

12.  In those circumstances there is no longer  a  decision  upon  which  to
    found a valid appeal before the Tribunal (whether First-tier  or  Upper
    Tribunal). It will  be  for  the  Secretary  of  state  to  remake  her
    decision.  In those circumstances, following the promulgation  of  this
    decision the file may be closed.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed            [pic]                      Date 3 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
