
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09864/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                          |On 4th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                            MR muhammad asif khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  23rd
    August 2017 to refuse his application for indefinite leave to remain in
    the UK on the basis of his long residence.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 12th
    July 2018.  The Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on 7th September 2018.



 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  granted  leave
    to enter the UK as a student on 17th September  2007  and  was  granted
    subsequent extensions of leave to remain until 30th November  2010.  He
    submitted an application for further leave on 29th  November  2010  and
    that application  was  refused  on  14th  December  2010.  His  further
    application was made on 18 January 2011 and leave was granted  on  10th
    February 2011 and further periods of leave to remain were granted until
    23rd May 2011. He made an application on 23rd May  2011  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur but varied  that  application  on  15th
    November 2016 when he submitted an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    based on his long residence in the  UK  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  the  basis
    that there was a gap in the Appellant's lawful residence in the UK as a
    result of the application for leave to remain  made  on  29th  November
    2010 being rejected because the fee  was  not  paid  as  his  card  was
    declined. His subsequent application was  made  on  18th  January  2011
    therefore, according to the Secretary of State, the Appellant  had  not
    made a valid application within 28 days of the permitted time from  his
    rejected application therefore his section 3C leave was  not  extended.
    The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  there  was  a  gap  in  the
    Appellant's  lawful  residence  between  16th  December  2010  and  9th
    February 2011, a total of 56 days and that there was therefore a  break
    in the Appellant's lawful residence  in  the  UK  within  the  10  year
    qualifying period. The Secretary of State went on to conclude that  the
    Appellant had not established that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Pakistan  under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)
    (vi). The Secretary of State decided that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances such as to justify a grant of leave to remain outside the
    Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

 4. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  submission  put  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that the subsequent grant  of  leave  to  remain  in
    February  2011  amounted  to  an  implied  waiver  of  the  period   of
    overstaying. This finding has not been challenged.

 5. At paragraph 13 of the decision the judge set out the four  submissions
    made by counsel on the Appellant's behalf. In summary, these were  that
    the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi);  that
    the Appellant had only been an illegal overstayer by  a  period  of  56
    days and a 28 day period was normally overlooked;  that  the  Appellant
    should succeed  under  Article  8  as  a  result  of  the  'near  miss'
    provisions; that in August 2017, when the application was refused,  the
    respondent refused to exercise discretion to waive the  absence  of  10
    years continuous residence.

 6. The first ground of appeal contends that the judge misdirected  himself
    as to the evidence he could consider. This ground has not been  clearly
    articulated with specific reference  to  this  appeal.  The  first  and
    second grounds of appeal are interlinked and in essence it appears that
    it is argued that the judge failed to  treat  the  appeal  as  a  human
    rights appeal and failed to undertake a full assessment of  Article  8.
    It is contended that the judge failed to consider proportionality  with
    reference to the circumstances of the Appellant's overstay between 16th
    December 2010 and 9th February 2011  which  he  says  was  because  the
    payment made in respect of his in-time application bounced  because  of
    an attempted fraudulent withdrawal from his account  and  that  at  the
    time he was recovering from a very serious  accident  as  a  result  of
    which he was unfit for work from February 2010 until September 2011.

 7. In her submissions Ms Harvey contended that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    deciding that the issue of the potential exercise of discretion by  the
    Secretary of State due to the circumstances of the failed  payment  and
    the Appellant's accident could not be considered because  the  evidence
    of these matters had not been put to the Secretary of State. It was her
    submission that, in an Article 8  consideration,  these  issues  should
    have been considered by the judge. Ms Harvey submitted that the crux of
    the  case  was  that  very  little  weight  had  been  given   in   the
    proportionality balance to the Appellant's explanation for the delay in
    re-submitting his application after the payment failed.

 8. However in my view the difficulty with  this  submission  is  that  the
    Appellant did not provide evidence to support his belated  explanations
    (which, as highlighted by the judge, had not been put to the  Secretary
    of State with the re-submitted application) as to why the first payment
    bounced and why he delayed beyond the  28  days  in  re-submitting  the
    application. There  is  no  evidence  from  the  bank  explaining  what
    happened to the payment in December 2010. This is evidence which  could
    very easily have been obtained and the Appellant put forward no  reason
    for not producing evidence from the  bank.  The  Appellant  did  submit
    medical evidence. However, whilst the  medical  evidence  supports  the
    Appellant's claim that he suffered from low back claim (albeit it  does
    not clearly support the extent of disability asserted in paragraph 5 of
    the witness statement), the evidence does not support  the  Appellant's
    claimed memory problems which he put forward as the reason he failed to
    re-submit within 28 days. Again, this is evidence which could have been
    easily obtained from the Appellant's doctors. The judge was entitled to
    attach little weight to this evidence, which had not been submitted  to
    the Secretary of State.

 9. However, in addressing the issue  in  terms  of  the  exercise  of  the
    Secretary of State's discretion at  paragraphs  21-24,  the  judge  was
    addressing the case put to him which appears to have been a  submission
    that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  not  being  in
    accordance with the Secretary of State policy. The judge was  right  to
    conclude that any request to the Secretary of  State  for  exercise  of
    discretion on the basis of this policy should  have  been  put  the  to
    Secretary of State. The Secretary  of  State  could  not  consider  the
    exercise of discretion in circumstances where  he  had  not  been  made
    aware of the explanation for the delay.

10. The grounds of appeal highlight Gen 3 of the  Immigration  Rules  which
    applies in this appeal and which provides that the decision-maker  must
    consider whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render
    refusal of leave a breach of Article 8 because  such  a  refusal  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  Appellant,  their
    partner, child or another family member. This is what the judge did  at
    paragraph 20. Ms Harvey did not  draw  attention  to  any  evidence  of
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant or anyone else as  a
    result of this decision.

11. In these circumstances, and in light of the evidence  before  him,  the
    judge was entitled to find at paragraph 20 that the Appellant  had  not
    put forward any special or compelling circumstances which could justify
    a grant of leave to remain under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. Looking at the decision  as  a  whole,  I  agree  with  Ms  Isherwood's
    submission that the judge dealt with the case as it was put to him. The
    grounds seek to put the case on a different  basis  but,  based  on  my
    analysis at paragraph 8, even had the case been  clearly  put  on  that
    basis  it  could  not  have  succeeded.  These  factors,   which   were
    inadequately evidenced, were not capable of tipping the proportionality
    balance in the Appellant's favour in circumstances  where  he  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and in  the  absence  of
    any other exceptional circumstances.

13. Having considered all of the grounds put forward I conclude  that  none
    of the grounds have been made out.  The judge made findings open to him
    based on the evidence.  There is no material error of law disclosed  in
    this decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date: 30th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 30th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
