
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09282/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS, SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [T M]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None, the Sponsor and the Sponsor's wife attended


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as  they
    were described before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  is  [TM]  as  the
    appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is 11 years old and a national of Jamaica (born  on  15th
    December 2004) and he  appealed  a  decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refusing him entry clearance to join his father and  stepmother
    in the United Kingdom under  paragraph  301(i)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  29th  September  2015  refused  the
    application on the basis he did not accept that the appellant's sponsor
    had sole responsibility.  He  did  not  accept  that  the  sponsor  had
    control over the major aspects of his life such as schooling,  religion
    and medical care  and  noted  that  the  sponsor  must  "satisfactorily
    demonstrate that she has usually for a substantial period of time  been
    the main person exercising parental responsibility".  It  was  asserted
    that  the  letter  signed  by  his  biological  mother  [TT]  did   not
    sufficiently demonstrate that the sponsor had sole responsibility.   He
    had provided no detail as to  why  the  current  care  arrangements  in
    Jamaica were no longer suitable and the application was  refused  under
    paragraph 301(i)(b) and (c) of the Immigration Rules.  His rights  were
    also considered with reference to  Article  8  but  concluded  that  no
    satisfactory reason had been put forward as to why the sponsor  in  the
    UK was unable to travel to Jamaica to be with him or  spend  time  with
    him.

 4. An Entry Clearance Manager upheld that decision took  into  account  of
    the statements made by the sponsor and the appellant's  mother  in  the
    documents provided with the  appeal  papers  but  found  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant's life in Jamaica was as claimed other than
    unsupported statements made by the sponsor and the appellant's  mother.
    The appeal was upheld.

 5. In the appeal the sponsor maintained that in his letter  of  22nd  June
    2015 he explained his son had always lived with him  since  birth.  The
    sponsor left Jamaica when his son was 8 years old but that he made  all
    the decisions regarding his son's education, health and wellbeing.   He
    stated that he called his son  constantly  and  that  he  had  provided
    detail as to why current care arrangements were no longer suitable.  He
    submitted that when he left Jamaica the  mother  was  living  with  her
    partner at the time but they had since split up and she was now  moving
    around to family members' houses as she had nowhere for herself and his
    son did not have a stable home.  The appellant's mother had two younger
    children and was unemployed and although he sent money for his son that
    money was being used to care for everyone else.  It was  difficult  for
    him to fly to Jamaica because flights were so expensive  and  he  could
    not afford to do that.  He started to  do  poorly  in  school  and  was
    unsettled and struggling to cope.  He added that he was the only parent
    his son knew and he left him in Jamaica with his biological mother.

 6. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge James who decided  the
    matter on the papers.  The judge allowed the appeal  on  the  following
    basis:

         "10. In this appeal I have been mindful  of  the  guidance  in  the
             decision in TD (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  'sole  responsibility')
             Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.   The  headnote  to  that  decision
             states:

                  'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter  to  be  decided
                  upon all the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved
                  in the child's upbringing he (or  she)  had  abandoned  or
                  abdicated responsibility, the issue may arise between  the
                  remaining parent and others who have  day-to-day  care  of
                  the child abroad.  The test  is  whether  the  parent  has
                  continuing  control  and  direction   over   the   child's
                  upbringing, including making all the  important  decisions
                  in the child's life.   However,  where  both  parents  are
                  involved in a child's upbringing, it will  be  exceptional
                  that one of them will have 'sole responsibility'.

         11.  I accept the Sponsor's evidence regarding  the  upbringing  of
             the Appellant.  I am satisfied that the Appellant  lived  with
             the Sponsor until he relocated to the  UK.   The  arrangements
             that were made with the  Appellant's  biological  mother  were
             intended  to  be  temporary.   The  relationship  between  the
             Sponsor and his biological mother has clearly broken down.   I
             have  noted  that  the  Sponsor  has  been  providing  regular
             financial support for the Appellant although he has  expressed
             concern that the money  has  been  taken  by  the  Appellant's
             biological  mother  to  provide  for  herself  and  her  other
             children.  The Sponsor regularly attended parent  meetings  at
             the Appellant's school and I  have  seen  a  letter  from  the
             Principal, Charles A McKenzie, confirming this.   The  Sponsor
             confirms that he remains in  contact  with  the  Appellant  as
             regularly as possible and continues to monitor his  schooling.



         12.  I have noted that it has taken some time for  the  Sponsor  to
             try to bring the Appellant to the UK but I accept his evidence
             that he has been waiting until  he  was  financially  able  to
             maintain him in he UK.  I accept that the Sponsor has a family
             life in the UK with a British national wife and it  would  not
             be reasonable in my view to  ask  the  Sponsor  to  return  to
             Jamaica to look after the Appellant.

         13.  I have not seen any evidence showing how and when  contact  is
             maintained between the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  such  as
             telephone or Skype records.  I  have  not  seen  any  evidence
             about how the Sponsor is dealing with any emotional  needs  of
             the Appellant and  I  anticipate  that  his  circumstances  in
             Jamaica  would  give  rise  to  personal  problems   for   the
             Appellant.  I have noted  the  most  recent  e-mail  from  the
             Sponsor's wife indicating that in recent weeks the Appellant's
             biological mother has abandoned him  to  live  with  a  family
             friend.  The Sponsor has been unable to make contact with her.



         14.   While  under  normal  circumstances  I  would   expect   more
             information  regarding  the  Appellant's  situation  and   the
             contact he has with the Sponsor, on balance of probabilities I
             am satisfied that the Sponsor satisfies the test in TD (Yemen)
             and has established that he has sole  responsibility  for  the
             Appellant.  Accordingly I allow this appeal."

 7. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State and granted permission on  the  following  basis.   There  was  a
    severe lack of documentation to support the application which the judge
    noted himself at paragraphs 13 and 14.  Much of the evidence was  self-
    serving and not supported by any reliable evidence  such  as  a  letter
    from the appellant's mother or from the person he was currently  living
    with and it was not explained as to how the sponsor's wife  knew  about
    the claimed abandonment.  Although the judge referred to the  case  law
    of TD (Yemen) the judge had not given adequate reason as to  why  there
    were exceptional circumstances in the appellant's  case  and  had  thus
    erred in his  consideration.   It  was  not  demonstrated  through  the
    decision that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant and
    it was only shown that the sponsor generally gave financial support.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr [M], the sponsor and his wife attended.   I
    explained to them that there had been  no  further  evidence  submitted
    despite the directions sent out with regards  further  evidence  should
    the decision be  remade.   I  specifically  asked  if  they  wished  to
    consider an adjournment which they resisted.

 9. I find that there was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  As Mr Bramble pointed out there was not only a lack of
    evidence but there was a  conflict  of  evidence  which  had  not  been
    resolved.  At 13 the judge stated:

         "I have not seen any evidence  showing  how  and  when  contact  is
         maintained between the sponsor and the appellant such as  telephone
         or Sky records.  I have not seen any evidence about how the sponsor
         is dealing  with  any  emotional  needs  of  the  appellant  and  I
         anticipate that his circumstances in Jamaica  would  give  rise  to
         personal problems for the appellant".

    The judge nonetheless proceeded to find that the sponsor satisfied  the
    test in TD Yemen.  The burden of proof was on  the  appellant  and  the
    onus was on the appellant to provide documentation.

10. On the one hand the judge had stated and commented on the  sparsity  of
    the evidence whilst at the  same  time  accepting  that  the  sponsor's
    evidence regarding the  upbringing  of  the  appellant  [11].   It  was
    incumbent upon the judge to consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances in line with TD Yemen and whether the appellant's sponsor
    did in fact have sole responsibility.  Bearing in mind the  acute  lack
    of evidence which was before the judge, which is also  referred  to  at
    paragraphs 13 and 14, not least that  the  judge  stated  'While  under
    normal circumstances I would  expect  more  information  regarding  the
    appellant's situation and the contact he has  with  the  sponsor',  the
    reasoning of the judge in relation to his findings was insufficient for
    concluding that the sponsor had sole responsibility. The judge did  not
    explain  why  he  should  depart  from   the   'normal   circumstances'
    particularly in the light of TD Yemen.

11. I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  James
    and  I  remake  the  decision.  I  turn  to  a  consideration  of   the
    documentation myself and set out the relevant immigration rule

         301. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  limited  leave
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to  settlement
         as the child of a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement are that he:



         (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or remain  with
             a parent or parents in one of the following circumstances:

             (a)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
                  or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and
                  the other parent is being or has been given limited  leave
                  to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with  a  view  to
                  settlement; or

             (b)  one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to
                  settlement and has had sole responsibility for the child's
                  upbringing; or

             (c)  one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to
                  settlement and there are serious and compelling family  or
                  other considerations which make  exclusion  of  the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; and

         (ii) is under the age of 18; and

         (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
             not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent  family
             unit; and

         (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately without recourse  to
             public funds, in accommodation which the parent or parents own
             or occupy exclusively; and

         (iva)    can, and will, be maintained adequately by the  parent  or
             parents without recourse to public funds; and

         (ivb)    does not qualify for limited leave to enter as a child  of
             a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or remain  as
             a refugee or  beneficiary  of  humanitarian  protection  under
             paragraph 319R; and

         (v)  (where an application is made for limited leave to remain with
             a view to settlement) has limited leave to enter or remain  in
             the United Kingdom; and

         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
             clearance for entry in this capacity."

    and  the  headnote  to  TD  which  details   the   concept   of   'sole
responsibility':

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.   Where one parent is not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'".

12. At the hearing,  as  I  indicated  above  the  appellant's  father  and
    stepmother were invited to submit evidence and return to  an  adjourned
    hearing but they declined to do so on the basis they wish to pursue the
    resumed hearing on the day.  Bearing in mind their  representations  on
    the matter and the fact that the focus for my decision was the date  of
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer I considered that it was in the
    interests of justice  when  considering  the  overriding  objective  to
    proceed with the hearing.

13. In  support  of  the  appeal  the  documentation  lodged  included  the
    following.  An email of the sponsor's wife  Mrs  [SM]  dated  10th  May
    2016, a letter with references to payslips for proof of income from the
    sponsor's wife, a sponsorship  undertaking,  copy  of  the  appellant's
    sponsor's and father's residence permit, a copy of his wife's passport,
    a letter from Negril All Age School dated 26th September 2012, a letter
    from [TT] (Ms) the appellant's biological mother dated 8th October 2015
    and a letter from Mrs [SM] dated 15th August 2016.

14. At the hearing the appellant's father gave the following oral  evidence
    and he confirmed that at the date of decision the son was  living  with
    his biological mother.  He had continued living with  his  mother  when
    the sponsor left Jamaica for the UK in 2012 and he had  provided  funds
    to the mother for the appellant from 2012 to 2015 on a  monthly  basis.
    He had no doctor's receipts and the one letter he had from  school  was
    dated September 2012.  He advanced that he kept in touch with his son's
    school through a friend who worked in a  recording  studio  across  the
    road.  That friend had now relocated to New York.  He stated that often
    when he rang his son said he had no food and when he visited him he had
    said that his son had clearly gone one to two months without  having  a
    haircut.  He had visited him  in  Jamaica  when  they  made  the  entry
    clearance application last summer 2015.  He  had  no  further  evidence
    from the school and no letters  of  support  from  friends  in  Jamaica
    regarding the situation.  It was too expensive for  him  to  travel  to
    Jamaica.

15. The situation now was that the email from his wife dated 10th May  2016
    confirmed that the son was no longer living with his  mother  but  with
    friends.  The sponsor explained that he lived in a compound  where  his
    grandmother's house  was  and  their  strangers  and  family  including
    cousins lived there.  His wife in the UK's family lived at  a  distance
    in Jamaica.  A friend Jermaine was looking after  him  but  he  had  no
    letters from Jermaine.  He had started sending her money in April.   He
    explained that the house in the yard was the  mother's  mother's  house
    and the sister lived there.  He then amended his evidence to  say  that
    he was not sure whether the sister was there and he was not sure  which
    family members lived in the compound.  He confirmed  that  he  kept  in
    contact with his son via phone and Skype and he paid for the  internet.
    He confirmed that Jermaine was living in the compound but he could  not
    say for sure if the cousins lived there.  He then gave  an  example  of
    his son playing football with his cousins who  were  his  own  age  and
    there was a knifing incident which concerned him.

16. He confirmed that his own wife's parents lived in Jamaica but  were  at
    some distance.

17. Mrs [M] gave evidence and confirmed that  she  had  known  her  stepson
    since he was 3 years old and he was dear to her.

18. Mr Bramble did not question the credibility of the appellant  but  made
    submission that there was an issue  regarding  the  evidence.   It  was
    clear that the set of circumstances as at the date of decision were not
    such that the sponsor had sole responsibility and there was  no  up-to-
    date evidence.

19. In response Mr [M] stated that he had learnt that the mother was now in
    America and had learnt this in August from the pictures on Facebook.

My Conclusions

20. The focus of my conclusion is the decision dated  29th  September  2015
    and further to Section 85 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act I  can  only  admit  evidence  where  it  is  appertaining  to  the
    circumstances as at the date of decision.  I also take into account the
    guidance in TD (Yemen) set out above.  The appellant at the date of the
    Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  was  living  with  his  mother  in
    Jamaica.  The father and sponsor asserted that  he  had  a  very  close
    relationship with his son but  unfortunately  there  was  a  dearth  of
    evidence provided to support that contention.  The father  stated  that
    he had looked after his son up until the age of 8 at  which  point  the
    sponsor and father had departed from Jamaica and  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He left his  son  in  the  care  of  his  biological  mother.
    Although Mr [M] complained of the care that the mother afforded to  the
    appellant from the age of 1� years old onwards, I am not persuaded that
    the care was so poor that he was not  prepared  to  leave  him  in  her
    charge.

21.  The  critical  question  for  me  is  whether  the  sponsor  has  sole
    responsibility.  If he shares that responsibility with one  other  such
    has the biological mother then he does not have sole responsibility and
    cannot comply with the Rules under paragraph 301.  I  can  accept  that
    the sponsor has sent financial remittances throughout the time that  he
    has been in the United Kingdom for the care of his son.  There appeared
    to be a lack of other supporting evidence that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility.  There  was  a  sparsity  of  documentary  evidence  in
    relation to the school of the appellant and only one letter  from  2012
    was produced.  I find it difficult to accept that the sponsor can  have
    had control over the appellant's schooling when he can only contact the
    school through a friend in a recording studio over the road.  Nor  were
    there any remittances in relation to the appellant's medical care.

22. A further lacuna in the evidence was  the  absence  of  any  supporting
    letters from, for example, Jermaine  who  is  said  to  be  the  person
    looking after the appellant now or from any of the  family  members  in
    Jamaica.  The letter from the school confirmed that the sponsor  was  a
    very loving and caring parent and makes frequent visits to  school  but
    this was a letter from 2012.

23. There was no letter from Jermaine who is the person said to be  looking
    after the appellant at present and what I have identified is  that  the
    letter written by the mother dated 8th October  2015  referred  to  the
    fact that there were difficulties with the child "here  in  Jamaica  in
    the absence of his father [JM] who now resides in the UK".  She stated:



         "I am definitely experiencing  conditions  with  my  son  that  are
         unbearable and I know from a fact that this is happening due to the
         absence of his father in his life presently.

         Firstly the living condition at present is very much unpleasant  as
         my son usually lives with his father who gives him all the  support
         and teaching and positive values and mainly instilling in  him  the
         importance of education.

         I do not have a stable place to live and therefore I have  to  move
         regularly to family member home or close friends for accommodation.



         This situation affects my son as he was  quite  comfortable  living
         with his father."

    This letter was written after the decision made by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer and indicates that the mother is indeed and was indeed at  that
    time living in Westmoreland which is the address given by the appellant
    on his application form.  Indeed the area is  the  area  of  where  the
    school is.  I therefore do not accept that the mother had abandoned her
    son as at the date of decision and indeed I find that she would not  be
    prepared to have written such a  letter which indicates a  concern  for
    his welfare had she abandoned him.  This letter does not chime with the
    assertion that the mother has left and gone to America.  It was not the
    case put forward at that time that  the  mother  had  indeed  left  for
    America.

24. The sponsor's evidence was that the son lived in a compound with  other
    family members.  At first the sponsor stated that  the  family  members
    were cousins and then stated that he did not know who lived there.   If
    the sponsor had the parental responsibility that he states he  did  and
    sole responsibility, which is what he must show, I do not  accept  that
    he would not know who lived in the compound with his  son.   A  further
    point is that he stated that the appellant's biological mother's mother
    had a family home in that compound.  It  is  not  consistent  with  the
    argument that the mother had no stable home as she states in her letter
    if there was indeed a home in the  compound  for  them  and  where  the
    appellant states he has lived all his life (see VAF).

25. I do not accept therefore that only one parent is involved or that  the
    sponsor has had continuing control.  In those  circumstances,  that  is
    that both parents are involved, I am not persuaded that any exceptional
    circumstances have been shown to the effect that the sponsor  has  sole
    responsibility.  There were no medical reports or  information  and  no
    further reports from the school to show that the father did indeed have
    sole parental responsibility and had taken an active part in the school
    life or the important decisions of the child.

26. Overall the picture of who does indeed care for this child  in  Jamaica
    is not at all clear, despite the evidence of the sponsor and his  wife,
    and bearing in mind the level of scrutiny that needs to be afforded  to
    the best interests of a child I am not  persuaded  that  the  necessary
    evidence has been put forward regarding circumstances  appertaining  at
    the date of the decision to show that the appellant had  fulfilled  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules or that there were any compelling
    circumstances.  It would appear that the appellant has a home  and  has
    cousins of his own age to play with and further that  he  is  regularly
    attending school.  I take the point that it is difficult for the father
    to visit him because of the expense of  travelling  that  distance  but
    nonetheless that too undermines the case that  the  appellant's  father
    has sole parental responsibility.

27. On any analysis of Article 8 the starting point must be the Immigration
    Rules SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317. The appellant cannot  comply
    with these for the reasons given above.  Further to Singh v SSHD [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 I do not accept that all relevant  factors  have  not  been
    taken into account. Even if I am wrong about that,  although there  may
    be a protected family life with the father and son and with  which  the
    refusal will interfere, the decision is in accordance with the law  and
    necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms of  others  through
    the maintenance of immigration control. In the circumstances I  am  not
    persuaded that the decision is one  which  is  disproportionate.    The
    focus for such analysis is also the date of the Entry Clearance Officer
    decision AS (Somalia) and another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] UKHL 32.  At  that  point  the  appellant  was  still
    living with  his  mother  albeit  that  living  may  have  become  more
    difficult. The best interests of the child T (s.55 BCIA  2009  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC) are not  to  be  taken  into
    account as a statutory  requirement  but  nonetheless  they  should  be
    addressed. On the evidence, I am not  persuaded  that  the  mother  has
    indeed relinquished her part in the upbringing of the  child  and  thus
    that the appellant's best interests lie away from  a  home  in  Jamaica
    where his relatives live and a school which  he  clearly  continues  to
    attend.

28. As set out in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 'In an article 8 case  where
    this question is reached,  the  ultimate  question  for  the  appellate
    immigration authority is whether the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain, in circumstances where the life of the family cannot reasonably
    be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account  of  all
    considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the family
    life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount  to  a
    breach of the fundamental right protected by article 8'.   In  my  view
    the evidence has not shown the family life o the appellant has not been
    so prejudiced.  I appreciate that the father has not  visited  his  son
    since the father left in 2012, but he does have, as he states,  contact
    through modern methods and this can continue as before.

29.  I therefore set aside the decision  of  Judge  James  and  remake  the
    decision dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

