
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09597/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/09598/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/10105/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2020                    |On 3rd August 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     Y p
                                     s t
                                     a p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs MADe)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 20 March 2020 indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside; the parties  agreed  with  no  objections
    being raised and both made written submissions on the issues raised  in
    the appeal.  It is in the interests of justice to proceed to  determine
    these issues on the papers in light of the detailed written submissions
    from the parties and the full appeal files.

 2. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Reid promulgated on 7 November 2019, in  which  the
    Appellants' appeals against the decisions to refuse their human  rights
    claims dated 20 May 2019 were dismissed.

 3. The First Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 11 June  1986,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom in 2009 with leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student and leave to remain as  such  was  extended  to  30
    November 2016. On 13 August 2014 the First Appellant was served with an
    IS.151A notice (a section 10 removal notice) on the basis that  he  had
    used deception in an English language test in 2013  relied  on  in  his
    previous application  for  leave  to  remain.   The  Second  and  Third
    Appellants are the First Appellant's wife and  daughter  who  are  both
    dependent on this latest application  for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds made on 2 May 2020.

 4. The Respondent refused the applications the basis that  the  Appellants
    did not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  a  grant
    of leave to remain, either under Appendix FM on  the  basis  of  family
    life or under paragraph 267ADE on the basis of private life.   Further,
    the First Appellant was refused on suitability grounds on the basis  of
    having used deception in obtaining an English language test by a  proxy
    test taker, relied upon in a previous application for leave to  remain.
    There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to
    remain.

 5. Judge Reid dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 7 November
    2019 on all grounds.  In  relation  to  the  suitability  criteria  and
    allegation of deception against the First Appellant, it was found  that
    despite the criticisms by the All Party Parliamentary Group of the  ETS
    evidence, the Respondent had discharged the initial  burden  of  proof.
    The First Appellant's explanation in response was considered in  detail
    but overall,  it was found that the Respondent had discharged the legal
    burden of proof to establish on the balance of probabilities  that  the
    prima facie innocent explanations of the First Appellant were  rejected
    and he did use a proxy test taker in 2013.  Separate consideration  was
    given to the Appellants' private and family life as well  as  the  best
    interests of the Third Appellant; with the finding that there would  be
    no breach of the right to respect for family  life  as  the  Appellants
    would return to Nepal together as a family unit (and Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules is not therefore satisfied as they are  all  Nepalese
    nationals);  and  there  were  no   very   significant   obstacles   to
    reintegration in Nepal for the purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In relation to Article  8  and  private  life  more
    broadly, the First-tier Tribunal  took  into  account  the  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and
    overall  found  that  the  public  interest  in   immigration   control
    outweighed the interference with the Appellants' private life.

The appeal

 6. The Appellants appeal on four grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  in  making  speculative
    findings, in particular by finding that the lack of evidence as to  the
    First Appellant's studies between 2009 and 2013 was because  they  were
    not going well due to him struggling with English, which was found to a
    be a motivation for cheating in 2013.  The  finding  was  made  without
    evidential basis and then contradicted by the finding  that  the  First
    Appellant had sufficient English, which could be improved  rapidly,  to
    undertake a Master's degree course from 2013.  Secondly, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in applying the wrong standard of
    proof to the  evidence,  higher  than  the  balance  of  probabilities.
    Thirdly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing  to  make  any  clear  assessment  of  the  First   Appellant's
    credibility and  in  particular  failed  to  give  any  weight  to  the
    consistency of his evidence as to the detail about the test  taken  and
    transport  to  get  there.   Finally,  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    materially erred in law in failing to give  sufficient  weight  to  the
    First Appellant's evidence under  cross-examination  and  his  academic
    achievements, in particular his study in English between 2002 and  2007
    before he arrived in the United Kingdom; not  making  findings  on  the
    flaws in the Respondent's generic evidence and  failing  to  take  into
    account that the  First  Appellant  had  completed  an  Association  of
    Business Executives course in the United Kingdom  prior  to  commencing
    his Master's degree in 2013.

 7. The Appellants submitted further written submissions setting  out  five
    separate grounds of appeal,  said  to  be  those  originally  made  but
    significantly recast and including additional points and at  least  one
    additional ground, that the First-tier Tribunal's findings in  relation
    to the First Appellant's English language ability between 2009 and 2013
    were made without giving him an opportunity to  respond.   The  written
    submissions fail to correspond with the grounds of appeal submitted  by
    the Appellants upon which permission  was  granted  and  seek,  without
    leave, to significant widen and change the matters relied upon with  no
    explanation for the approach.   I  set  out  below  a  summary  of  the
    submissions but return later to consider the extent to which  they  are
    actually within the scope of this appeal.

 8. The first ground of appeal identified in  the  written  submissions  is
    that there was  a  failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider
    relevant evidence before it.  It is  submitted  that  further  evidence
    sent as an addendum to the Appellants' bundle on 16 October 2019, which
    contained evidence of the First Appellant's  attendance  at  the  South
    London College; was not taken  into  consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There was a failure to take into account  relevant  material
    relied upon by the Appellant.

 9. The second ground of appeal identified in the written  submissions,  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give the Appellants'  notice
    of an adverse finding against them, which appears to be relied upon  on
    further to a statement in the original grounds that the First Appellant
    was not asked questions about the position  prior  to  2013.   However,
    there was no express ground of appeal on this basis in the  application
    for permission, nor has permission granted on it  (which  I  return  to
    below).  On this point, the Appellants' submit that there was no  basis
    for speculation as to the First  Appellant's  academic  progression  in
    this time and if asked, he could have drawn attention to the  documents
    not considered by the First-tier Tribunal as to this period.

10. The third ground of appeal identified in  the  written  submissions  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal made contradictory findings that the First
    Appellant was struggling in English between 2009 and 2013 but was  then
    able to successfully begin a Master's degree in 2013 and  completed  it
    in 2016 in English; with an attempt to reconcile this by  suggesting  a
    rapid improvement in this period.

11. The fourth ground of appeal identified in the  written  submissions  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal  applied  the  wrong  standard  of  proof,
    failing to follow the approach set out in Mhandiramge  (section  S-LTR.
    1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC) and in relying on the  findings  in  SM  and
    Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC)  without
    appreciating that the findings in the  All  Party  Parliamentary  Group
    report could alter the stage one  conclusion.   The  Appellants  submit
    that the First-tier Tribunal fail to answer  the  second  stage  as  to
    whether the First Appellant's evidence met  the  test  of  a  plausible
    innocent explanation; such that the final conclusion is flawed.

12. The fifth ground of appeal identified in  the  written  submissions  is
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  properly  engage  with  the
    evidence from the  All  Party  Parliamentary  Group  or  generally  the
    criticisms of the Respondent's  evidence;  making  findings  apparently
    based solely on the First Appellant's motivation to cheat.

13. The Respondent submitted further written submissions  pursuant  to  the
    directions issued by UTJ Smith  on  20  March  2020,  setting  out  her
    response to the grounds of appeal.  The Respondent continued to rely on
    her rule 24 notice dated 4 March 2020, which in  summary,  opposed  the
    appeal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  expressly  considered
    all of the evidence and reached findings that were  open  to  it,  with
    adequate reasons in relation to the finding of deception, applying  the
    correct standard of proof.

14. On the first ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that this amounts
    only to a disagreement with the findings made without  identifying  any
    error of law in the decision.  The First-tier Tribunal  relied  on  the
    lack of evidence of the First Appellant's studies between 2009 and 2013
    (in contrast to other periods) to confirm even  when  and  whether  the
    Appellant attended and no explanation  had  been  given  by  the  First
    Appellant to explain the gap.  It was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in the absence of evidence about this period to conclude that this  was
    because the First Appellant's studies were not going well  and  he  was
    struggling with his English.  Further, it was open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to find the absence of  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  the
    First Appellant scoring 100% in his English language test in 2013.   It
    is submitted that  there  is  no  contradiction  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant had studied in English before  and  after  this  period,  but
    became rusty in this middle period when there was no evidence  that  he
    was studying or using his English.

15. On the second ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that the  First-
    tier Tribunal correctly set out and applied  the  correct  standard  of
    proof and there is nothing in the decision to show anything other  than
    the balance of probabilities being applied after consideration  of  all
    of the evidence in the round.

16. On the third ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that  the  weight
    to be attached to the evidence is a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal
    and it was open to it to attach  no  significance  either  way  to  the
    evidence of the First Appellant's journey to the test  centre  for  the
    reasons given in paragraph 27.

17. Finally, the Respondent submits that the First-tier Tribunal  expressly
    referred to evidence of the First Appellant's studies in English  prior
    to his arrival in the United Kingdom and more recently,  but  concludes
    that this does not identify his language ability at the pertinent  time
    in 2013.   Further,  the  All  Party  Parliamentary  Group  report  was
    expressly taken into account at paragraph 30 and that  the  failure  to
    expressly refer  to  the  First  Appellant's  Association  of  Business
    Executive course was not material as it did not shed any light  on  the
    Appellant's English language ability between 2009 and 2013.

18. Upon consideration of the written submissions,  it  became  clear  that
    neither party had seen those made by the other and therefore  I  issued
    directions on 6 July 2020 providing for the responses to be shared  and
    the parties were given the opportunity to make any further  submissions
    if needed.  Both parties confirmed that they did not wish to  make  any
    further submissions and continued to rely on those already filed.

Findings and reasons

 1. It is necessary to specify first what the grounds of appeal before  the
    Upper Tribunal actually are.  I have set out above the four grounds  in
    the application for  permission  to  appeal  which  are  confirmed  and
    summarised in the grant of  permission  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant-Hutchison as follows:

         "Whilst the Judge consider [sic] the correct burden of proof it  is
         arguable that the Judge has erred in law (a) by making  speculative
         findings in stating that the lack of evidence about the period when
         the Appellant was first starting in the UK between 2009 to 2013 was
         on the basis that his studies were not going well and that  he  did
         not want to explain why  that  is  the  case  because  it  involves
         struggling with English; (b) by contradicting  herself  in  stating
         that whilst the Appellant must have been  struggling  with  English
         during the period from 2009 to 2013 he was able to complete a three-
         year MSc course from 2013 onwards "as his English could be improved
         quite rapidly given his existing knowledge"; (c) by failing to make
         any clear assessment of the Appellant's credibility in relation  to
         his journey to the test centre; (d) by failing to make any findings
         on the evidence that the Appellant had completed the Association of
         Business Executive Course in the UK prior to the offer to  commence
         a Master's degree at the University of West London  in  2013  which
         could have made a material difference to the weight the Judge  gave
         to the Appellant's study of English before he arrived in the UK and
         the period from 2009 to 2013."

 2. To the extent that written submissions on behalf of the  Appellants  go
    wider than these grounds, permission has not been sought or obtained to
    argue them and only those submissions relevant to the actual grounds of
    appeal will be expressly considered; albeit for  completeness  some  of
    the additional points are addressed but can not be determinative.

 3. The first ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
    speculative findings on the First Appellant's English language  ability
    based on the absence of documents relating to his studies between  2009
    and 2013.  The  further  written  representations  refer  to  documents
    submitted under cover of a letter dated  16  October  2019  containing,
    inter alia, a record of the Appellant's attendance  from  South  London
    College which were not considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. However, although a copy of those  documents  accompanied  the  written
    grounds of appeal and further submissions, there is no evidence  of  an
    addendum to the main bundle having  been  received  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or available to Judge Reid when considering the appeal - it is
    not on file (save for as an attachment to later documents)  and  it  is
    not listed in paragraph 4  of  the  decision  as  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.  The record of proceedings start with a list of the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  and  discussion  on  this  between  the
    parties as the Respondent did  not  have  the  Appellants'  bundle  and
    arrangements were made to deal with that.  There is nothing to  suggest
    any reference was made at that point to an addendum bundle, nor at  any
    other point during the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  nor
    reliance placed in submissions or otherwise on any  document  contained
    in  an  addendum  bundle.   Further,  there  is  no  reference  to  the
    particular document now referred to in the skeleton argument on  behalf
    of  the  Appellants  (contrary  to  the  express  reference  to   other
    educational documents before and after the period 2009 to 2013  in  the
    United Kingdom); nor to any other  documents  in  an  addendum  bundle.
    There is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  not  taking  into
    account evidence which was simply not before it nor mentioned or relied
    upon at all at the hearing.

 5. The evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  include
    any documentary evidence about the First  Appellant's  studies  between
    2009 and 2013, in contrast to detailed written evidence with supporting
    documentation of his studies before and after this period.  It was  not
    simply the absence of evidence for this period but the contrast between
    the availability of evidence before and after this period combined with
    the lack of explanation about the period in between which led the First-
    tier Tribunal to draw adverse inferences about the Appellant's lack  of
    progression during this time and that this would  be  relevant  to  his
    motivation to use a proxy test  taker  in  2013  when  applying  for  a
    Master's degree course.  The First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that  if
    there had been evidence of attendance  and  progression,  it  was  less
    likely that problems with the First Appellant's study in English  would
    have arisen.  I find those are findings which were open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to make on the basis of the evidence that  was,  and  was
    not before them at the date of the appeal  (which  as  above,  did  not
    include the attendance letter for  South  London  College  or  anything
    documenting completion of any course during the period 2009-2013).

 6. Further, I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal's finding about the
    First Appellant's English language ability in 2013, which  was  in  any
    event directed towards possible motivation for using a proxy test taker
    rather than any specific finding as to his level  of  English  at  that
    time (given the lack of evidence of the same and in recognition of  the
    fact that a person may still use a  proxy  test  taker  even  if  their
    English was sufficient that they could have passed the test themselves)
    was inconsistent with the finding that his English could  have  rapidly
    improved between 2013 and  2016  by  the  time  of  completion  of  his
    Master's degree and subsequently to the date of hearing  when  he  gave
    oral evidence.  For these reasons I find no error of law on  the  first
    ground of appeal.

 7. The second ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal applied the
    wrong  standard  of  proof,  higher  than  that  of  the   balance   of
    probabilities.  That is not borne out by  a  rational  reading  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which expressly sets out  both  the
    three stage approach where the Respondent bears the initial  evidential
    burden of a prima facie case  of  deception;  followed  by  the  burden
    shifting to the Appellant to establish an  innocent  explanation  to  a
    minimum plausible level; and finally the legal burden on the Respondent
    to establish deception.  There are clear findings on all  three  stages
    in paragraphs 30 to 32 of the decision with express  reference  to  the
    standard of proof applied being the balance of probabilities.  There is
    nothing express  nor  in  substance  in  the  decision  to  support  an
    assertion that any different or higher standard was in fact applied  to
    the evidence.  There is no error  of  law  on  this  second  ground  of
    appeal.

 8. The third ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    make an assessment of the First Appellant's credibility and  failed  to
    give any weight to the consistency of his evidence about his  test  and
    travel to it.  There is no need  for  a  Tribunal  to  expressly  state
    whether a person is found to be credible  or  not  as  a  free-standing
    statement within a decision.  In the circumstances of this case,  where
    numerous reasons are given for  the  overall  finding  that  the  First
    Appellant used a proxy test taker for his English language test and was
    dishonest in doing so and further, the  specific  and  express  finding
    that his prima facie innocent explanation  is  rejected;  there  is  no
    doubt that the First-tier Tribunal did in substance  assess  the  First
    Appellant's credibility and found that aspect of  his  claim,  that  he
    took the test himself, was not credible.

 9. In paragraph 27 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal considers  the
    First Appellant's evidence of his test and in particular travel to  it;
    giving clear and sustainable reasons for not  attaching  weight  to  it
    either way.  The weight to be  attached  to  evidence  is  primarily  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal and there is  no  error  of  law  or
    irrational approach to this particular evidence.  There is no error  of
    law on this third ground of appeal.

10. The final ground  of  appeal  also  concerns  the  weight  attached  to
    evidence by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  particular  to  the  First
    Appellant's performance in cross-examination, his academic achievements
    and duration of his study in English; as  well  as  too  little  weight
    being attached to the flaws relied upon  in  the  Respondent's  generic
    evidence.  This is expanded upon in the further written submissions  to
    rely more specifically on the All Party Parliamentary Group report  and
    inconsistent  information  on  the  look-up  tool   about   the   First
    Appellant's nationality.

11. The First-tier Tribunal expressly took into account within its findings
    the First Appellant's academic qualifications (to the extent that these
    were in evidence before the First-tier Tribunal; as above this did  not
    include information about completion of  the  Association  of  Business
    Executives course) and previous English language assessment; at  school
    and with a diploma in General Medicine, studied  in  English  in  Nepal
    (paragraph 22 of the decision), his British  Council  English  test  in
    2009 (paragraph 23 of the decision), his MSc between 2013 and 2016  and
    offer of a place to do a PhD (paragraph 24 of the  decision).   It  can
    not be said that these matters were not taken into account nor is there
    any error with the weight attached to this evidence by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, as  above,  that  is  a  matter  for  the  Tribunal  with  no
    irrationality in the approach or reasons given.

12. In relation  to  the  Respondent's  generic  evidence,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal noted at paragraph  29  of  the  decision  that  there  was  a
    criminal  investigation  into  South  Quay  college  where  the   First
    Appellant stated that he sat his English language test, which  is  more
    specific than the All Party Parliamentary Group report which was  wider
    on the ETS system more generally.  The First-tier  Tribunal  then  make
    further express reference to  that  report  in  paragraph  30  and  the
    criticisms made of the ETS evidence found to mean that it is impossible
    to take decisions based on that  evidence  alone.   There  is  then  an
    express finding that the report identifies a number  of  real  concerns
    about the ETS process and decision making using that  data;  but  those
    concerns were not sufficient for the First-tier Tribunal to  find  that
    the Respondent had not discharged the initial evidential burden as also
    decided in SM and Qadir.

13. Contrary to the suggestion in the further written submissions on behalf
    of the  Appellants;  these  paragraphs  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision expressly engage with  the  findings  in  the  report  and  an
    overall assessment of all of the evidence was made, rather than just  a
    simple reliance on the earlier findings  in  SM  and  Qadir.   Although
    there is no express reference to the concerns raised about the  content
    of the look-up tool, the First-tier Tribunal  expressly  found  that  a
    decision could not, and was not, made on the  basis  of  that  evidence
    alone.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  considered  all  of  the
    evidence in the round, in a balanced way and reached conclusions  which
    were open to it on the evidence available  and  with  adequate  reasons
    being given for those findings.  There is no error of law on the  final
    ground of appeal as to the assessment of the First Appellant's history,
    the Respondent's generic evidence or material contrary to  it;  nor  in
    the weight attached to any of this evidence.

14. For the reasons set out above, there is no error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         20th July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

