
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09483/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2019                           |On 12 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        ms Mitchelle Abitu Khasakhala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel instructed by Mondair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a  national  of  Kenya,  date  of  birth  17  June  1999,
    appealed against the decision of the ECO, dated  1  August  2017.   The
    basis of the application to the ECO was for leave to enter by reference
    to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (the  rules).   The
    matter was refused because of the absence of  evidence.  In  particular
    under paragraph 297(i)(e) on the basis that the Appellant's mother, the
    Sponsor, did not have sole responsibility for the  child's  upbringing.
    The Appellant had been a child at the date of application.

2.   Her appeal against the  ECO's  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal judge Grimmett (the Judge) decision [D] on 19  November  2018.
    Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville  on
    7 January 2019.

3.   Before the Judge, in the alternative,  the  Appellant's  representative
    had argued under paragraph 297(i)(f)  of  the  rules  that  there  were
    serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made  the
    exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.  The Judge, with some  brevity,
    set out clear reasons why she rejected the claim that the appeal  could
    succeed on the grounds of sole responsibility under  sub-paragraph  (e)
    but did not specifically deal with  sub-paragraph  (i)(f).   The  Judge
    went on, again somewhat briefly, to refer to the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant bearing in mind  the  Appellant  was  a  university  student,
    living  in  some  form  of  temporary   accommodation   with   friends,
    financially and emotionally supported by her mother, the  Sponsor.  The
    Sponsor remains a national of Kenya who became a UK national.

4.   The  Judge  concluded  that  the  family  life  which  took  place  had
    essentially been based around visits  that  the  Sponsor  had  made  to
    Kenya. The Appellant's father who  was  based  in  Tanzania,  had  made
    visits an occasional basis.  The Judge concluded, again with remarkable
    brevity that the decision did not interfere with her family life and on
    the basis of the facts it would follow with her private life  as  well.
    The Judge did not formally dismiss the appeal with reference to Article
    8 ECHR grounds. Mr Tufan argued that in effect it must  have  been  the
    judge's intention because [D3] the Judge  had  referred  to  Article  8
    issues and the discussion was on family life so  that  the  Judge  must
    have  concluded  there  was   no   disproportionate   interference   in
    family/private life rights.

5.   Mr Chakmakjian said in effect the consideration of the Judge failed  to
    address the evidence particularly of the Sponsor who gave  evidence  of
    the visits, with or without her UK  national  children  who  are  half-
    sisters of the Appellant.  Ultimately, the Sponsor's evidence  did  not
    get close to  making  out  the  necessary  case  that  the  Appellant's
    exclusion from the UK was having an adverse impact on the  half-sisters
    nor was there evidence of significant harm to the  Sponsor's  wellbeing
    or indeed the Appellant's wellbeing from being excluded.

6.   It was perhaps unsurprising  that  the  Appellant  has  some  sense  of
    grievance about the fact that she has been left  behind  and  that  her
    mother is settled and resided in the United Kingdom and she has had the
    same benefits.  Putting that aside, her discontent did not  get  close,
    on the evidence, to showing it was having an adverse  impact  upon  the
    Appellant.  Quite remarkably it seemed to me, given that the  Appellant
    has been for some time an adult, educated and still in education,  that
    no statement has been obtained from her to put before the Judge  as  to
    the impact of separation both in terms of her perception of the impacts
    on her half-sisters or indeed herself.

7.   Why that should have been the case I do not  know  but  Mr  Chakmakjian
    was not responsible for the  preparation  of  the  appeal  nor  was  he
    directing the presentation of  the  case  before  the  Judge.   In  the
    circumstances it is extremely difficult to see what evidence there  was
    of serious and compelling family or other considerations which made the
    exclusion of  the  Appellant  undesirable.   On  the  basis  that  sub-
    paragraph (i) (f) was raised in the submissions being made,  I  do  not
    find there was evidence which either the Judge ignored or alternatively
    had not considered as to why there were serious and  compelling  family
    or other considerations which made exclusion undesirable.  Accordingly,
    I find that the Judge in failing to refer to that matter did  not  make
    any material error of law: Even if there was an error, in failing to do
    so, there was nothing to indicate it was material to the outcome of the
    appeal on the strength of the evidence that was then advanced.

8.   In relation to the Article 8  issue  Mr  Chakmakjian  essentially  said
    that needed to be properly looked at in the context of the  fact  on  a
    remaking that the Appellant was now an adult and a student. Whilst  the
    case law particularly emphasises that there was no bright-line  between
    being a child and an adult, the fact of the matter is it is  very  hard
    to see what evidence there really was of the kind  necessary  to  show,
    even through the prism of the Rules that the Respondent's decision  was
    disproportionate.

9.   Accordingly, whilst it would  have  been  better  to  have  more  fully
    analysed the Article 8 ECHR claim in relation to  the  interference  in
    her family life by the exclusion of the Appellant, I conclude  that  on
    the strength of the limited evidence that was advanced in the manner it
    was, again not by Mr Chakmakjian, the inevitable outcome was  that  the
    appeal would have failed on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  outside  of  the
    Rules. There is nothing to show  that  the  decision  would  have  been
    unduly harsh or have consequences which have  the  necessary  level  of
    exceptionality that is referred to in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  or  that
    the ECO's decision was disproportionate  or  there  were  unduly  harsh
    consequences.  Accordingly, I conclude the Original Tribunal's decision
    does not disclose a material error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was made, nor is one required, nor was it requested.

Signed   Date 6 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed   Date 6 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
