
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09791/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2020                   |On 11th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               farzana kausar
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions dated 2 April  2020,  sent  on  24  April  2020,
    indicating a provisional view  that  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, it would be appropriate in this case to determine the  issue
    of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an
    error of law and if so whether the decision should be set  aside.   The
    Secretary of State made written submissions on 8 May  2020  further  to
    the directions but no response was received on  behalf  of  Ms  Kausar,
    either as to the substance of the appeal or whether it was  appropriate
    to determine it without a hearing.  The Upper  Tribunal  contacted  the
    Appellant's representatives on 23 July 2020  as  to  any  response,  to
    which they confirmed on 24 July 2020 that no response was filed.  There
    was nothing to indicate that that was anything other than a  deliberate
    decision not  to  make  submissions  or  to  object  to  the  procedure
    proposed.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and  where  the  Respondent  made  written
    submissions, the Appellant choosing not to; it is in the  interests  of
    justice to proceed to determine the error of law issues on  the  papers
    in light of the written submission available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers  promulgated
    on 1 November 2019, in which Ms Kausar's appeal against the decision to
    refuse her human rights claim dated 17 April  2020  was  allowed.   For
    ease I continue to refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, with Ms Kausar as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 20 February  1959,  who
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 24 January  2017,  following
    which she returned to Pakistan and came to the United Kingdom again  on
    26 May 2017 and stated that she moved to Ireland the following day.  On
    12 September 2017 the Appellant was encountered in  Belfast  attempting
    to travel  and  served  with  an  Immigration  Notice.   The  Appellant
    submitted a human rights claim on 3 October 2017 which was refused on 8
    February 2018 with no right of appeal.  A further application was  made
    on 8 October 2018, the refusal of which is the subject of this  appeal.



 5. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not meet any  of  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM for a grant of leave  to  remain.   The
    Appellant's medical conditions were considered but  did  not  meet  the
    high threshold for a grant of leave to remain on that basis  and  there
    were no other exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 6. Judge Cruthers allowed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  1
    November 2019 on human rights grounds.  It was accepted  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant did not
    meet the high threshold for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  on  medical
    grounds under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    instead only relied upon Article 8 of the same, including by  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, private life and risk  of
    suicide.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   found   that   the   Appellant's
    circumstances came nowhere near establishing a high risk of suicide and
    that given her circumstances in Pakistan,  there  were  no  significant
    obstacles to her return and she could not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7.  In  relation  to  the  balancing  exercise,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    identified one neutral  factor  (that  there  was  a  single  piece  of
    correspondence with the Appellant's  brother  in  Pakistan)  and  three
    factors against the Appellant that were  that  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration Rules (including that she had never had
    any intention of returning to Pakistan after entry as a visitor);  that
    she would be financially supported on return to Pakistan  with  medical
    treatment  available;  and  that  there  was  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant's home in Pakistan was no longer available to her.  The First-
    tier Tribunal  then  identified  factors  in  the  Appellant's  favour,
    including that the Appellant was unlikely to get  assistance  from  her
    brother or his children in Pakistan; that the Sponsor  and  his  family
    are the only likely family to provide emotional and financial  support;
    that the strength of the Appellant's social networks would have reduced
    during her residence in Abu Dhabi and that there is a  lack  of  social
    care for the elderly; that visits from family  in  the  United  Kingdom
    would be limited; that there is medical evidence against  a  return  to
    Pakistan; that the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  grandchildren
    would be to continue to reside in the United Kingdom with her and  that
    the Appellant does not have recourse to  public  funds  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Overall, the First-tier Tribunal concluded  that  the  family
    life of the individuals outweighed the public interest  in  immigration
    control.

The appeal

 8. The Respondent appeals on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal  has
    failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal on human rights
    grounds because the  Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  family  life
    outweighs  the  public  interest  in  her  removal,   particularly   in
    circumstances  where  she  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules and where she would  be  financially  supported  with
    medical treatment available in Pakistan.

 9. Further written submissions were received on behalf of  the  Respondent
    in response to the directions dated 2 April 2020 (sent 24  April  2020)
    which gave more detail on the grounds of appeal submitted  as  follows.
    The Respondent submits, in summary, that it is unclear why  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has allowed the appeal on the  basis  of  findings  made;
    including that the Appellant was not as restricted in her  mobility  or
    self-care as claimed; that elderly people could live alone in  Pakistan
    with sufficient finances (even if at nearly 60 the Appellant really was
    elderly) and where there was no dispute that  the  Appellant  would  be
    financially  supported  on  return  and  that  medical  treatment   was
    available; as was her home to return to.

10. Further, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to specify what assistance
    the Appellant needed on return to Pakistan; failed to take into account
    that the Appellant had returned to live in Pakistan from Abu  Dhabi  in
    2012; failed to take into account the availability of medical treatment
    in Pakistan and its own finding that there  was  not  a  high  risk  of
    suicide when relying on the medical report in the  Appellant's  favour;
    failed to  acknowledge  that  the  communication  would  be  maintained
    between the family through modern means and visits; attached  too  much
    weight to the best interests of the Appellant's grandchildren which was
    'very far from being a decisive factor' and attached positive weight to
    the Appellant being financially supported when the factors  in  section
    117B(2) and (3) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    were only neutral and do not attract positive weight in  favour  of  an
    individual.

11. As above, the Appellant did not make  any  written  representations  in
    response to the grounds of appeal or submissions  from  the  Respondent
    and no Rule 24 response has been filed.

Findings and reasons

 1. For the following reasons, I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    erred in law by making inadequate  findings;  coming  to  a  conclusion
    which fails to take into account properly those findings that have been
    made, errs in its application of the factors in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and fails to give adequate
    reasons for allowing the appeal.

 2. First, although not expressly stated in  the  Respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal, there are a lack of adequate  findings  of  fact  to  enable  a
    lawful balancing exercise to take  place.   For  example,  there  is  a
    finding that the Appellant's mobility  and  ability  to  self-care  was
    nothing like as restricted as she claimed, in particular because  of  a
    lack of evidence of any need for an  adult  to  provide  any  care;  an
    unwillingness of the Appellant to answer questions  about  day  to  day
    functions (but acknowledged that she could  manage  for  herself);  the
    fact that the Appellant volunteers in a shop to work once  a  week  and
    provides care for her grandchildren when their  parents  are  at  work.
    Although this part of the claim is  rejected,  there  are  no  findings
    whatsoever on what, if any, care or  support  the  Appellant  requires.
    Similarly, although there  is  reference  to  the  Appellant's  medical
    conditions and medical evidence; there is no express finding about what
    medical needs she has but only  an  apparent  acceptance  that  medical
    treatment is available in Pakistan.

 3. Further, there are no findings as to the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    Appellant's relationships with her family in the United Kingdom and  no
    express finding that family life is established  for  the  purposes  of
    engaging Article 8; albeit it would of course be taken into account  as
    part of the Appellant's private life, it is not clear  the  basis  upon
    which Article 8 is assessed which is at least potentially  relevant  to
    the factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 4. Secondly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  takes  into  account  as  positive
    factors in the  Appellant's  favour  a  number  of  matters  which  are
    arguably inconsistent with the earlier findings and/or fail to  explain
    why these  are  positive  factors  at  all.   These  include  that  the
    Appellant would not receive assistance from  family  in  Pakistan,  but
    given that there are no findings on what assistance she required, there
    is no explanation as to how this is a positive factor at all and  there
    is no consideration of any alternative support (if needed at all) given
    the recognition that elderly people with adequate  financial  resources
    (which it was found  the  Appellant  would  have)  can  live  alone  in
    Pakistan.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal also find that the Appellant's residence in Abu
    Dhabi from 1986 will have impacted on the strength of  social  networks
    in Pakistan but fails to acknowledge that  the  Appellant  returned  to
    live in Pakistan in 2012 and in any event makes no actual  findings  as
    to the Appellant's networks in Pakistan, a country where she has  spent
    the majority of her life and has family.

 6. In relation to family contact,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acknowledges
    that the  Appellant's  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  provide
    emotional and financial support to her  and  would  visit,  albeit  the
    opportunities for visits would be very limited.  There are  no  reasons
    given as to why this is a factor in the Appellant's favour  given  that
    it is in essence a finding that family life  can  be  maintained  after
    removal; presumably as it was before the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 7. In relation to the medical evidence, there is a simple  statement  that
    the reports of Dr Moosa provide support for the  Appellant's  claim  to
    remain in the United Kingdom but no further explanation is  given  even
    despite the earlier references in the decision discounting the risk  of
    suicide set out in the same reports and the finding,  contrary  to  the
    medical reports, that the Appellant has  overstated  her  inability  to
    self-care and  mobility  issues.   There  is  no  clear  or  consistent
    assessment of this medical evidence.

 8. Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal take into account as a positive factor
    that the Appellant can be maintained and accommodated without  recourse
    to public funds; a factor  which  is  at  best  neutral  under  section
    117B(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. Fourthly,  in  addition  and  although  not  expressly  stated  by  the
    Respondent, it is a Robinson obvious point that although the First-tier
    Tribunal has set out the factors in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 early in  the  decision,  there  is  no
    clear application of the same.  In particular, there is no  recognition
    that section 117B(2) or (4) apply given that  it  is  stated  that  the
    Appellant only speaks a little English and that she  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully since her arrival.

10. Finally, when taking all of these matters into account,  there  are  no
    clear reasons given as to why the factors  in  the  Appellant's  favour
    (even if all taken into account  without  the  difficulties  identified
    with a significant number of them above), to which little weight is  to
    be attached given she is in the United Kingdom unlawfully; outweigh the
    interests of immigration control  particularly  given  the  Appellant's
    history of deception seeking to enter  the  United  Kingdom  (to  which
    significant weight should be attached) and support available on return.

11. Overall and even without the  Robinson  obvious  points  not  expressly
    relied upon by the Respondent, there are clear errors  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's inadequate findings, inadequate reasoning and  in
    the final balancing exercise undertaken for the purposes of  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   For  these  reasons  the
    decision on Article 8 must be set aside and the appeal remade  on  this
    point only.  As accepted before the First-tier Tribunal, the  Appellant
    did not meet the threshold for Article  3  on  medical  grounds  and  I
    preserve  this  together  with  the  unchallenged  findings  that   the
    Appellant does not meet any of  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for a grant of leave to remain.

12. Although some findings of fact  have  been  preserved,  there  are  not
    insignificant further findings of fact  required  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's private and family life for the purposes of Article 8  such
    that this is a case which is more appropriately remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for determination.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision in relation to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (with preserved findings of fact as above in relation  to  Article  3
and the Immigration Rules).

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Manchester hearing centre) to be heard  before  any
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal except Judge Cruthers.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed G Jackson                             Date         3rd August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

