
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/09253/2015
     hu/09256/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2018                            |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  issa [m]
                                 zakaria [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the  Appellant  is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondents are referred to as the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants appealed against the ECO's  refusal  of  entry  dated  18
    September 2015.  Their appeals came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid who, on 13 June 2017, allowed  their  appeals.   The  ECO  sought
    permission to appeal which  was  granted  on  8  December  2017.    The
    Claimants  are  nationals  of  Somalia  whose  dates   of   birth   are
    respectively 5 June 2000 and 1 June 2001.  Their mother  is  Sofia  [D]
    who is in the United Kingdom with leave to remain as  a  refugee.   She
    sought  to  bring  the  Claimants  to  the  United   Kingdom   and   in
    consideration of the appeals  of  the  Claimants,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid (the judge) made no reference whatsoever to the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake dated 23 March 2015.  In that  decision
    Judge Blake accepted the evidence of Mrs [D] about her journey  to  the
    UK.  Her account of having left behind her  children,  with  a  distant
    relative who was a clan  member,  was  accepted,  as  was  her  general
    credibility.

3.   The issue that Ms Loughran correctly  identified,  notwithstanding  the
    terms of  the  actual  refusal,  was  the  consideration  of  paragraph
    352D(iv) of the Immigration Rules which stated:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or  remain  with  the
         parent who is currently a refugee granted status as such under  the
         Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom are that...


         (iv) was part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum  at
             the time that the person granted asylum left  the  country  of
             his habitual residence in order to seek asylum."...

4.   Essentially this  was  the  sole  issue  raised  by  the  ECO  and  its
    importance cannot be understated, it is extremely unfortunate that  the
    Judge made no express finding as to whether or not  the  Claimants  met
    paragraph 352D(vi).  Ms Loughran was drawn to argue that by  the  terms
    of paragraph 16 of the Judge's decision it is evident  that  the  Judge
    must have accepted that the Claimants met the requirements of the Rules
    and that is also by reference to evidence contained  in  the  Sponsor's
    statement (AB, page 7, paragraph 4) in  which  the  Sponsor  sought  to
    explain why she had not declared the existence of the Claimants at  the
    material time.  In paragraph 16 of the decision the Judge said this:

         "I found the Appellants'  and  their  supporters'  evidence  to  be
         credible and this persuades  me  to  allow  this  appeal.   I  must
         indicate to the Presenting Officer that (as I have said before)  it
         is open to me to take a particular view  of  the  evidence  adduced
         before me; otherwise the  appeal  rights  are  not  given  for  any
         meaningful purpose.  These Appellants should be  helped  and  I  am
         happy to allow the appeal."

5.   The drawback is that this reasoning was really the full extent  of  the
    analysis of the  evidence.   Ms  Loughran's  understandable  desire  to
    support the Judge's decision cannot ignore the fact is the Judge simply
    did not give adequate or sufficient reasons as to why he was  satisfied
    that at the material time the Claimants had been part of  the  relevant
    family unit as required under the Rules.  Ms Loughran  was  essentially
    drawn, as I pointed out, to the positive credibility  finding  made  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Blake   about   the   Sponsor's   general
    credibility.  It seemed to me most unfortunate that  this  should  have
    happened but I was satisfied the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand  on
    that matter.

6.   Part of the problem is that  other  than  that  issue  the  Judge  made
    absolutely no other findings that are material.  Therefore,  it  seemed
    to me the necessary step was for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  this
    matter and deal with the issue bearing in mind the credibility findings
    that had been made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake and the  evidence
    which was  not  challenged,  given  the  absence  of  the  Respondent's
    representative at the hearing of the appeal.   So  the  matter  can  be
    addressed by submissions, bearing in mind an issue has been  ultimately
    that of credibility.  In the circumstances I  set  aside  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision  and  considered  this  further  in  the  light  of
    submissions made.

7.   The Sponsor on behalf of the Claimants has established on a balance  of
    probabilities that she has refugee status, she is  the  mother  of  the
    Claimants when she left Somalia to seek asylum.  Those  material  facts
    were established in her appeal in March 2015  (Ref.  AA/10247/2014)  by
    the findings of FtT Judge Blake.  The Secretary of State  has  not  and
    does not challenge that Judge's findings on those issues.  The concerns
    of the ECO about the Claimants  meeting  the  requirements  of  Section
    352S(iv) and (iii) were addressed by  the  FtT  Judge  in  2015.   That
    Judge's decision was of FtT Judge Majid.

8.   The earlier failure by the Sponsor  to  mention  the  Claimants  was  a
    point taken by the ECO but given the DNA evidence of  the  relationship
    was not now in dispute.  Equally, Judge Blake accepted the  Sponsor  as
    an honest  and  credible  witness  who  had  fled  Somalia  in  seeking
    protection and was at risk on return and accepted the Sponsor's account
    of her circumstances before leaving Somalia, her  need  for  protection
    and that she could not return.  In that appeal the Secretary  of  State
    had challenged the Sponsor's account but the Sponsor's credibility  was
    accepted.

9.   I find there were no further matters of substance  raised  by  the  ECO
    which, applying Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 282 and Judge Blake's  decision
    as a starting point, raised no meaningful doubts about why the positive
    findings on the Sponsor's credibility should not stand.

10.  No other grounds of challenge to the refusal under  paragraph  352D  of
    the Rules were raised.

11.  I find the Claimants have shown they did meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules at the relevant date.  I apply  the  general  approach  taken  by
    Mostafa [2015] UKUT 46 and take this into account  in  considering  the
    Article 8 ECHR issue of proportionality.  I apply s.117A and s.117B  of
    the NIAA 2002.  I find the Claimants will be maintained  and  supported
    by the Sponsor.  The likelihood is that they  will  learn  English  and
    assimilate into the UK.  Given their ages there is nothing  to  suggest
    beyond their education, to which they  would  be  entitled,  that  they
    would be a burden on the British taxpayer.  I conclude that joining the
    Sponsor engages with Article 8 family/private life  right.   The  ECO's
    decision is a significant interference with those rights  which  cannot
    be exercised from abroad.  The ECO's decision, whilst lawful, does  not
    serve objectives of immigration control, given the Sponsor is a refugee
    and is to be reunited with her children.  I find the evidence shows the
    ECO's decision  is  disproportionate  because  of  its  impact  in  the
    continued separation of family  members  and  the  public  interest  in
    family re-union.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the following decision  is
substituted:

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:                                 Date: 20 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which is due to the file being miss-
    located.

