
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2019                           |On 8 November 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                     d c (by her Litigation friend, n c)
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, representative from Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's  appeal
    following the setting aside of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 1 March 2019.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born in August  1955.  She  last
    entered the United Kingdom on 24 August 2016 as a visitor in  order  to
    stay with her son, N C ("the sponsor"), his wife, and  their  children,
    all of whom are British citizens. Within the currency of her  leave  to
    enter, the appellant made an application for leave to remain. This  was
    refused and the subsequent appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed.
    It transpired that the Tribunal had erred in so doing. The error of law
    decision is annexed to my remaking decision.

Agreed matters

 3. It is accepted that the appellant is a widow, her late  husband  having
    passed away in  2012.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  is
    seriously  mentally  unwell,  suffering  as  she  does  from  psychotic
    depression. Indeed, during his submissions, Mr Clarke  recognised  that
    she is an "incredibly ill woman". The  respondent's  position  has,  in
    light of Mr Clarke's fair and pragmatic stance  at  the  hearing,  been
    further refined. It is accepted that the appellant requires significant
    long-term personal care from others and that there is "family life"  as
    between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  and  his  wife.  It  is  also
    acknowledged that there would be, as Mr Clarke described it,  a  "risk"
    to the appellant if she were  forced  to  reside  in  some  form  of  a
    residential home in Albania.

Disputed matters

 4. The two principal matters of dispute between the parties in  this  case
    are: first, whether relatives living in Albania would be willing and/or
    able to provide appropriate care for the appellant; second, the  extent
    to which the appellant's presence in the  United  Kingdom  would  be  a
    drain on public finances.

Preliminary issues

 5. In her error of law decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  was  of  the
    view that the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal that there would be
    no "very significant obstacles" to  the  appellant  reintegrating  into
    Albanian society should be preserved  when  it  came  to  the  remaking
    decision. However, in light of further expert evidence provided on  her
    behalf, it was apparent to me that the preservation of this  particular
    conclusion  would  be  artificial.  Given  her  serious  mental  health
    condition and other relevant circumstances, the issue of whether  "very
    significant obstacles" would have existed (as at the date of her  human
    rights claim made in February 2017) would need to be revisited.

 6. Mr Clarke very pragmatically acknowledged this point and found that  he
    was prepared to address  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Having said that, he urged me not to go  behind  the  underlying
    primary facts as found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  regards  the
    presence of relatives in Albania, together with the fact that she had a
    house in some land in that  country.  I  acceded  to  that  invitation,
    without any opposition from Mr Ahmed.

 7. The second matter I must address at  this  stage  regrettably  involves
    criticism of the appellant's representatives. The comments  I  set  out
    below were all canvassed at the hearing,  but  I  nonetheless  deem  it
    appropriate to commit them to writing as well.

 8. Following a case management hearing on 1 May 2019, I issued tailor-made
    directions to the parties, which were sent out to the parties on 3 May.
    These included the filing and service  of  additional  evidence  and  a
    skeleton argument no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing.  In
    fact, a bundle of new evidence was received by the Upper Tribunal on  8
    October 2019, under cover of letter dated 7 October. No explanation was
    given for the late service. The skeleton argument was only produced  on
    the day of the hearing itself.

 9. Two of the expert reports contained in  that  bundle,  the  psychiatric
    assessment by Consultant Psychiatrist Dr R Lawrence and an  Independent
    Social Worker's report by Ms E Palamani, had been produced a relatively
    significant time before the late service (the former in June 2019,  and
    the latter at the beginning of August of this  year).  A  third  report
    from a country expert, is undated, but is  also  likely  to  have  been
    produced sometime beforehand.

10. There is no excuse for the late service of the  bundle.  Indeed,  there
    was not even an attempt at an explanation for the  tardiness.  This  is
    wholly unacceptable. Fortunately, the bundle  had  got  through  to  Mr
    Clarke in advance of the hearing and he was  sufficiently  prepared  to
    present the respondent's case. I make it clear that if, due to the late
    service, the resumed hearing had had to be adjourned, there is  a  very
    strong  possibility  that  a  costs  order  against   the   appellant's
    representatives would have followed.

11. The final matter is,  if  anything,  more  important.  The  psychiatric
    report clearly states  that  the  appellant  lacked  the  capacity  to,
    amongst other things,  instruct  legal  representatives.  As  mentioned
    above, that report is dated June 2019. At no stage until I  raised  the
    issue of my own volition at the hearing, had the appellant's solicitors
    made any application for the appointment  of  a  Litigation  Friend  in
    these  proceedings.  On  the  face  of  it,  the  representatives  were
    purporting to act on the appellant's behalf between  June  and  October
    without her having capacity. That is a potentially a serious matter.

12. At the hearing, and in light of the power  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    appoint a Litigation Friend (see  R  (on  the  application  of  JS  and
    Others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (litigation friend
    - child) [2019]  UKUT  64  (IAC)),  I  invited  Mr  Ahmed  to  make  an
    application for the appointment  of  the  sponsor  as  the  appellant's
    Litigation Friend. I was satisfied that the  sponsor  was  willing  and
    able to act in this way, and that there were  no  actual  or  potential
    conflicts of interest. I  granted  the  application  and  directed  the
    representatives to file  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  close  of
    business, written confirmation of the  sponsor's  willingness  to  act.
    This direction at least was complied with.

The evidence

13. In making my  decision  in  this  appeal  I  have  considered  relevant
    evidence contained in the  respondent's  original  appeal  bundle,  the
    appellant's original First-tier Tribunal bundle, indexed and  paginated
    1-392 (which I refer to as AB 1),  and  the  new  bundle,  indexed  and
    paginated 1-261 (which I refer to as AB 2).

14. The three most significant sources  of  evidence  in  this  appeal  are
    contained in AB 2: a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Robin  Lawrence,
    dated 15 June 2019; a report from an Independent Social  Worker,  Ms  E
    Palamani, dated 11 August 2019;  a  country  report  from  an  Albanian
    academic, Professor E Haxhiymeri.  I will deal with relevant aspects of
    this evidence when setting out my findings and conclusions, below.

15. Neither the  appellant  nor  the  sponsor  were  called  to  give  oral
    evidence.

The parties' submissions

16. Mr Ahmed relied on his skeleton argument. He relied on the three expert
    reports. He acknowledged that there had been no formal assessments  for
    dementia, nor had the appellant been hospitalised. The reference in  Dr
    Lawrence's report to their being no family members  in  Albania  meant,
    submitted Mr Ahmed, simply that there were no family members who  could
    support the appellant there. In respect of the country report,  it  was
    submitted that  at  most  there  might  be  a  possibility  of  private
    treatment in Albania.  Even  private  institutions  would  not  provide
    adequate care for the appellant, given her circumstances.  Being  taken
    into a private residential home would separate the appellant  from  her
    son and daughter-in-law, and this would lead to a deterioration in  her
    mental health.

17. In respect of the public funds issue in the United  Kingdom,  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that the Immigration Health Surcharge had been  paid  by  the
    sponsor and would continue to be so. The sponsor has been  contributing
    to NHS costs over time.

18. As set out earlier in my decision, Mr Clarke's position evolved at  the
    hearing, at least to the extent that  certain  issues  were  no  longer
    contested (for example, the existence of "family life", the severity of
    the appellant's mental health condition, and  the  need  for  long-term
    personal care). He emphasised the lack of evidence from family  members
    in Albania to suggest that they would be  unable  and/or  unwilling  to
    care for the appellant in their own homes. Mr Clarke accepted that  the
    contention that the applicant could live in a  residential  home  in  a
    city, or be transported to  and  from  day-care  centres  regularly  by
    family members, was problematic. However, the  Appellant  could  reside
    with one or more family members instead.

19. Significant emphasis was also placed on the cost  to  the  NHS  of  the
    applicant's care in this country. The evidence  indicated  that  whilst
    some of the debt had been paid off by the sponsor, there  was  still  a
    significant amount outstanding. It was  likely  that  this  debt  would
    increase over time, leading to a real drain on the public purse.  There
    was a question mark as to why assets apparently held by  the  appellant
    in Albania had not been sold off to pay the NHS debt.

Findings and conclusions

20. There is no real dispute as to the core issue of the  appellant's  ill-
    health. On the basis of Dr Lawrence's conclusions (which have not  been
    challenged), together with Mr Clarke's stated position, I find that the
    appellant is suffering from psychotic depression.

21. Again based on Dr Lawrence's report, I find that the appellant  suffers
    from visual and auditory hallucinations, a  powerful  example  of  this
    being her belief that she is under  attack  from  snails,  snakes,  and
    insects. In  addition,  her  overall  condition  is  marked  by  severe
    anxiety.

22. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, and taking note of  the  fact
    that the appellant was able to  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in October 2018, I find  that  her  health  has  significantly
    deteriorated during the course of 2019.

23. It  is  unclear  whether  the  appellant  in  fact  also  suffers  from
    schizophrenia and/or dementia. Dr Lawrence is of the view that she  may
    be. He had recommended further assessments for  these  two  conditions.
    However, it appears as though no such follow-up has yet taken place.  I
    am not placed to find as a fact that the appellant does  indeed  suffer
    from these two conditions. However, Dr Lawrence's  overall  impression,
    combined with the evidence of the sponsor and  his  wife,  is  strongly
    suggestive of enduring cognitive and/or mental health problems.

24. I accept Dr Lawrence's opinion that the appellant is not  fit  to  fly,
    nor does she have capacity to understand these legal proceedings (hence
    the appointment of her son as Litigation Friend). Taking  the  evidence
    as a whole, I find it to be more likely than  not  that  she  currently
    lacks capacity to have genuine comprehension of  most  aspects  of  her
    life.

25. In summary, I find that Dr Lawrence's view of  the  appellant's  mental
    health is an accurate one: in his words, it is "extremely poor".

26. I find that the appellant is wholly reliant for her personal  care  and
    well-being on the sponsor and his wife in the United Kingdom. Mr Clarke
    has quite sensibly accepted this to be so. In any event,  in  light  of
    the evidence as a whole such a conclusion would be  almost  inevitable.
    Specifically, I find that the appellant requires 24-hour  care  and  is
    unable to manage any aspects of day-to-day life,  including  nutrition,
    washing, and personal safety. This state of  affairs  is  supported  by
    evidence from sponsor, his wife, and the Independent Social Worker.

27. I turn next to the question of what the consequences would  be  of  the
    appellant having to leave the United Kingdom and  live  once  again  in
    Albania. Dr Lawrence puts it in stark terms:

           "It would be totally impossible for this woman to survive if she
           was separated from  her  son  and  daughter-in-law.  Her  mental
           health condition would lead to death from neglect in only a  few
           days or weeks if she was  separated  from  her  current  support
           structure."

28. Such a state of affairs is alluded to in the  appellant's  own  witness
    statement from October 2018. The sponsor takes a similarly  bleak  view
    in his witness statement.

29. I find that were the appellant to leave the United Kingdom and have  to
    reside alone in Albania, the consequences stated by Dr  Lawrence  would
    be highly likely to materialise within the timeframe stated.

30. However, there is more to be said about the situation that  might  face
    the appellant were she to return to Albania (an event that is currently
    impossible in light of her unfitness to fly). In particular,  it  would
    not necessarily be the case that she would be forced to live alone.

31. The first point relates  to  the  sponsor,  his  wife,  and  their  two
    children. All four members of this family unit  are  British  citizens.
    The two children were born in 2012 and 2016. Both parents work. It  has
    not been suggested by the respondent that  the  unit  could  reasonably
    relocate to Albania on a permanent basis. Both the sponsor and his wife
    have given clear evidence that they would be  unable  to  make  such  a
    move. In all the circumstances, I find that it would not be  reasonable
    to expect such an upheaval on their part.

32. The second issue relates to other family members currently residing  in
    Albania. It is right to say that there has been a lack  of  clarity  in
    the evidence. Dr Lawrence appeared to believe that  the  Appellant  has
    two sisters in the country.  The  Independent  Social  Worker's  report
    lists four individuals, said to be half-siblings  of  the  sponsor  (in
    other words, the appellant's step-children). The author  records  these
    individuals as living in either Greece or Germany. The  country  report
    states that the appellant has no "immediate" family members in Albania.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  a  finding  that  the
    appellant had a sister and a brother, as well as  her  in-laws,  living
    there.

33. In the absence of oral evidence on this issue, it is not an  easy  task
    to reach a firm finding on the true situation. On balance, I find  that
    the appellant does have certain family members residing in Albania.  It
    is more likely than not that the Appellant has  two  siblings  in  that
    country. It is likely that they are of a broadly similar age to her.  I
    accept that they have their own children, who are likely to be  adults.
    I find it to be more likely than not that members  of  the  appellant's
    late husband's family continue to live in Albania. It is clear from the
    evidence I do have that the appellant's daughter-in-law has her parents
    there as well.

34. A difficulty in the appellant's case is the absence  of  evidence  from
    any family members living in Albania. I am bound to say that it strikes
    me as somewhat odd that no such evidence has  been  obtained  over  the
    course of time. This omission was a  central  feature  of  Mr  Clarke's
    submissions. Doing the best  I  can  with  what  I  have,  I  make  the
    following findings.

35. It is highly  unlikely  that  the  daughter-in-law's  family  would  be
    willing (even if they were  able)  to  assume  responsibility  for  the
    appellant's care if she were to return to Albania. I say  this  on  the
    basis of the severity of the  appellant's  condition  and  care  needs,
    together with the fact that the  family  concerned  are  at  least  one
    significant step removed from filial ties  to  the  appellant.  In  the
    overall circumstances of this case, mere  financial  support  would  be
    insufficient.

36. I find that the appellant's step-children  do  indeed  live  away  from
    Albania and would not be in a position to provide  the  necessary  care
    for her.

37. It is highly unlikely that the appellant's  in-laws  would  be  willing
    and/or able to take on  responsibility  for  her  needs.  There  is  no
    evidence that she has resided  with  them  during  the  course  of  her
    marriage to her late husband. It is, I find,  unlikely  that  they  are
    aware of her current state of health and the  complex  and  significant
    care requirements. Not only would these involve effectively maintaining
    24-hour supervision and practical  assistance  to  the  appellant,  but
    would also very probably require regular  transportation  to  and  from
    appropriate health care centres. In light of the evidence contained  in
    the  country  report,  the  only  realistic  sources   of   potentially
    appropriate care are located in the urban areas of Tirana, Elbasan, and
    Vlora.

38. I turn then to the appellant's siblings and their families. On the face
    of it, these individuals would represent  the  most  likely  source  of
    potential support for the appellant if she were to return. In light  of
    the factors set out in the previous paragraph, I find that the siblings
    themselves would not be in a position to provide the requisite care and
    support. It is in my view  highly  unlikely  that  the  siblings  would
    either willing or able to undertake such a task. Whilst their  children
    may be somewhat better placed by virtue of their younger ages,  I  also
    find that the possibility of effective care and support is  remote,  to
    say the least. The children have their own families and would be highly
    unlikely to be willing to commit to the long-term 24-hour care of their
    aunt, together with the logistical burden of transporting  her  to  and
    from  treatment  centres.  As  Mr   Clarke   has   acknowledged,   such
    arrangements would be problematic. In my view, that is underplaying the
    practical realities of the situation.

39. Above and beyond the inability and/or unwillingness of  family  members
    in Albania to provide care and support, I return to an important aspect
    of Dr Lawrence's evidence. His view is that a removal of the  appellant
    from her current support structure would have serious consequences  for
    her mental health. I have accepted this to be the case. It follows that
    the mere fact of being taken out of her current situation and placed in
    what would be an unfamiliar setting of a relative's  house  in  Albania
    would, in  and  of  itself,  render  this  possible  route  not  simply
    unreasonable, but seriously detrimental to her well-being.

40. I find that the appellant still  owns  a  property  and  some  land  in
    Albania. It would, on any view, be impossible for the appellant  to  go
    and live by herself in that property.

41. I have considered whether  the  appellant  could,  with  the  financial
    assistance of the sponsor and other relatives, have live-in  carers  at
    the property. I find that this would not be a viable option. First,  in
    light of the medical  evidence,  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would engage with strangers. In turn, it is extremely  likely
    that her mental and physical health would rapidly deteriorate.  Second,
    the country report makes it clear that relevant mental health provision
    in Albania for those with  serious  conditions  is  very  thin  on  the
    ground. It is highly  unlikely  that  even  with  sufficient  financial
    resources, appropriately trained  live-in  carers  could  be  found  to
    reside with the appellant in her own property (or, for that  matter,  a
    relative's property). Third, the country report provides clear evidence
    that the possibility of suitably trained healthcare professionals going
    out to visit the appellant at her residence is remote. I note from  the
    appellant's witness statement  that  she  spent  the  entirety  of  her
    married life living  in  a  village.  I  accept  this  evidence  to  be
    accurate, and I have gleaned from other evidence that the  village  was
    situated in the north of Albania.

42. Mr Clarke raised the issue of the appellant  being  able  to  sell  her
    property  and  land  order  to  raise  funds  for  private  residential
    treatment. The ability to liquidate the assets would not seem  to  face
    any real obstacles. However, being forced to reside  in  a  home  would
    raise two significant problems. First, there is the  extremely  limited
    resources in Albania, as highlighted in  the  country  report.  Leaving
    aside the cost, there would in my view be a very real  obstacle  as  to
    capacity. Second, and in any event, there is the appellant's prevailing
    mental health condition and the effect on it by having to go  and  live
    with strangers, in a strange place, and be cared for by strangers. As I
    have said previously, this in itself  would  effectively  represent  an
    insurmountable obstacle. I also take  account  of  Mr  Clarke's  candid
    acknowledgement that placing the appellant in a residential home  would
    give rise to a risk to her health and well-being.

43. Bringing  all  of  the  above  together,  I  find  that  there  are  no
    appropriate alternative care arrangements that could be put in place in
    Albania, having regard to the very limited resources available in  that
    country, the likely response from relatives there to the possibility of
    taking responsibility for the  appellant,  her  current  mental  health
    condition, and her attachment to and dependence on the sponsor and  his
    wife.

44. I now turn to the issue  of  public  funds  in  this  country,  and  in
    particular the resources of the NHS. I find that the  sponsor  did  pay
    the Immigration Health Surcharge,  and  it  is  likely  that  he  would
    continue to do so in the future as and when required. I find that there
    is an outstanding NHS debt, as evidenced in AB 1 (this stood  at  �1800
    as at October 2018). Having said that, the evidence also shows that the
    sponsor has, albeit to a modest extent at present, sought  to  pay  off
    this debt. I have no  reason  to  doubt  the  sponsor's  commitment  to
    continue paying off the sum.

45. It is likely that the appellant would continue to require NHS treatment
    if she were to remain in this country. This would have  the  effect  of
    increasing the  debt  as  time  goes  on.  However,  recourse  to  such
    treatment would be permitted where  the  appellant  to  have  leave  to
    remain. Even if such recourse was not permitted, it is likely that  the
    sponsor would continue to contribute to the  costs  of  treatment,  and
    would, I find, continue to care for his mother within the family  home,
    thereby  undoubtedly  saving  the  state  expenditure  in  respect   of
    residential care.

46. I now bring the various matters discussed  above  together  and  placed
    them within the applicable legal framework relating to Article 8.

47. There is a strong family life as between the appellant and the  sponsor
    and his wife. The appellant has also established a private life in this
    country, albeit of a lesser strength than the family life.

48. The appellant's departure from the United Kingdom would, on  any  view,
    constitute an interference with the family and private lives.

49. The respondent's decision was undoubtedly in accordance  with  the  law
    and it pursues the legitimate aim of maintaining effective  immigration
    control.

50. In addressing the issue of proportionality,  I  direct  myself  to  the
    guidance recently set out by the Court of  Appeal  in  GM  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1630.

51. I turn first to the relevant Article  8-related  Immigration  Rules.  I
    conclude that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  cannot  be  satisfied.  This  is
    because of the temporal restriction imposed by that  provision,  namely
    that the issue of whether "very significant obstacles" to reintegration
    exist must be assessed as at the date of  the  application  (deemed  to
    constitute the human rights claim). In this case, the  application  was
    made back in February 2017. In light of the evidence before me  and  my
    findings thereon, the appellant's health condition was nowhere near  as
    severe as it currently is. In all the circumstances, the high threshold
    imposed was not met as at that time.

52. The Adult Dependent Relative provisions under Appendix FM to the  Rules
    could never have been met because the appellant had  not  entered  this
    country with entry clearance in that capacity. Having said that, on  my
    findings as to the appellant's current  circumstances  and  the  likely
    position  on  return  to  Albania,  I  conclude  that   the   stringent
    requirements under E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM are satisfied.  In  simple
    terms, there is  no  appropriate  treatment  and/or  care  arrangements
    available in Albania. Thus, whilst the appellant  cannot  satisfy  this
    Rule as a whole, she does meet a core requirement. This accounts in her
    favour in the overall balancing exercise.

53. The nature of the appellant's total dependency upon the sponsor and his
    wife, combined with her prevailing very severe mental  health  illness,
    go to show a particularly compelling claim.

54. There are course competing factors in play. the appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor without  any  expectation  of  an  extended
    period of residence. She does not speak English, nor is she financially
    independent in the sense that she has had recourse to the NHS. Although
    I have found that the sponsor will endeavour to pay off the debt, it is
    likely that treatment costs will endure and the appellant will never be
    economically active. Her private life has a course  existed  whilst  in
    the United Kingdom on an extremely  precarious  basis.  Whilst  section
    117B does not expressly deal with the  family  life  relationship  with
    which I am concerned, I do take account of the fact that  it  has  been
    established during precarious residence in this country. I also  factor
    in the inability of the appellant to satisfy the relevant Rules.  Last,
    but certainly not least, there is the overarching  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control.

55. These factors combine  to  provide  a  weighty  counterbalance  to  the
    appellant's case.

56. However, on the particular facts of this  case,  I  conclude  that  the
    compelling nature of the appellant's Article 8 claim is such  that  the
    competing factors on the respondent's side of the balance sheet fail to
    tip the scales in her favour. This is, I conclude,  an  example  of  an
    exceptional case in which striking the requisite fair balance leads  to
    success for the appellant.



Anonymity


57. Although there has been no direction previously, in light of the
    appellant's current lack of capacity, it is appropriate to make one at
    this stage. She is a highly vulnerable individual.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.



Signed      [pic]            Date:  5 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a reduced  fee
award of �70.00. Although the appellant won her appeal,  this  was  only  on
the basis of evidence submitted  for  the  remaking  hearing  and  the  case
clearly required consideration on appeal.


Signed      [pic]                 Date: 5 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 18 February 2019                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     d c
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, instructed by Oliver & Hasani Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Ms  C's  appeal
   against the respondent's decision to refuse her human rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  Ms  C  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  born  on  10  August  1955.  She
   entered the United Kingdom on 24 August 2016 with a  visitor  visa  valid
   until 12 February 2017, having previously visited the UK in 2013 but then
   been refused entry  clearance  on  13  January  2014  and  unsuccessfully
   appealed  against  that  decision.  On  8  February  2017  she  made   an
   application for leave to remain on human rights grounds, on the basis  of
   her family and private life in the UK. She claimed that she was cared for
   and supported by her son and daughter-in-law as a result of  her  medical
   condition and that she had no one in Albania who could provide  her  with
   the necessary support ad care.


4. The appellant's application was refused on 4 April 2018.  The  respondent
   considered that the appellant could not meet the requirements in Appendix
   FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of her family and private life and
   that there were no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of  leave
   outside  the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
   appellant could access relevant medical care and support in Albania, that
   her medical circumstances did not engage Article 3 and that the  decision
   to refuse leave to remain  was  proportionate  and  did  not  breach  her
   Article 8 rights.


5. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was heard on  30
   October 2018 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio.  The  appellant  gave
   evidence before the judge, as did her son and daughter-in-law. The  judge
   noted some discrepancies in the evidence about family support in  Albania
   and had regard to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal against an earlier decision refusing  entry  clearance
   to the UK. He noted that the appellant had lost her husband in  2012  and
   had visited the UK in 2013. He noted the evidence that the appellant  had
   fallen down and been rushed to hospital a month after arriving in the  UK
   in 2016. He noted that the appellant had a sister and brother  and  their
   children in Albania  and  found  that  there  were  no  very  significant
   obstacles to her integration in Albania. However he  allowed  the  appeal
   outside the immigration rules on the basis of  the  appellant's  complete
   dependency, since her fall, upon her son and  daughter-in-law  from  whom
   she received 24 hour care and support. He found that the  family  members
   in Albania were unable to offer  such  support  and  concluded  that  her
   removal from the UK would be disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.
   He allowed the appellant's appeal.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge could not have made the  findings  that  he
   did in regard to Article 8 outside the rules without medical evidence  of
   the specific care the appellant required  and  without  evidence  of  her
   medical condition; that the judge had failed to  consider  insurmountable
   obstacles to the family members returning to Albania with the  appellant;
   and that the judge had failed consider section 117B of the 2002 Act.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on  28  December  2018  with  particular
   reference to the lack of medical evidence or  independent  care  evidence
   before the judge.

Appeal Hearing

8. At the hearing,  Ms  Cunha  relied  upon  the  case  of  Ribeli  v  Entry
   Clearance Officer, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611 and  submitted  that  the
   judge had failed to consider the limited nature of the  medical  evidence
   before the Court, had failed to  consider  whether  there  were  adequate
   medical facilities in Albania  and  had  failed  to  consider  the  adult
   dependent relative rules. The judge's findings were inconsistent with the
   evidence. There was evidence that the sponsors had visited  Albania,  yet
   no consideration of how the  appellant  managed  in  their  absence.  The
   evidence was that the appellant's son  and  daughter-in-law  worked,  but
   there was no consideration of how they provided  the  appellant  with  24
   hour care. There was no consideration  of  the  appellant's  property  in
   Albania and no proper consideration of the family members in Albania  and
   why they could not assist her. In addition, the judge failed to  consider
   the public interest factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act and  gave  no
   reasons for dismissing the respondent's concerns.  There  was  no  proper
   explanation as to how the judge found that the relationship  between  the
   appellant  and  her  son  and  daughter-in-law  met  the  threshold   for
   establishing family life as set out in Kugathas v Secretary of State  for
   the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and no proper  assessment  of  the
   support the appellant claimed to  receive  from  the  sponsors.   It  was
   difficult for the respondent to know why the appeal had been allowed  and
   accordingly the decision was not safe and needed to be re-made.

9. Ms Brown submitted that the judge's decision was safe.  The  respondent's
   grounds had not included a  challenge  on  the  basis  of  Kugathas.  The
   decision in Ribeli was restricted to the facts. The judge dealt with  the
   medical evidence, which  consisted  of  an  up-to-date  letter  from  the
   appellant's GP, and that was sufficient, when  taken  together  with  the
   appellant's own evidence, to conclude as he did. The factors  in  section
   117B(4) and (5) could be overridden in cases of a special and  compelling
   character and the judge's findings were sufficient in the  regard.  There
   was no requirement for evidence to come from a medical source and on  the
   contrary the evidence of the witnesses could be accepted.  There  was  no
   requirement, in assessing Article 8, to show that there  were  inadequate
   facilities available in Albania. The judge's findings were clear and  the
   grounds were simply a disagreement.

Consideration and Findings

10. I am in agreement with Ms Cunha,  that  the  judge's  decision  lacks  a
   proper assessment of the medical evidence and reasons for concluding that
   the evidence that was before him was sufficient to lead to  the  decision
   made.


11.  At  [36],  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
   immigration  rules,  but  in  so  doing  appears  to  have  limited   his
   consideration of the immigration rules to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) without
   giving consideration to the requirements of the adult dependent  relative
   rules. Such a consideration would have required a detailed  consideration
   of all the medical evidence and properly made  findings  on  whether  the
   appellant required long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks as a
   result of her medical condition and the availability of care and  support
   in her own country. However, there was no such  assessment.  The  medical
   evidence before the judge was limited, consisting of little more  than  a
   letter from the appellant's GP, the most recent  of  which  was  dated  9
   October 2018. I agree with Ms Cunha that there was  no  diagnosis  within
   that letter  and  no  indication  of  the  severity  of  the  appellant's
   condition and the required care and treatment. The  judge's  findings  on
   the appellant requiring 24  hour  care,  and  the  sponsors'  ability  to
   provide that care, were not based upon any independent evidence  and  did
   not involve any analysis of how that fitted in with the evidence  of  the
   sponsors'  working  hours.  The  judge  gave  no  consideration  to   the
   availability of medication and facilities in Albania and did not consider
   why the sponsors could not care for the appellant in Albania  or  arrange
   care for her there. Ms Brown submitted that the judge was able to  accept
   the oral evidence of the witnesses without any  requirement  for  medical
   evidence, but  I  find  no  merit  in  such  a  suggestion,  particularly
   considering the inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  identified  in  that
   evidence.


12. In the circumstances I agree with Ms Cunha  that  the  judge's  decision
   lacks adequate reasoning and fails to explain how the evidence  supported
   the conclusions reached. Accordingly I set the decision aside. There  has
   been no cross-appeal by the appellant on  the  judge's  finding  on  very
   significant obstacles to integration and accordingly I see no reason  why
   that finding should not stand. However the judge's findings on Article  8
   outside the immigration rules are set aside and the decision has to be re-
   made in that respect.  There  needs  to  be  a  full  assessment  of  the
   appellant's medical condition, the care she requires, the level  of  care
   provided by the sponsors and the treatment, support and care available in
   Albania. There is no reason why that  cannot  take  place  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

DECISION

13. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is
   allowed. The decision is set aside to the extent stated above.

14. The case will be listed for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

    Directions


    No later than 14 days before the hearing:


    (1) The appellant is to file with the Upper Tribunal, and serve on  the
    respondent,  a  consolidated  appeal  bundle  containing  the  evidence
    previously submitted and any further medical and other evidence  relied
    upon.

    (2) Any request for an interpreter for the appellant is to be  made  to
    the Tribunal, should one be required.

Signed:     [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                  Dated: 19 February 2019

