
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09806/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2020                   |On 01 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Louis [A]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person (still represented by Okafor & Co
Solicitors)
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's  appeal
    following  the  previous  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Owens,
    promulgated on 26 February 2020, in which she concluded that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law when  originally  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Mauritius born on 25 May 1998,  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2009 at the  age  of  11  and  has  resided  here
    unlawfully for the great majority of time thereafter.

 3. His human rights claim was, and is, based on two elements:  first,  his
    relationships with a citizen of the Seychelles with indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom, Ms [EE], and the two young children  born
    to them at the beginning and end of 2019  (both  of  whom  are  British
    citizens); second, the private life said to have been established  over
    the course of time.

The error of law decision

 4. The First-tier Tribunal had concluded that, applying section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended (the  2002
    Act), it would be reasonable for  the  older  of  the  appellant's  two
    children (the hearing pre-dated the birth of the second child) to leave
    the United Kingdom, and that Ms [E] could also be expected  to  go  and
    live  in  Mauritius.   On  this  basis,  the  appellant's  appeal   was
    dismissed.  Upper Tribunal Judge Owens agreed with the concession  made
    by the Senior Presenting Officer on appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred.  In summary,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had effectively taken the circumstances  of  the  child's
    parents into account when making the reasonableness assessment and  had
    failed to take into account the  wider  familial  ties  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the circumstances of the child if they were  to  reside  in
    Mauritius.

 5. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  duly  set  aside.   The
    following findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    preserved:

      i. the older child's British nationality;

     ii. Ms [E] nationality status in the United Kingdom;

    iii. the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  since  2009  (that
         amounting to 10 years as at the date of the Upper Tribunal  hearing
         on 17 February 2020);

     iv. the appellant's father (who resides in the  United  Kingdom)  is  a
         British citizen by descent, whilst his grandmother  was  a  British
         citizen as a result of having been born in Diego Garcia.

 6. Although not expressly stated as a preserved finding  of  fact,  it  is
    quite clear that there has never been any dispute as to the genuineness
    and subsistence of the appellant's relationship with Ms [E], or that he
    enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  older
    child.

 7. Finally, it  had  been  found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant could not meet any  of  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    United Kingdom ancestry or Article 8 (whether in respect of family life
    or private life).

Procedural matters

 8. Although the appellant has  had  legal  representation  throughout  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal,  he
    has not in fact had  any  such  representative  in  attendance  at  the
    hearings themselves.  As he explained to me, he simply could not afford
    this.  I considered whether I could fairly proceed with the hearing  in
    these circumstances.  Having regard to the matters  set  out  below,  I
    concluded that I could and should proceed to redecide  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 9. Having asked a number of preliminary questions, I  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant understood the nature of the  proceedings  and  what  the
    main issues in his  case  were.   He  had  already  had  experience  of
    appearing in person before the First-tier Tribunal and at the error  of
    law hearing.  Whilst aware of a degree of nervousness at  the  hearing,
    there was no suggestion that the  appellant  suffers  from  any  mental
    health or other conditions  such  as  to  increase  the  level  of  any
    vulnerability.

10. The appellant had come to the hearing  without  any  paperwork.   After
    explaining all of the issues in the appeal to him, I provided him  with
    the two bundles of evidence which had previously been filed and  served
    on his behalf, and in respect of which I was satisfied he  was  already
    familiar.  To ensure that he was fully aware of the relevant  evidence,
    I asked Ms [E] to read the relevant witness statements to the appellant
    outside of the hearing room (the appellant told  me  that  his  reading
    ability was not particularly good).  Appropriate time was  afforded  to
    the appellant so as to have  matters  fresh  in  his  mind  before  the
    hearing began.  I was  also  satisfied  that  there  was  no  realistic
    prospect of any further evidence being provided if an  adjournment  had
    been granted.

11. The appellant himself  made  no  application  for  an  adjournment  and
    confirmed that he was happy to proceed.

12. The hearing proceeded in the normal manner, although I remained acutely
    aware of the appellant's overall circumstances (including of course the
    fact that he was appearing in person) and the need to  ensure  that  he
    understood all questions and submissions.  I was satisfied  that  there
    were no material difficulties in comprehension.  Mr  Whitwell,  in  his
    customary manner, was entirely  fair  in  putting  forward  his  cross-
    examination and making submissions in a  way  in  which  the  appellant
    could readily follow.

The issues in the appeal

13. Even taking the appellant's case at its highest, he cannot meet any  of
    the relevant Immigration Rules, whether in respect  of  United  Kingdom
    ancestry or Article 8 matters.

14. The focus of this appeal rests primarily on  section  1176B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act, which provides:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

15. As alluded to earlier, there is no dispute that  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the older child.  The
    same is true in respect of the younger child.

16. Similarly, it is accepted that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms [E].

17. The secondary focus of the appellant's case relates to his private life
    in the United Kingdom.

The evidence

18. I have considered the respondent's appeal  bundle,  under  cover  of  a
    front sheet dated 23 August 2018.  On the appellant's side, I have  two
    bundles prepared for the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.   The  first  is
    indexed and paginated 1-12 and was received at the Hatton Cross hearing
    Centre on Newell 7 November 2018.  The second is indexed and  paginated
    1-10 and was received on 1 July 2019.  In addition, I  have  copies  of
    the birth certificates for both of the children.

19. The appellant, Ms [E], and the appellant's father attended the  hearing
    and gave oral evidence, a full note of which is contained in the record
    of proceedings.  I do not propose to set this evidence  out  here,  but
    will refer to relevant aspects when stating my  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions, below.

Submissions

20. Mr Whitwell relied on the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter,
    dated 10 April 2018, although he accepted that this  was  now  somewhat
    out of date.  In relation  to  the  reasonableness  assessment,  I  was
    referred to page  48  of  the  respondent's  guidance  on  family  life
    (version 11, published  on  16  October  2020)  and  to  the  preserved
    findings from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Whilst both of the children are British, Mr  Whitwell  emphasised  that
    this was not a trump card.  They were both very young  and  it  was  in
    their best interests to remain with their parents.  He  submitted  that
    in many respects the family unit's situation  if  living  in  Mauritius
    would not be "very different" from  the  circumstances  in  the  United
    Kingdom: neither the appellant nor Ms [E]  are  working  and  they  are
    being supported by relatives.  The appellant would be able to  work  in
    Mauritius and he did not suffer  from  any  material  health  problems.
    United Kingdom-based relatives would be able to provide  some  support.
    The appellant's evidence on his previous life  in  Mauritius  had  been
    particularly vague and Mr Whitwell submitted that this may have been in
    order to bolster his Article 8 case.  There was no country  information
    on Mauritius.

22. I raised with Mr Whitwell the issue of MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705, at paragraph 49, and what, if any, were the "powerful reasons"  to
    show that the two British children  could  be  expected  to  leave  the
    country of their nationality.  His response was that  I  should  simply
    apply KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and view the children's circumstances
    in the "real world" scenario.

23. The appellant emphasised the following points: that he had no  home  or
    family left in Mauritius; that he had been away from that country for a
    long time and no longer knew much about  it;  and  that  he  wished  to
    remain in the United Kingdom in order to look after his children.

24. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Findings of fact

25. In so far as the preserved findings are concerned, I refer to  what  is
    said in paragraph 5, above.  Further,  the  appellant  has  been  since
    approximately 2015 in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms [E]
    and he enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  both
    of his children.  None of the members of  this  family  unit  have  any
    material health problems.

26. There is no  specific  evidence  as  to  precisely  when  in  2009  the
    appellant arrived in this country.  In oral evidence he told me that he
    believed it was near to Christmas.  There is no  particular  reason  to
    disbelieve this, and I accept it to be the case.

27. I find that the appellant currently lives with his father in  a  rented
    property and has  done  so  for  two  or  three  years.   The  evidence
    surrounding Ms [E]'s place of residence was not entirely  satisfactory:
    it was said that  she  lived  together  with  the  appellant,  but  the
    children's birth certificates both include another address said  to  be
    that of her mother.  Ultimately, I find that they do all live  together
    at the appellant's father's property and have done so since soon  after
    the birth of the older child  in  January  2019.   I  accept  Ms  [E]'s
    evidence that her mother's address had been given because this is where
    she had previously lived and she had not notified all relevant  parties
    of the change; the consequence of this being that she gave the  address
    for the sake of convenience.

28. The appellant acknowledged he had never worked in United Kingdom and  I
    find this to be the case.  I find that he  was  educated  here,  having
    completed GCSEs and then attending a further education  college  for  a
    year.

29. The evidence as  to  the  appellant's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
    throughout his residence here is  not  entirely  clear.   I  take  into
    account that he was only 11 years old on entry.  He told  me  that  his
    father had bought him here and had "asked someone  to  help  get  me  a
    passport".  However, his father stated that the appellant had travelled
    on  a  valid  passport  with  a  six-month  visit  visa  and  had  then
    overstayed.  I prefer the father's evidence to that of  the  appellant,
    given all the circumstances.  I am not sure why nothing was  apparently
    done to regularise the appellant's status in the United Kingdom for  so
    long after the visit visa would have expired in mid-2010, but, at least
    until the appellant reached the age of 18, no fault can  be  attributed
    to him.

30. I find that the family unit  is  being  supported  by  the  appellant's
    father.  It is more likely than not that his father would  be  able  to
    provide at least some financial  assistance  to  the  appellant  if  he
    returned to Mauritius.  Although no evidence has been led on the point,
    it is probable that other relatives in this country would  be  able  to
    provide some financial assistance as well.

31. I find that Ms [E] is currently in the second  year  of  a  cabin  crew
    course, which she hopes will lead her into employment.   Her  immediate
    family in United Kingdom consists of her mother and  two  sisters,  the
    older of which is now an adult, although she does not work.  Her mother
    works and I am willing to accept that she would not be in a position to
    provide meaningful financial support if the family unit were to live in
    Mauritius.  I accept that the mother financially supports Ms [E]'s  two
    siblings and is seeking to  sponsor  her  (the  mother's)  husband  who
    currently resides in the Seychelles.  I have  no  reason  to  doubt  Ms
    [E]'s evidence that she understands some words of  Creole  French,  but
    does not have a good grasp of it.

32. In certain respects, I agree with  Mr  Whitwell's  description  of  the
    appellant's evidence as to his previous life in Mauritius as vague.  On
    the face  of  it,  there  was  a  lack  of  detail  as  regards  fairly
    straightforward matters such as schooling and  where  in  Mauritius  he
    lived with his aunt.  I have considered  the  appellant's  age  at  all
    material times, together with the evidence provided by  his  father  at
    the hearing.  Overall, part  of  the  criticism  levelled  against  his
    evidence by Mr Whitwell falls  away.   In  respect  of  education,  the
    father confirmed that he left this is a responsibility  of  his  sister
    (the appellant's aunt).  Whilst he thought that the  appellant  "might"
    have attended a  government  school  in  the  locality,  there  was  no
    certainty on this.  No other  source  of  evidence  suggests  that  the
    appellant did in fact attend school up until the point of his departure
    in 2009.  I am prepared to accept, albeit by a narrow margin,  that  it
    is more likely than not that the appellant did not attend school at all
    material times whilst in Mauritius.  His inability to  state  where  he
    lived in the country is implausible as regards the general location, if
    not the name of a particular street and I have taken this adverse point
    into account.  Having said that, the evidence of the appellant and  his
    father was consistent in respect of the  lack  of  any  family  members
    currently living in Mauritius.  I accept that the auntie and all of the
    father's other siblings no longer reside in that country; they are  all
    in the United Kingdom.

33. There has been no challenge to the evidence of the  appellant  and  his
    father to the effect that the former's mother abandoned him at  a  very
    young  age  and  that  there  is  no  information  as  to  her  current
    whereabouts.  I find this to be the case.

34. I find that the appellant never worked in Mauritius.  His evidence that
    he now only has a limited vocabulary  of  Creole  French  is,  I  find,
    credible in light of his educational history,  the  age  when  he  left
    Mauritius, at the time away from that country.  I find that he is  able
    to understand the language to a greater extent.

35. The appellant and Ms [E] were asked about whether they discussed a move
    to Mauritius.  I found it somewhat  strange  that  the  appellant  said
    there had been no such discussion, whereas Ms [E] recalled  that  there
    had been.  In any event, I find  a as fact that her resolve is  not  to
    relocate to Mauritius on the basis that, in her view, the  family  unit
    would be homeless, without any support, and that she herself would have
    no right to live there.

Conclusions

36. I start with section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  With  reference  to  the
    essential case-law on this issue (including that referred to previously
    and AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661),  the  basic  principles  can  be
    stated as follows:

          i. the reasonableness assessment is conducted on the hypothetical
             basis that the children would be expected to leave the  United
             Kingdom;

         ii. the children's best interests are a primary consideration, but
             are not determinative;

        iii. the nationality of  the  relevant  children  is  an  important
             factor, but again is not determinative;

         iv. the reasonableness assessment must be conducted without regard
             to  the  parents'  immigration  history  (including  any  past
             misconduct);

          v. however, it is important to consider the "real world" scenario
             of the parents' current status in the United Kingdom;

         vi. the ages of the relevant children are a  relevant  factor,  as
             are the health, wider familial and/or  social  ties,  and  the
             circumstances in which they may  find  themselves  in  in  the
             country of relocation.

37. To these I add two further points.  This appeal concerns  the  scenario
    in which one parent (the appellant) has  no  right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, whilst the other (Ms [E]) does.   This  factual  matrix
    was addressed by the Court of Appeal in Runa [2020] EWCA Civ 514.   The
    Court rejected the submission that where one  parent  has  a  right  to
    remain in the rate United Kingdom (on the facts of that case, they were
    a British citizen), it would never be reasonable for relevant child  to
    leave.  At paragraphs 36 and 37, Singh LJ held:

         "36.     I would therefore reject Mr Biggs's primary submission  as
         to the interpretation of section 117B(6). I would, however,  accept
         his alternative submission, that the provision calls  for  a  fact-
         finding  exercise  so  that  the  full  background  facts  must  be
         established against which the only statutory question posed by that
         provision can then be addressed. I would emphasise  again,  as  the
         Supreme Court did  in  KO  (Nigeria)  and  this  Court  did  in  MA
         (Pakistan) and AB (Jamaica) that, once all the relevant facts  have
         been found, the only question which arises under section  117(6)(b)
         is whether or not it would be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
         leave the UK. The focus has to be on the child.

         37.      I would also accept Mr Biggs's submission  that  the  test
         under section 117B(6) is  not  whether  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" to the maintenance of family life outside the  UK.  That
         would be so even in an ordinary Article 8 case: see GM at paras. 42-
         52, in particular paras. 43-44 (Green LJ). That is all the more  so
         in a case which is not a conventional Article 8(2) one  but  arises
         under section 117B(6)."

38. This  makes  it  clear  that  the  reasonableness  assessment  must  be
    undertaken in light of the full factual picture in the case, which will
    of  course  include  the  status  of  both  parents  and  the  children
    themselves.

39. The second point relates to MA (Pakistan).  Whilst a  specific  element
    of Elias LJ's was disapproved by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  the
    observation made in paragraphs 49 of his judgment has, in my view, been
    left undisturbed and remains sound.  He said this:

         "49.     ... However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

40. The "powerful reasons" phrase is  not  a  rule  of  law,  but  it  does
    emphasise the significance of the status of a "qualifying child" in the
    overall  assessment  of  reasonableness.   Indeed,  this  is   entirely
    consistent with the respondent's latest guidance, to which Mr  Whitwell
    referred me in the course of his submissions.  On pages 50  and  51  of
    the document, it is said that:

         "The starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK.

         ...

         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK with  the
         parent(s)."  [A list of indicative factors is then set out]

41. With all of the above in  mind,  I  now  undertake  the  reasonableness
    assessment.

42. First and foremost, I conclude that it is in the best interests of both
    of the children to be with their parents and to reside in  the  country
    of their nationality.  As regards the latter, the importance to even  a
    young child of the rights and benefits accruing  from  nationality  has
    been recognised in the authorities and I need not provide  any  further
    explanation  here.   The  best  interests  of  both  children   are   a
    significant factor in this evaluative exercise.

43.  The  "real  world"  circumstances  in  which  the  two  children  find
    themselves is as follows.  Their  mother  has  settled  status  in  the
    United Kingdom and is not expected to leave this country.  On the other
    hand, their father has no status whatsoever and is of  course  expected
    to leave.

44. Both of the children are very young, and this is the  most  significant
    factor weighing against the appellant's  case  and  in  favour  of  the
    reasonableness of a departure.  Their primary focus is clearly on their
    parents and any wider relationships with other family members  will  by
    the nature be relatively tenuous at this stage: I  certainly  have  not
    been  provided  with  evidence  of  anything  more  significant.    The
    children's inability to  speak  French  Creole  and  the  lack  of  any
    experience of living in Mauritius is in a sense  of  neutral  value  by
    virtue of their young ages.

45. I take account of the appellant's connections to Mauritius.  On the one
    hand, he is a citizen of that country and resided there until  the  age
    of 11.  He will not have forgotten all sense of the social and cultural
    mores.  On the other hand, he was not in education for all of his  time
    there, left before his teenage years, and has now been  away  for  very
    close to 11 years.  He has no family remaining in the country to  which
    he could turn for general emotional and/or social support if he and his
    family unit relocated there.  The  appellant  would  have  no  concrete
    assets to return to, in terms of, for example,  property.   He  has  no
    work history in either country (this is explicable  by  his  young  age
    whilst in Mauritius and the fact that he has had no permission to  work
    in the United Kingdom).  Overall,  his  position  on  return  would  be
    precarious, notwithstanding some  financial  support  from  the  United
    Kingdom.   This  in  turn  has  a  bearing  on  my  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of the two young children going to live in that country.

46. Ms [E]  has  no  connection  with  Mauritius  other  than  through  the
    appellant.  She has never lived there and only has a very limited grasp
    of French Creole (the Creole spoken  in  the  Seychelles  is  based  on
    English).  Even if she did relocate to that country, it would be  as  a
    foreign national.  She has no material work history in this country and
    the prospects of being economically viable in Mauritius  would,  in  my
    view, be slim, at least in the short to medium term.

47. Having weighed up  all  relevant  factors  in  what  is  an  inherently
    difficult  evaluative  exercise,  I  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's two young children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, accompanied by their mother or not, and go and live  in
    Mauritius.  The combination of their best  interests  (including,  most
    importantly their British citizenship); the  fact  that  one  of  their
    parents has settled status in this country; the absence of  significant
    ties to Mauritius in respect of the  appellant  and  notifies  for  the
    others; and the respondent's own position  as  stated  in  her  current
    guidance, goes to show that there are no "powerful reasons" (or indeed,
    good reasons) why it would be reasonable for them to leave.

48. As section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is  a  freestanding  provision,  the
    appellant therefore succeeds in his appeal.

49. In light of this, it is unnecessary  for  me  to  go  on  and  consider
    separately  his  private  life  claim  under  Article  8.    The   only
    observation I would make is that, on my findings of fact,  he  is  fast
    approaching a period of residence in the United  Kingdom  amounting  to
    half of his life.

Anonymity

50. No anonymity direction has yet been made in these proceedings and there
    is no reason why I should  do  so  at  this  stage.   I  make  no  such
    direction.



Notice of Decision

51. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

52. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside

53. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  24 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
 Although the appellant has succeeded  in  his  appeal,  the  evidence  upon
which this success is based has only emerged  during  the  course  of  these
proceedings.  Indeed, relevant matters did not come out until oral  evidence
was provided to me.

Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date:  24 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
