
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09766/2018
     EA/07683/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2018                  |On 06 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JONATHAN SWIFT
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                   Thi [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, Counsel, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the decision of the Tribunal.

The appellant, Thi [D], is a Vietnamese national.  She is the subject of a
deportation order made on 17 August 2015.  The order was made under Section
32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and was consequent on her conviction in May
2013 for conspiracy to conceal and/or convert criminal property.  In
January 2014 the appellant was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for
that offence.

This appeal arises out of two decisions of the Secretary of State.  The
first is a decision of 13 June 2016 to refuse the appellant's application
for a derivative residence card.  That decision was made under regulation
18A of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  Regulation 18A has, with
effect from 1 February 2017, been overtaken by a corresponding provision in
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016. That provision is in materially the
same terms as regulation 18A of the 2006 Regulations. The reasons in the
proceedings below were formulated by reference to regulation 18A, and for
sake of consistency between this judgment and the First-tier Tribunal's
judgment, we will follow the same course.  The second decision was made on
16 April 2018 and refused the appellant's claim to remain in the United
Kingdom on human rights grounds.  We will first address the claim made in
respect of the EEA Regulations.

The appellant's application under the EEA Regulations was made on the
grounds that she was the primary carer for her daughter [Rl].  [Rl] was
born on 9 October 2015.

By Regulation 18A(1) the following is provided:

"The Secretary of State must issue a person with a derivative residence
card on application and on production of -

(a)  a valid national identity card issued by an EEA state or a valid
passport; and

(b)  proof that the applicant has a derivative right to reside under
Regulation 15A."

Regulation 15A is a somewhat extended provision but in summary, a person
has a derivative right to reside for so long as she satisfies the criteria
stated at any of paragraphs 2, 3, 4A or 5.  For present purposes, the
relevant paragraph is paragraph 4A, which applies to an applicant if she is
the primary carer of a British national who resides in the UK and would be
unable to reside in the UK if the applicant were required to leave.
Primary carer is also a defined term - see regulation 15A(7).  An applicant
is a primary carer of another person if she is a direct relative or a legal
guardian of that person, and has primary responsibility for the person's
care or shares the responsibility with one other person who is not an
exempt person.  An exempt person is someone who has a right to reside in
the UK under the 2006 Regulations other than under regulation 15A itself or
has a right of abode under Section 2 of the 1971 Act or has indefinite
leave to remain - see regulation 15A(6)(c).

The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's application. He concluded
that the applicant was a joint carer for [Rl], together with her partner,
Mr [TV] ([Rl]'s father), but went on to conclude that Mr [V], a British
citizen, was an exempt person. The Secretary of State concluded there was
no sufficient evidence that the appellant was the sole primary carer. He
stated that to be considcered a primary carer he would expect evidence to
show that [Rl] lived with the appellant, that the appellant made all day to
day decisions in respect of her child's health, education and so on, and
that the appellant was financially responsible for her child. The Secretary
of State's conclusion was that since [Rl] lived with both her parents, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary he was entitled to conclude that
the appellant shared responsibility for [Rl]'s care, together with Mr [V].

The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal
was dismissed and the decision was promulgated on 23 August 2018.  We
should add that by this time the appellant and Mr [V] had had a further
child, [Rd], who was born on 11 August 2017.

When considering the appeal under the EEA Regulations the First-tier
Tribunal Judge, Judge Hussain, said the following at paragraphs 39 and 40
of the judgment:

"39. In my view, the Secretary of State was plainly right in finding that
the appellant is not a primary carer because living with her partner who
was the other parent of the child in question, it cannot be said that she
has primary responsibility for that child.  In my view, it is inescapable
that the appellant and her partner are jointly responsible for their
child's care but the partner is clearly an exempt person because being a
British citizen, he clearly has the right of abode in the UK by virtue of
Section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971: subparagraph 6(c)(ii) applies.

40.  In view of the above, I find that the Secretary of State was right in
concluding that the appellant was not entitled to a derivative reside
residence card.  ..."

In this appeal the appellant contends that that decision was contrary to
the evidence before the Tribunal which explained the division of labour
between Mr [V] and the appellant. Put shortly, that evidence was to the
effect that Mr [V] worked to provide the resources the family needs, while
the appellant remains at home to look after the children. The appellant
also relies on the judgment of the Court of Justice in Chavez-Vilchez,
[2018] QB 103, and further, the appellant has referred the Tribunal to the
judgment of the Court of Appeal in Patel v The Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 5245.

Mr Nathan, who appears for the appellant, accepts that in light of the
judgment of the Court of Appeal in Patel his appeal in respect of the EEA
Regulations decision cannot succeed. However, I think I should say a little
more to explain the circumstances of why that is so. The starting point in
respect of derivative rights of residence is the judgment of the Court of
Justice in Zambrano [2012] QB 265.  In that case the parents were Columbian
nationals living in Belgium.  Two of their three children were Belgian
nationals.  The question referred to the Court of Justice was essentially
whether the parents could gain a right of residence from their dependent
minor children.  The conclusion on that point was at paragraph 45 of the
judgment of the court and was as follows:

"On the other hand, a refusal to allow the parent, whether a national of a
member state or a national of a non-member country, who is the carer of a
child to whom Article 18 EC and Directive 90/364 grant a right of
residence, to reside with that child in the host member state, would
deprive the child's right of residence of any useful effect.  It is clear
that enjoyment by a young child of a right of residence necessarily implies
that the child is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is his or
her primary carer and accordingly that the carer must be in a position to
reside with the child in the host member state for the duration of such
residence."

In Zambrano both parents were non-EU nationals.  What then of the situation
where one parent is an EU national and the other is not?  The case law
following Zambrano, as reviewed by the Court of Appeal in Patel,
distinguished between situations where if the non-EU parent were required
to leave, the EU national dependent child would be forced to leave the EU,
and situations in which that child might choose to leave.  For example, in
Harrison v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] 2 CMLR 23
Elias LJ stated as follows at paragraph 63 of his judgment:

"There is really no basis for asserting that it is arguable in the light of
the authorities that the Zambrano principle extends to cover anything short
of a situation where the EU citizen is forced to leave the territory of the
EU.  If the EU citizen, be it child or wife, would not in practice be
compelled to leave the country if the non-EU family member were to be
refused the right of residence, there is in my view nothing in these
authorities to suggest that EU law is engaged.  Article 8 Convention rights
may then come into the picture to protect family life as the Court
recognised in Dereci, but that is an entirely distinct area of protection."

The appellant in this appeal seeks to rely on the judgment of the Court of
Justice in Chavez-Vilchez.  In our view, the significance of the judgment
in that case is to be seen in the context of the circumstances in which the
reference to the Court of Justice was made.  The case concerned eight
claims. Common to the circumstances of each was that the parents lived
apart; the mother was responsible for the day-to-day care of the child; the
father was either entirely absent or had only limited contact.  Paragraphs
32 to 34 of the judgment of the court are material:

"32  The referring court seeks to ascertain whether the applicants in the
main proceedings, who are all nationals of third countries, may, as mothers
of a child who is a Union citizen, derive a right of residence under
Article 20 TFEU in the circumstances specific to each individual case.  The
referring court considers that, in that event, the individuals concerned
could rely on the provisions of the Law on social assistance and the Law on
child benefit that allow foreign nationals who are staying lawfully in the
Netherlands to be treated as Netherlands nationals, and to be entitled,
where appropriate, to receive social assistance or child benefit under that
legislation; that entitlement not being subject to a requirement that the
IND decide to grant them a residence permit or a document certifying that
they are staying legally.

33   In the opinion of the referring court, it is apparent from the
judgments of 8 March 2011, Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09, EU:C:2011:124), and of
15 November 2011, Dereci and Others (C-256/11, EU:C:2011:734), that the
applicants in the main proceedings would acquire under Article 20 TFEU a
right of residence in the Netherlands, derived from the right of residence
of their children, who are Union citizens, provided that those children are
in a situation such as that described in those judgments. It is necessary,
in each of the disputes in the main proceedings, to determine whether the
circumstances are such that those children would be obliged, in practice,
to leave the territory of the European Union if the right of residence was
refused to their mothers.

34   The referring court seeks to ascertain, in those circumstances, what
importance is to be given, in the light of the Court's case-law, to the
fact that the father, a Union citizen, is staying in the Netherlands or in
the European Union, as a whole."

It is clear that the court was not being asked by the referring Dutch court
to undertake any significant review of the principle in Zambrano.  Rather,
the cases concerned one specific matter, the significance of the fact that
the EU national parent, in each case the father, lived either in the
Netherlands or in another EU Member State.  This point was reflected in the
questions referred to the court, which were stated at paragraph 39 of the
judgment.  Those questions were as follows:

"1.  Must Article 20 TFEU be interpreted as precluding a member state from
depriving a third country national who is responsible for the day-to-day
and primary care of his/her minor child, who is a national of that member
state, of the right of residence in that member state?

2.   In answering that question, is it relevant that it is that parent on
whom the child is entirely dependent, legally, financial and/or emotionally
and, furthermore, that it cannot be excluded that the other parent, who is
a national of the member state, might in fact be able to care for the
child?

3.   In that case, should the parent/third country national have to make a
plausible case that the other parent is not able to assume responsibility
for the care of the child, so that the child would be obliged to leave the
territory of the European Union if the parent/third-country national is
denied a right of residence?'"

The answer to questions 1 and 2 was given at paragraph 72 of the judgment
of the court in the following terms:

"In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first and second
questions is that Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that for
the purposes of assessing whether a child who is a Union citizen would be
compelled to leave the territory of the European Union as a whole and
thereby deprived of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights
conferred on him by that article if the child's third country national
parent were refused a right of residence in the member state concerned, the
fact that the other parent, who is a Union citizen, is actually able and
willing to assume sole responsibility for the primary day-to-day care of
the child is a relevant factor, but it is not in itself a sufficient ground
for a conclusion that there is not, between the third-country national
parent and the child, such a relationship of dependency that the child
would indeed be so compelled were there to be such a refusal of a right of
residence.  Such an assessment must take into account, in the best
interests of the child concerned, all the specific circumstances, including
the age of the child, the child's physical and emotional development, the
extent of his emotional ties both to the Union citizen parent and to the
third country national parent, and the risks which separation from the
latter might entail for the child's equilibrium."

The Court's answer to the third question is at paragraph 78 of the
judgment, but that answer is not material for present purposes.

The answers to questions 1 and 2 are material.  In the context of the cases
before the Court of Justice, where the fathers were EU nationals but not
living with the mothers, it was (said the Court) relevant to consider
whether the father was willing and able to assume sole responsibility for
care. That was relevant, but not determinative. The overall question
remained whether the relationship of dependency between the child and the
non-EU parent was such that if that parent was required to leave the EU the
child would also be compelled to leave.

We do not consider that the judgment of the Court of Justice in Chavez-
Vilchez marks any material departure from the Zambrano principle. We are
comforted by the fact that when the Court of Appeal considered the same
matter in Patel the court reached the same conclusion.  This is clear from
paragraphs 25 to 26 of the judgment of Irwin LJ, who stated as follows.

"25. It seems clear therefore that the underlying principle in Zambrano is
undisturbed by Chavez-Vilchez, albeit that in the case of a child dependent
on one parent who is a third country national with no right of residence,
the State must ensure a careful process of enquiry.  However, the third-
country national bears the evidential burden of establishing that the child
citizen will, in practice, be compelled to leave the EU, unless rights of
residence are granted to the (principal) carer parent.

26.  As always with CJEU authority, the context must be borne in mind when
looking at the conclusions of the Court.  In Chavez-Vilchez, the reference
came before any final decision by the referring court.  The Dutch court was
looking for guidance.  There were no crisp findings of fact in respect of
the eight different cases.  However, the assumption which runs through the
cases, whether the EU citizen father assisted with child care or not, was
that the EU citizen parent would remain in the Netherlands whatever the
outcome of the case.  None of these cases were family units with parents
living together.  In each case the context was: if the non-EU citizen
mother leaves and the EU citizen father remains, will the EU citizen child
be compelled, in practice, to leave?"

How then does this fit with regulation 15A(7)?  That regulation is
formulated in terms of responsibility for care of the relevant person and
whether the applicant for the derivative right of residence has primary
responsibility or shares that responsibility equally with another person.
In a situation where parents are living with their child, and between them
do the things necessary for the child's practical and financial welfare, it
is no misuse of language to say that they share responsibility for care of
the child. That is a sensible starting point. Where such a situation
exists, we do not see that a conclusion - again as a matter of ordinary
language - that there is shared responsibility, will necessarily be
affected by the specific division between the parents of day to day
household responsibilities, for example responsibility for staying with the
child or the responsibility to earn the money necessary to support the
household. The simple fact that in a two parent household one parent works
and the other does not, does not indicate either that the working parent
lacks responsibility for decisions relating to the child's health,
education or welfare, or that the non-working parent lacks responsibilty
for the child's financial welfare. There is nothing in the judgment of the
Court of Justice in the Chavez-Vilchez that requires any different approach
- see the way in which the Court has expressed itself at paragraph 72 of
its judgment.

Paragraph 72 of the judgment is to the effect that there then must be an
overall assessment of the position, including the extent of the emotional
ties to the EU citizen parent and to the third country national parent.
This is the proper approach to the application of Regulation 15A(7).  Mr
Nathan's submission is  that the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Patel
takes a different approach to that in the judgment of the Court of Justice
in Chavez-Vilchez. We do not consider that there is any difference of
approach between  the two Courts. See for example, the approach adopted by
the Court of Appeal in Patel to the specific cases that were before it:

"75. In both Shah and Bourouisa there is impressive evidence of the
strength of family life, and of the determination of the British citizen
mother (in each case) to stay with the family unit and move abroad, if the
husband and father must leave.  Every sensible person would wish to honour
such an impulse.  However, recognition of that does not alter the fact that
however hard such a choice may be, it is a choice, not a necessity, not
compulsion.  In my judgment the evidence in each of these two cases is
clear that were the British parent to remain, they would be able to care
for the children concerned perfectly well.  The child citizen would be
under no compulsion to leave the EU."

In the present case, we do not consider the evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal required any departure from what we have described as the sensible
starting point.  The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude as it
did, that the appellant and her partner shared responsibility for the care
of [Rl] and [Rd]. The First-tier Tribunal accepted as correct the in-
principle approach taken by the Secretary of State - that is to say that
when parents live together with their children they will, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, share responsibility for the children's health
and welfare. Mr Nathan points out that at the time of the hearing before
the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was still breast-feeding [Rd]. Mr
Nathan informs me that [Rd] (age 14 months) is still being breast-fed as at
the date of this hearing.  We do not consider that that alters that the
approach to whether or not the appellant has primary responsibility for
[Rd]'s care for the purposes of Regulation 15A. Only the mother can
breastfeed, but that is not per se a determinative matter for the purposes
of whether there is entitlement to a right of residence in the United
Kingdom under regulation 15A. The notion of responsibility for a person's
care, in that regulation, entails an holistic evaluation. An evaluation of
a settled state of affairs having a degree of permanence will be the most
reliable guide to whether a derivative right of exists. In this instance
there was nothing that required the First-tier Tribunal to reach any other
conclusion than the one it did - that the appellant and Mr [V] shared
responsibility for the care of their children.

For these reasons the appeal against the EEA Regulations decision must be
dismissed. For sake of completeness we reject Mr Nathan's submission that
while his appeal would succeed on the basis of the judgment of the Court of
Justice in Chavez-Vilchez, it must fail in light of the judgment of the
Court of Appeal in Patel. On any analysis of either authority, the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law.

The second appeal before the Tribunal is against the Secretary of State's
decision on human rights grounds. This is the decision set out in the
letter dated 16 April 2018.  The point that was before the First-tier
Tribunal and is contested in this appeal too also arises out of the
appellant's family's circumstances.  As we have already mentioned, the
appellant lives with her partner, Mr [V].  They live with Mr [V]'s son [S],
who was born on 14 November 2003, with their daughter [Rl], born on 9
October 2015, and their son [Rd], born in August 2017.  Both [Rl] and [Rd]
were born after the Notice of Intention to Deport, which was dated 12 March
2014.

The ground of appeal concerns the claim to remain in the United Kingdom on
human rights grounds, relying on the Article 8 rights of her children.
This requires consideration of Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002. The material provisions are subsection (3) and
subsection (5):

"(3) In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

...

(5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant contended that the effect of
her deportation would be unduly harsh on her children and on her partner,
Mr [V]. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant shares family
life with her own children, and her partner, and with her stepson [S].
However, the Tribunal concluded it would not be unduly harsh for [S] to
remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant; and that it would not
be unduly harsh for [Rl] to remain in the United Kingdom without the
appellant. The Tribunal concluded it would be unduly harsh for [Rd] to
remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant, but it would not be
unduly harsh for [Rd] to live with the appellant in Vietnam.  Finally,
Tribunal concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for either [S] or [Rl]
to live in Vietnam with the appellant; and that it would not be unduly
harsh for Mr [V] to live in Vietnam with the appellant.

The appellant's grounds in this appeal are threefold.  The first is that
the Tribunal did not consider the impact on the children of the finding
that the appellant should go to Vietnam with [Rd], and possibly also [Rl],
while leaving [S] in the United Kingdom with his father.  The appellant
says that this is an error on the part of the Tribunal by reference to the
judgment in Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
1 AC 115.  In that case the House of Lords accepted the submission that
where an appellant alleged that removal would be in breach of his Article 8
rights it was right for the purposes of determining that Article 8 claim to
take into account the effect of his removal on family members even though
those other family members were not themselves party to the proceedings.
Thus, whether the interference consequent upon removal was disproportionate
depended on a consideration of the position of the family in the round.

There is no doubt as to that principle of law but we do not consider that
it assists the appellant in this case.  The ground is directed at the
Tribunal Judge's observation at paragraph 55 of his decision:

"55. The points made above appear to be fairly self-evident and one may
have thought not requiring an expert opinion on.  However I have taken
those into account and in my view the negative impact of the appellant's
deportation from this country can be mitigated by the two younger children
going to live with the appellant, the step-child remaining in this country
with his father and both he and the father travelling to Vietnam from time
to time to see the appellant."

    That paragraph followed from his consideration at paragraph 54 of
    various points made in the psychiatrist's report as to the impact of
    removal on the various different family members.  In our view,
    paragraph 55 is no more than a view on what might happen.  It was not
    in any sense any form of direction by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
    Further, section 117C(5) is itself a form of statutory recognition of
    the Beoku-Betts principle in that it focusses attention on the effect
    of deportation on partners and children. In this case, it is clear that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not fail to have regard to the impact
    that the appellant's removal might have on other family members nor did
    he fail to have regard to the impact that the removal of the appellant,
    perhaps with her son [Rd], might have on family members that remained
    in the United Kingdom.

We turn next to the third ground of appeal, which concerns what is the
correct approach to the notion of unduly harsh for the purposes of Section
117C(5).  This is the subject of the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO
(Nigeria) [2018] 1 WLR 5273.  As we read that judgment, the conclusions
were as follows.

First, that unduly harsh meant a degree of harshness beyond that which
would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
parent.

Second, that when assessing undue harshness, it was not appropriate to
balance the parent's criminality against the interest of the child.
Rather, the assessment of unduly harsh depends on consideration of the
effect on the child of the deportation of the parent.

Third, what amounts to undue harshness is a question of fact and assessment
for the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore, there is no single rule or set of
rules that can be applied to resolve every set of circumstances.  It is,
however, notable that the Supreme Court approved the description by this
Tribunal in its decision in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2015] INLR 563, where the Tribunal stated as follows:

"By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does not
equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.
Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this
context, denotes something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis of
pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly'
raises an already elevated standard still higher."

Fourth, given the treatment by the Supreme Court of the particular cases
before it, it is notable (a) that there is no rule that it would be unduly
harsh to require a British national to live outside the UK, (b) that the
existence of undue hardship is not to be equated with failing to take the
course of action that would be in the best interests of the child, and (c)
that the individual circumstances of the child or the other person
concerned are likely to be the matters that will be of particular
significance when deciding whether the impact of the deportation would be
unduly harsh. However, these three points are simply examples.  The general
description of the nature of undue harshness in MK is likely to be the only
thing which will be a reference point across all cases.

How then does this apply to the present case? The answer to this question
encompasses both the third ground of appeal - that the First-tier Tribunal
took a wrong approach in law - and the second ground of appeal, that there
was a failure to give reasons for the conclusions stated at paragraph 44 of
the judgment (that is to say, the conclusion that it was not unduly harsh
for [S] or [Rl] in the event that the appellant was required to leave the
United Kingdom, and the conclusion that it would not be unduly harsh for
any of the children to live with the appellant in Vietnam).

The point emerging from the material paragraphs of the Secretary of State's
determination was that he concluded there were no specific matters
suggesting that the impact of the appellant's deportation would be outside
the range of what might be described as 'ordinary' harshness.

The First-tier Tribunal considered the matter afresh.  It is important to
read that decision in the round.  We consider that, looking at the decision
in the round, it is clear that the Tribunal Judge had proper regard to the
witness statements that were before him and to the oral evidence given by
those who made those statements.  We note in particular what is said by the
Tribunal Judge between paragraphs 29 and 32 of his judgment.  It is also
significant to read the material passages of his judgment, paragraphs 43
and 44, together with what he says at paragraphs 54 and 55, here too
referring to the psychiatric evidence that was before him as to the likely
impact of the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

We have considered the witness statements that were before the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  It does not seem to us that there is anything in those
statements to indicate that there were any matters that might genuinely be
ones placing the circumstances of this case in the category of undue
harshness. Nor is there anything in the judgment of the First-tier Tribunal
to indicate that the judge took a wrong approach in law to the question of
what unduly harsh means. Reading the judgment as a whole, we are satisfied
that the First-tier Tribunal applied those words by reference to their
ordinary meaning, and in accordance with the description given by this
Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone).  We are conscious of the fact that the task
of this Upper Tribunal is to identify and correct errors of law. On matters
which are essentially matters of factual evaluation, such as the question
of undue harshness, it is important that the judges of this Tribunal do
afford due respect to the evaluations of First-tier Tribunal Judges.

Returning to this case, we see nothing in the conclusion set out by the
judge that indicates any error of principle in his approach.  For those
reasons, the appeal against the human rights decision is also dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
     [pic]
Mr Justice Swift
Date.   21 December 2018



