
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/09751/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard remotely by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 17 February 2021                           |on 03 March 2021             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN



                                   Between

                                  OBASOHAN

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr P Harvey, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Procedure to date.


 1. FtT Judge Green dismissed this appeal by a decision promulgated  on  14
    August 2019.


 2. The decision of Judge Green was set aside by a decision promulgated  on
    17 March 2020, which should be read with this determination.


 3. The main point in setting aside was that the judge  was  misled  by  an
    expert misquoting her instructions on  whether  she  was  to  opine  on
    "significant obstacles" rather than on "very significant obstacles"  to
    the appellant's (re)integration in Nigeria.


 4. For the remaking of the decision,  parties  were  directed  to  provide
    outlines of their submissions, referenced to the evidence  and  to  the
    law.  (Various  extensions  of  time  were  subsequently  granted,  and
    further extensions are hereby granted, to enable all  materials  to  be
    considered.)


 5. In a submission dated 14 October 2020, the SSHD sought disclosure  from
    the appellant about her medication.


 6. On 18 January 2021,  the  appellant's  solicitors  provided  a  country
    expert report by a social anthropologist, Prof. Jacqueline Knorr, dated
    7 January 2021, "to be read in conjunction" with the medical report  of
    Dr Erica Peters, consultant physician in infectious diseases, dated  26
    August 2020.


 7. On 16 February 2021, the  appellant  provided  a  consolidated  bundle,
    comprising case law and the two above reports.


 8. On 17 February 2021, the respondent provided  her  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (CPIN),  "Nigeria,  Medical  and  Healthcare  Issues",
    version 3.0, January 2020.


 9. I am  obliged  to  both  representatives  for  their  clear  and  well-
    referenced submissions, after which I reserved my decision.


AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] 2 WLR


10. The legal landscape on  medical  cases  has  changed  since  the  FtT's
    decision.  As this case has developed, the appellant's  submissions  on
    remaking focused on that matter.  Mr Harvey contended that  this  is  a
    prime example of a case which would not have succeeded  previously  but
    did now.  For the new legal framework, he  referred  to  an  unreported
    decision of UTJ Gleeson, not as  an  authority,  but  as  a  convenient
    summary.  Mrs Aboni agreed that it accurately sets out  the  applicable
    law, so I adopt that summary:


    On 29 April 2020, the Supreme Court gave the following guidance on  the
    approach now to be adopted following the decision of the European Court
    of Human Rights in Paposhvili.  The most important passage is at  [22]-
    [23] in the opinion of Lord Wilson JSC, (with whom Lady Hale JSC,  Lady
    Black JSC, Lady Arden JSC and Lord Kitchin JSC agreed):


          "22.             Following a careful analysis of the decision  in
          the D case and of its own decision  in  the  N  case,  the  Grand
          Chamber in the Paposhvili case expressed the  view  in  para  182
          that the approach hitherto adopted  should  be  "clarified".  The
          Convention   is   a   living   instrument   and   when,   however
          appropriately, the ECtHR  charts  its  growth,  it  may  generate
          confusion for it to claim to be providing only clarification. The
          court proceeded as follows:


               "183.  The Court considers that the 'other  very  exceptional
               cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N v  The  United
               Kingdom (para 43) which may raise an issue  under  article  3
               should be understood to refer  to  situations  involving  the
               removal of  a  seriously  ill  person  in  which  substantial
               grounds have  been  shown  for  believing  that  he  or  she,
               although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a  real
               risk, on account of the absence of appropriate  treatment  in
               the  receiving  country  or  the  lack  of  access  to   such
               treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,   rapid   and
               irreversible decline in his or her state of health  resulting
               in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
               expectancy.  The  Court  points  out  that  these  situations
               correspond to a high threshold for the application of article
               3 of the Convention in cases concerning the removal of aliens
               suffering from serious illness."


          ... So the Grand Chamber was thereby explaining that, in cases of
          resistance to return by reference to ill-health, article 3  might
          extend to a situation other than that exemplified by the D  case,
          cited in para 14 above, in which there was an  imminent  risk  of
          death in the returning state.


          Its new focus on the existence and accessibility  of  appropriate
          treatment in the receiving state led the  Grand  Chamber  in  the
          Paposhvili case to  make  significant  pronouncements  about  the
          procedural requirements of article 3 in that regard. It held


               (a)    in para 186 that  it  was  for  applicants  to  adduce
               before the returning state evidence "capable of demonstrating
               that there are substantial grounds for  believing"  that,  if
               removed, they would be exposed to a real risk  of  subjection
               to treatment contrary to article 3;


               (b)   in para 187 that, where such evidence  was  adduced  in
               support of an application under article 3,  it  was  for  the
               returning state to "dispel  any  doubts  raised  by  it";  to
               subject the alleged risk to close scrutiny;  and  to  address
               reports of reputable organisations  about  treatment  in  the
               receiving state;


               (c)   in para 189 that the returning state had to "verify  on
               a case-by-case basis" whether the care generally available in
               the receiving state was in practice sufficient to prevent the
               applicant's exposure to treatment contrary to article 3;


               (d)    in para 190 that  the  returning  state  also  had  to
               consider the accessibility of the treatment to the particular
               applicant, including by reference to its cost if any, to  the
               existence  of  a  family  network  and  to  its  geographical
               location; and


               (e)    in para 191 that  if,  following  examination  of  the
               relevant information, serious doubts  continued  to  surround
               the impact of removal, the returning state had to  obtain  an
               individual  assurance   from   the   receiving   state   that
               appropriate treatment would be available  and  accessible  to
               the applicant.


          These procedural obligations on returning states, at first  sight
          very onerous, will require study in paras 32 and 33 below."


    At [32], Lord Wilson confirmed the Supreme Court's  understanding  that
    Paposhvili was more than 'mere  clarification  of  what  the  [European
    Court of Human Rights] had previously said'.  In  effect,  there  would
    now be a shifting burden of proof.  It was for the appellant to  adduce
    evidence 'capable of demonstrating that there are  substantial  grounds
    for believing' that there is a risk on return  of  an  Article  3  ECHR
    breach.  That is not an undemanding threshold: the requirement  is  for
    the appellant to raise a prima facie case  of  potential  infringement,
    which  if  not  challenged   or   countered,   would   establish   that
    infringement.


    At [33], the guidance in Lord Wilson's judgment concludes:


          "33.     In the event that the applicant presents evidence to the
          standard  addressed  above,  the  returning  state  can  seek  to
          challenge or counter it in the manner helpfully outlined  in  the
          judgment  in  the  Paposhvili  case  at  paras  187  to  191  and
          summarised at para 23(b) to (e) above.  The  premise  behind  the
          guidance, surely  reasonable,  is  that,  while  it  is  for  the
          applicant to adduce evidence about his or her medical  condition,
          current treatment (including the likely suitability of any  other
          treatment) and the effect on him or her of  inability  to  access
          it, the returning state is better able to collect evidence  about
          the availability and accessibility of suitable treatment  in  the
          receiving state. What will most surprise the first-time reader of
          the Grand Chamber's judgment is the reference in para 187 to  the
          suggested obligation on  the  returning  state  to  dispel  "any"
          doubts raised by the applicant's evidence. But, when  the  reader
          reaches para 191 and notes the reference, in precisely  the  same
          context, to "serious doubts", he will realise that  "any"  doubts
          in para 187 means any serious doubts. For proof, or in this  case
          disproof, beyond all doubt is a concept rightly  unknown  to  the
          Convention."


    At [34], Lord Wilson recorded that neither party had  actively  invited
    the Court to refuse to follow Paposhvili:


          "[34].  ...Our  refusal  to  follow  a  decision  of  the  ECtHR,
          particularly of its Grand Chamber, is no longer regarded  as,  in
          effect, always inappropriate. But it remains, for  well-rehearsed
          reasons, inappropriate save in highly unusual circumstances  such
          as were considered in R (Hallam) and R (Nealon)  v  Secretary  of
          State for Justice (JUSTICE intervening) [2019] UKSC 2, [2020]  AC
          279. In any event, however, there is no question of our  refusing
          to follow the decision in the Paposhvili  case.  For  it  was  15
          years ago, in the N case cited at para 2 above, that the House of
          Lords expressed concern that the  restriction  of  article  3  to
          early death only when in prospect in the returning state appeared
          illogical: see para 17 above. In the light of the decision in the
          Paposhvili case, it is from the decision of the House of Lords in
          the N case that we should today depart."





The report of Dr Peters.


11. Dr Peters was asked to opine on these questions:


     1. What is Ms Obasohan's current treatment and medication for HIV?


      2.  How often does this treatment and medication need to  be  reviewed
      or adjusted?


      3.  How well controlled is Ms Obasohan's HIV at present?


      4.  If  Ms  Obasohan's  current  treatment  and  medication  were  not
      available to her in Nigeria (either because there was  an  absence  of
      appropriate treatment or a lack of access to it),  what  effect  would
      this have on her health?  Would her health decline? If so, how serious
      would that decline be, how quickly would  it  happen  and  would  that
      decline be reversible? What suffering would any such decline cause?


      5. If Ms Obasohan's current treatment were not  available  to  her  in
      Nigeria, would this lead to a reduction in her  life  expectancy?   If
      so, how significant (i.e. how substantial)  would  this  reduction  in
      life expectancy be?


12. The report explains that the appellant was first diagnosed in  2005  in
    Brighton and had complications including secondary kidney failure, with
    a resistant HIV virus requiring modification  of  her  therapy.   After
    2011 she was  fairly  stable  in  terms  of  her  medication,  with  an
    "undetectable viral load" when she came under the care of the Dr Peters
    in 2013.


      ...  her  medication  was  reviewed  in  2016  and  switched  to   ...
      dolutegravir, darunavir and ritonavir.  She has remained on this  drug
      combination since then with well controlled HIV ...


      Due to [her] previous history all antiretrovirals are not suitable ...
      It would be important to choose antiretrovirals that showed no further
      resistance and further have no toxicity in light of her renal failure.


      I cannot comment on whether the medication she is currently on, namely
      rezolsta and dolutegravir, is available in Nigeria... If she  was  not
      on antiviral therapy this would eventually be fatal.


      ... a timescale ... is very difficult ... but  I  would  anticipate  a
      reasonably rapid progression to death over ... a couple of years.


      ... if she remains on this medication we would expect her  to  have  a
      normal life expectancy and she only requires to attend  for  check-ups
      twice a year.


The report of Professor Knorr.


13. Under the heading "Facts and figures concerning HIV /  AIDS"  the  main
    points in the report are:


      1.8 million people in Nigeria were living with HIV in 2019.


      Only 33% of those with HIV were receiving treatment in 2017.


      Only a  quarter  of  those  receiving  treatment  had  achieved  viral
      suppression.


      ARV drugs are  officially  provided  free,  but  policy  is  far  from
      reality.


      Even common ARV drugs  are  liable  to  "stock-outs".   "Based  on  my
      information  from  written  sources  and  personal  acquaintances  ...
      dolutegravir  (DTG)  ...  is  among  the  drugs  heavily  affected  by
      irregularities in supply and stock-outs.  I am not aware  of  rezolsta
      being available in Nigeria".


      DTG is particularly expensive ... not affordable to most  ...  however
      ...  generic  and  cheaper  versions  (3.50  euros  per  month)   were
      introduced in 2017 ...


      Although drugs are free, patients often have to pay for other services
      such as tests and travel to clinics, which many infected people cannot
      afford.


      Distributors of drugs often demand payment, which  is  transferred  in
      various ways to patients.


The CPIN.


14. The passages to which I was referred are these (all based on  reputable
    sources; I have not included the citations):


      1.1.5 Access to and availability of quality  health  care  inadequate;
      most Nigerians unable to afford health care.


      4.1.1 Low numbers of doctors and other health workers  (especially  in
      rural areas and the north).


      5.1.1-3 Distribution of and access to  drugs  problematic;  access  to
      treatment for chronic diseases, such as malaria and AIDS, estimated at
      40%.


      5.1.6 Chaotic distribution, and shortages, of drugs.


      6.7 Free ARV drugs policy introduced in 2006.


      6.7.2 Human resources and infrastructure "sufficient to meet  the  HIV
      care country's needs".


      6.7.4 Free HIV treatment available "in all public facilities  as  well
      as designated private facilities".


      6.7.6 Treatment centres arranged to  minimize  geographical  barriers;
      more available in urban than in rural areas.


      Annex A, Available drugs: list includes  dolutegravir,  darunavir  and
      ritonavir, but not rezolsta.


Availability of treatment?


15. In absence of treatment, the appellant's case would succeed.


16. Mrs Aboni said that the consultant's  report  was  unclear  on  current
    treatment,  while  Mr  Harvey  said  that  was  plainly  rezolsta   and
    dolutegravir.  On this point, Mrs Aboni is right.


17. The report says firstly that  the  drug  combination  is  dolutegravir,
    darunavir and ritonavir.  It then contradicts itself by saying that the
    combination is rezolsta and dolutegravir.


18. The report does not show that rezolsta is an  indispensable  ingredient
    in the appellant's treatment.


19. Even if rezolsta is not available in Nigeria,  many  other  drugs  are,
    including the first mentioned combination.


20. Those other drugs may include equivalents to rezolsta.


21. Although neither representative explored the point  in  submissions,  I
    note  that  the  respondent's  decision   said   that   "rezolsta   and
    dolutegravir, or their equivalents, are available in Nigeria".


22. The evidence does not support a finding that an appropriate combination
    of drugs for the appellant is not available in Nigeria.


Access to treatment?


23. With an appropriate drug, or combination of drugs, the appellant has  a
    normal life expectancy.  Is there a real risk that she will  be  unable
    to access those drugs?


24. There are difficulties of access  to  treatment  in  Nigeria,  but  the
    appellant does not fall at the level of least advantage.  She  is  well
    versed in her medical needs, and can plan in advance.  She  can  return
    with the benefit of an initial support  package  from  the  respondent.
    There is no reason to suppose that she would choose to  live  far  from
    medical facilities, rather than close to a  clinic.   Drugs  should  be
    available publicly, without charge, but even if she has  to  pay,  they
    are likely to be cheap.


25. The source of the information at section 6 of the CPIN on HIV / AIDS is
    a "MEDCOI country factsheet".  A major plank of  Mr  Harvey's  argument
    was that this section of the note selected only one source, and that it
    did not sit well with the generalities in the rest of the note or  with
    the report of Professor Knorr.


26. The preface of the CPIN explains how its information has been selected.
     MEDCOI is an Asylum and Immigration Integrated Fund  financed  project
    to obtain country of origin medical information.  It allows 11 EU and 3
    other states to  use  information  from  qualified  doctors  and  other
    experts working in countries of origin.  Although Mr Harvey  said  that
    section 6 is based on a single source, that source  is  a  professional
    and reputable one, drawing on primary informants.  Section 6  does  not
    paint such a bleak picture as earlier sections, or  as  the  report  of
    Professor Knorr, but the note moves from the general to  the  specific,
    and its choice of source is made accordingly.


27. On all the evidence, there is no  real  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    unable to access treatment, such as to expose her to a  serious,  rapid
    and irreversible decline in her state of health, to intense  suffering,
    or to a significant reduction in her life expectancy.   Her case  under
    article 3 does not succeed.


Article 8.


28. Mr Harvey submitted that even if it fell short  under  article  3,  the
    appellant's case could succeed under article  8.   He  referred  to  PF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1139.  He said that lack of treatment,
    since AM, carries  a  greater  weight  than  was  accorded  by  earlier
    authorities.  He accepted that there had to be additional factors, over
    and above lack of treatment.  He relied upon 5  positive  matters  from
    the appellant's life in the UK, and 3 adverse matters about  return  to
    Nigeria:


      i) Her long time spent here, 18 years.


     ii) Her long absence from Nigeria, 22 years.


    iii) Her private life, accumulated over that period.


     iv) Her ability to speak English, which was a positive and not simply a
         neutral feature.


      v) Her church activities, and  the  unwillingness  of  her  church  to
         support her, if she were to return to Nigeria.


     vi) The stigma attached  to  HIV,  giving  rise  to  difficulties  over
         employment, and a likelihood of having nowhere to stay.


    vii) Lack of extended family support, with a particular impact on her as
         a single woman.


   viii) A real risk, with her profile, of economic and social destitution.


29. The long time the appellant has spent here  needs  to  be  put  in  the
    context of her immigration history.  She came in 2002 as a visitor, and
    overstayed.  She had discretionary leave from  2012  to  2015  but  has
    failed to establish various claims in proceedings since  then.   It  is
    not the worst of examples which come before tribunals, but  it  is  not
    greatly to her credit.


30. Ability to speak English, if it is to the appellant's credit at all, is
    of little weight.


31. There is nothing to stop the appellant pursuing  church  activities  in
    Nigeria.


32. Mr Harvey said that the FtT  erred  in  holding  that  the  appellant's
    church in the UK was likely to extend its support to her, because  that
    was contrary to the evidence.   I  am  not  persuaded  that  there  was
    anything wrong with the finding that  a  church  willing  to  help  the
    appellant financially here was likely to continue to do so there,  even
    if the church said otherwise.  In any event, I find  that  whether  the
    appellant is helped in that way does not  weigh  significantly  in  the
    article 8 balance.


33. The appellant failed to establish in various proceedings  to  date  her
    claims that she would be  returning  as  a  lone,  lesbian,  vulnerable
    female with no  family  or  other  support.   There  is  no  reason  to
    substitute any more favourable findings on those matters.


34. It is possible that the appellant might obtain  some  support,  if  she
    needed it, at  least  initially,  from  her  adult  children,  or  from
    extended family in Nigeria; but the article 8 balance does  not  depend
    on a definite finding that such support would be provided.


35. A risk of destitution might support an article  3  and  not  merely  an
    article 8 claim.   However,  there  is  no  reason  to  find  that  the
    appellant would be in  any  greater  difficulty  in  Nigeria  than  the
    average single woman of her age.  She has no disabilities  in  the  job
    market.  While she would  have  to  readapt,  nothing  of  significance
    stands in the way of her integration into her country of origin.   That
    conclusion is fortified by  the  availability  of  an  initial  support
    package from the respondent.  She falls well short of the private  life
    requirements in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  There is no
    absence of medical treatment, and no  set  of  additional  factors,  to
    disclose that the appellant has a right  to  remain  in  the  UK  under
    article 8.


36. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   The
    decision substituted is that the appeal, as originally brought  to  the
    FtT, is dismissed.


37.  No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




        Hugh Macleman



      19 February 2021

      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.







