
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/09261/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 17 January 2019                        |On 31 January 2019             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   N A [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Boyd, of Temple & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Russia born  on  22  June  2000  (and  so
    became an adult shortly before the FtT hearing on 28 June 2018).

 2. The appellant's father, her sponsor, is a citizen of Russia, born on 21
    June 1965.  He came to the UK from Georgia in April 2009.   On  7  June
    2013 he was granted leave to remain as a  refugee.   According  to  his
    statement, he last lived in family  with  the  appellant  in  2001,  in
    Georgia.  The appellant and her mother went to Chechnya in  that  year,
    without the appellant.

 3. The appellant applied on 4 May 2017 for leave to enter the UK.  The ECO
    refused her application by a  decision  dated  3  August  2017.   Under
    paragraph 352D  (iv)  of  the  immigration  rules,  the  ECO  was  "not
    satisfied that you lived together with your sponsor as part of the same
    family unit prior to his arrival in the UK".  Under article  8  of  the
    ECHR, the ECO was not satisfied that  she  had  family  life  with  the
    sponsor,  but  in  the  alternative  found  that   the   decision   was
    proportionate and that,  having  regard  to  the  duty  in  respect  of
    children, there were no exceptional circumstances to justify a grant of
    entry clearance.

 4. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Her grounds  were  stated  only  in
    terms of paragraph 352D of  the  rules,  with  no  reference  to  human
    rights.

 5. FtT Judge Clapham dismissed the appeal "under the immigration rules" by
    a decision promulgated on 6 August 2018.

 6. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  stated  in  her
    application dated 18 August 2018.  Ground (1) is that the rule requires
    the person to have been part of the family unit when the  sponsor  left
    the country of his habitual residence, not at any later  date.   Ground
    (2) is that the appellant, as a matter of fact and law,  remained  part
    of a family unit with the sponsor.

 7. FtT Judge Swaney granted permission on 13 September 2018, on  the  view
    that the judge might have taken the wrong approach to the  rule,  under
    reference to BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning of family unit) [2007]  UKAIT
    00055.

 8. I observed to Mr Boyd at the  outset  that,  as  stated  in  the  ECO's
    decision, the appellant had a right of appeal to the FtT under  section
    82(1) of the  2002  Act,  i.e.,  on  human  rights  grounds  only.   He
    acknowledged that to be the position.

 9. The rule remains relevant.  It provides thus:

         Requirements for leave to enter or remain as the child of a refugee


         The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
         parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:


             (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
             granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and


             (ii)      is under the age of 18; and


             (iii)     is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
             is not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent
             family unit; and


             (iv)      was part of the family unit of the person granted
             asylum at the time that the person granted asylum left the
             country of their habitual residence in order to seek asylum;
             and


             (v) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by
             virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in
             their own right; and


             (vi)      if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United
             Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.


10. The points which I noted from Mr Boyd's submissions were these:

      i) There was family life between the appellant and  sponsor,  and  the
         case raised an issue of the  proportionality  of  the  interference
         with that family life.


     ii) It would be difficult for father and daughter to meet,  other  than
         by through success in this appeal.  She would  be  unlikely  to  be
         granted a visit visa, if she failed in her appeal.   The  appellant
         could not visit Chechnya, where he would be at risk.


    iii) The UK might not be the only  possible  place  to  meet.   However,
         there would be visa and expense constraints on  meeting  elsewhere,
         and that would provide  short-term  contact,  not  the  quality  of
         family life she would have by living here with her father.


     iv) The appellant is not part of the new  family  unit  formed  by  her
         mother.  She now lives with her paternal  grandparents,  i.e.  with
         the sponsor's side of her family.


      v) It was in the appellant's interests as a child to join her  father.
         Although now legally an adult, the case was to be decided as  at  a
         date when she was a child.


     vi) It was in the appellant's favour that her case met the terms of the
         rules.  The judge went wrong by thinking it was relevant  that  the
         family unit (as originally constituted) came to an end at  a  later
         date.  The family unit between father  and  daughter  continued  to
         exist.


    vii) The religious and social background, and Islamic law, was that  the
         appellant even after reaching the age of 18 remained  part  of  her
         father's family unit until he consented to her marrying,  when  she
         would become part of her husband's family unit.


   viii) As well as her father, the appellant has extended family, an  uncle
         who has become an Irish citizen, and cousins,  living  lawfully  in
         the UK.  Her  entry  would  promote  her  family  life  with  those
         relatives.


     ix) The decision should be set aside, and the appeal should be  allowed
         on human rights grounds.


11. The above circumstances were  not  all  in  evidence  before  the  FtT.
    However, Mr Boyd said that they could readily be established, and  were
    all relevant to remaking the decision.

12. Mr Boyd accepted that in remaking the decision section 117B of the 2002
    Act, "Article 8:  public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    case", which was overlooked by the FtT, would apply.  He submitted that
    although there is no evidence that the appellant speaks English, s.117B
    (2) should not weigh significantly against her, because  she  is  young
    and can learn; and that although she is  not  financially  independent,
    s.117B (3) should not weigh significantly against her  either,  because
    of the brutal circumstances under which she has lived, and because  she
    could adapt and learn to support herself.

13. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the decision should be set aside, but that the appeal falls again to be
    dismissed.

14. The appellant, on a strict construction, did not state relevant grounds
    of appeal to the FtT or to the UT.  Her case was pitched  in  terms  of
    compliance with the rule, not of human rights.

15. BM and AL dates from a time when there was a right of appeal  in  terms
    of the rules, which does not apply to this case; but  the  rule  is  of
    course an appropriate starting point.

16. Neither party in their submissions referred to BM and AL.  It does  not
    assist the appellant.  The headnote says:

         "What is  a  'family  unit'  for  the  purposes  of  para  352D(iv)
         Immigration Rules is a question of  fact.  It  is  not  limited  to
         children who lived in the same household as the refugee. But if the
         child belonged to  another  family  unit  in  the  country  of  the
         refugee's habitual residence it will be hard to establish that  the
         child was then part of two  different  'family  units'  and  should
         properly be separated from the 'family unit' that  remains  in  the
         country of origin."


17. The appellant has not lived with the appellant since she was an  infant
    in Georgia in 2001.  She can  have  little  if  any  memory  of  direct
    contact with him.  The FtT decision at [45] shows that the sponsor  and
    his wife had separated by 2005.  Although it was said in  the  UT  that
    she now lives with her paternal side, I was referred to no evidence  of
    when she might have moved.  The FtT decision reads as if  the  evidence
    was that she grew up always with her mother.

18. Taking Georgia to be the sponsor's "country of habitual residence",  as
    Mr Boyd submitted, it was within reason for the FtT to  find  that  the
    appellant was not part of his family unit when he left there  in  order
    to seek asylum in 2009.  The appellant and sponsor  may  disagree,  but
    that conclusion is not shown to have involved the making of an error on
    a point of law.

19. Even if there were to be a finding of family life  between  father  and
    daughter for purposes of article 8, that family life is  exiguous,  and
    the ECO's decision does  not  interfere  with  it  to  any  significant
    extent, if at all.  The appellant and sponsor may communicate  as  they
    do now, and may meet, irrespective of the outcome of these proceedings.
     Any application she may make in the future for a visit  visa  must  be
    judged on its merits.

20. The considerations which the UT is bound to take into account in  terms
    of section 117B (2) and (3) of the 2002 Act are not decisive  on  their
    own, but it is plainly against the appellant that she  does  not  speak
    English, and is not financially independent.

21. Mr Boyd has made the most of every point which can properly be  gleaned
    for  the  appellant,  but  the   evidence   does   not   disclose   any
    disproportionate interference with such family life as exists.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, stating  that  the  appeal  is
    dismissed "under the immigration rules", is set aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted: the appeal, which was on human rights  grounds
    only, is dismissed.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



      [pic]

      17 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




