


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09276/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham             |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 15 May 2017                      |On : 22 May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               oliver muchenje

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat of Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  appeal  on
6 March 2017.

The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe,  born  on  30  September  1973.  He
applied for entry clearance to the UK as a spouse,  to  join  his  wife,  an
Ethiopian citizen who had been granted leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
refugee from 25 January 2012 until 24 January 2017.


The circumstances of the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor  are
somewhat complicated and are of relevance in this  appeal.  The  couple  met
through an online dating  website  in  early  2007  and  their  relationship
developed. They met in person in August 2007 in Ethiopia and  the  appellant
then returned to Ethiopia in October 2007  to  meet  the  sponsor's  family.
They got engaged in Ethiopia on 13 October 2007 and were  married  in  Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, on 3 January 2008. They then lived together as husband  and
wife in  Bahrain,  where  the  appellant  was  working,  until  the  sponsor
travelled to the UK to undertake an MSc degree, in  August  2008,  with  the
appellant sponsoring her financially. He was unable to visit her in  the  UK
because of previous traffic offences which prevented him obtaining  a  visit
visa. The appellant acquired a work permit for the UK in late 2008  and  was
offered various jobs but he declined the offers as he and his wife  did  not
intend to settle in the UK at that time. In 2009 the appellant  started  his
own consultancy firm in South Africa  and  travelled  frequently.  When  the
sponsor completed her studies in 2009 they met  up  in  Zimbabwe,  and  then
again in 2010 in South Africa. They decided that the  sponsor  would  remain
in the UK to gain work experience, but the distance affected their  marriage
and they encountered marital problems. The appellant secured  a  consultancy
position in Saudi Arabia and worked there on a  business  working  visa  and
their  relationship  deteriorated.  In  April  2011  the  sponsor  was  made
redundant and she decided to return to Ethiopia and purchased a  ticket  for
her return on 12 October 2011.  However  she  did  not  return  because  she
learned of the arrest of a friend in Ethiopia, an active  supporter  of  the
Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), a party she also supported, and she  was  told
that the security services were looking for her. She then decided to  remain
in the UK and she claimed asylum  and  was  granted  refugee  status  on  25
January 2012. From December 2012 contact resumed and the couple  reconciled.
They met up in South Africa in 2013 and 2014, in Zimbabwe in 2014  and  then
several times in France in 2015 and 2016. The  appellant  remained  residing
in the UAE but the sponsor could not obtain a visa to meet him there.  After
taking a holiday together in Zimbabwe and South Africa in November 2014  the
sponsor  became  pregnant,  in  December  2014.  The  pregnancy  had  to  be
terminated due to complications and the couple met  up  in  Paris  to  spend
time together. They tried to conceive again but were unsuccessful.

The appellant made his application for entry clearance on  20  August  2015.
His application was refused on 28 September 2015. The respondent noted  that
the appellant had a record of five  criminal  offences  in  the  UK  between
December 2001 and 2004  when  living  there  and  considered  him  to  be  a
persistent offender. It was noted that he  had  failed  to  declare  his  UK
offences in a previous visit visa application and therefore considered  that
he had failed to demonstrate a change of character. In  the  light  of  such
conduct the respondent considered it  undesirable  to  issue  the  appellant
with entry clearance and  refused  his  application  under  the  suitability
provisions  in  S-EC.1.5  and  2.5(b).   The   respondent   considered   the
appellant's application under paragraph 352A for family reunion but was  not
satisfied that he would be  eligible  as  a  pre-flight  partner  since  the
sponsor stated that they were separated when she made  her  application  for
leave to remain in the UK and they had not demonstrated that they  had  ever
lived together as husband and wife and had a subsisting relationship  before
she left Ethiopia. The application was therefore considered  under  Appendix
FM as a post flight spouse since the marriage was rekindled  in  2012  after
the sponsor was granted leave to remain as a  refugee.  The  respondent  was
not satisfied  that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor  was
genuine and subsisting or that they intended to  live  together  permanently
as husband and  wife  and  therefore  also  refused  the  application  under
paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM. As for Article 8  outside  the  rules,
the respondent considered that there  was  nothing  preventing  family  life
from being pursued in Zimbabwe or the UAE.

The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard in the  First-
tier Tribunal on 13 December 2016 and dismissed in  a  decision  promulgated
on 21 December 2016.


The appeal was heard by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  who
identified that there was  only  one  ground  of  appeal,  namely  that  the
decision was contrary to  s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.  The  judge
accepted the account given of the couple's relationship.  He  accepted  that
they were in regular contact, that they sought  to  be  together  when  they
could and that the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting.  He  accepted
that they enjoyed family life. The judge accepted further  that  the  couple
could not live together in Ethiopia or the UAE. He  found  there  to  be  no
evidence that the sponsor could not live in Zimbabwe but accepted that  that
would have serious consequences for the continuation  of  her  private  life
rights and that the burden in relation to Article 8(1) of the ECHR had  been
met. He then went on to consider proportionality.  The  judge  rejected  the
respondent's reasons for not considering the  application  as  a  pre-flight
one and found that paragraph 352A was applicable. However he did not  accept
that the couple intended to live together permanently in the UK and on  that
basis concluded that the requirements of  paragraph  352A  and  Appendix  FM
were not met and that the decision refusing entry clearance  was  justified.
The judge considered the suitability provisions  and  the  appellant's  past
convictions but considered that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  meet  the
burden of proof in that regard. He noted that the convictions were  all  for
driving offences, for which the appellant had received fines and periods  of
disqualification, and that all  were  spent  convictions.  He  accepted  the
appellant's explanation for not having declared all the offences  and  found
that there was no public interest in refusing  entry  clearance  because  of
the  appellant's  past   offences.   However   taking   all   matters   into
consideration he concluded that the public interest was in the  respondent's
favour and that the decision was proportionate. He  found  there  to  be  no
breach of Article 8 and he dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought on two main grounds: that  the
judge had erred in his finding that family life could continue  in  Zimbabwe
and that such  a  finding  was  contrary  to  the  country  guidance  in  RN
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083; and that  the  judge's  findings
on intention to live together permanently were inconsistent  and  failed  to
take account of material evidence.

Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Appeal hearing

The appeal came before me on 15 May 2017 and  I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.

Mr Farhat submitted with regard to the first ground that  the  couple  would
not be able to relocate to Zimbabwe and that the judge had erred in  finding
that they could. He relied on the case of RT (Zimbabwe) in  submitting  that
they would be unable to demonstrate  loyalty  to  the  regime,  due  to  the
appellant's lengthy absence  and  the  sponsor's  status  as  a  refugee  in
another country and her political activities in  Ethiopia.  With  regard  to
the second ground Mr Farhat submitted that the  judge  had  ignored  various
factors and had ignored the fact that the appellant's  willingness  to  give
up his salary in the UAE and start a  family  with  the  sponsor  showed  an
intention for them to live together  permanently.  Further,  the  judge  had
ignored evidence in the grounds of appeal before him that  the  couple  were
buying a property in Manchester, which was a major step in  cementing  their
intention to live together permanently in the UK.  Further,  the  judge  had
not considered that the appellant  was  very  employable  in  the  UK  as  a
quantity surveyor. The documentary evidence showed a  clear  commitment  for
the couple to be together.

Ms Pettersen submitted that there  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
suggest that the couple could not be  admitted  to  Zimbabwe  or  considered
themselves to be at risk there. With regard to the judge's findings  on  the
couple's intentions, she submitted that the appellant  would  need  to  show
perversity in the judge's findings which he could not do.  Even  if  he  had
omitted considering the proposed property purchase in Manchester  there  was
sufficient reasoning otherwise.

Both parties agreed that if I were to find an error of law  in  the  judge's
findings on the couple's intentions I could  re-make  the  decision  on  the
evidence before me without a further hearing.

Consideration and Findings


It was accepted by both parties that if the second  ground  of  appeal  were
made out, the first ground would effectively fall away. Accordingly, and  in
light of my findings below, I do not propose to deal with the  first  ground
in any detail, save to say that  I  find  little  merit  in  the  assertions
therein, which rely on  outdated  country  guidance  and  raise  issues  not
argued before the judge. I turn, therefore, to the  second  ground  relating
to the judge's findings on the couple's intentions.

At [38] the judge considered the couple's evidence as  to  the  reasons  why
they had decided to seek to live together, namely to increase  their  chance
of having children, particularly  after  the  sponsor's  miscarriage.  Their
evidence was that they had opted to make the UK their home  because  of  the
sponsor's refugee status and residence here. At  [39]  and  [40]  the  judge
gave reasons for concluding that that was  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  him
that they intended to live together permanently in  the  UK.  Those  reasons
were essentially that there was no evidence of  the  appellant  looking  for
work in the UK since rejecting a job offer in 2008 and  that  there  was  no
reasonable explanation why they would  forego  the  appellant's  substantial
income from his employment in the UAE.


Had there been no other considerations or  evidence  to  consider,  and  had
Judge McCarthy considered and addressed all the evidence in  reaching  those
findings, I would agree with Ms Pettersen that the appellant would  have  to
meet the high threshold of  showing  perversity  in  order  successfully  to
challenge the judge's conclusion in that respect and that he may be in  some
difficulty in doing so. However it seems to me that there  is  an  error  of
law in the judge's conclusion arising from an omission to  address  all  the
evidence when considering the parties' intentions.


There was evidence before the  judge  that  the  couple  were  purchasing  a
property in Manchester together and that was specifically  referred  in  the
grounds of appeal before the judge at page 15. That  was  not  a  matter  to
which the judge referred and it appears  that  he  may  have  overlooked  it
entirely. The judge accepted the evidence given  by  the  couple  about  the
nature of their relationship over time and there is therefore no reason  why
the purchase of a property in the UK ought not to have  been  given  weight.
Ms Pettersen accepted that there was no challenge to  that  evidence.  I  do
not agree that such an oversight was  minimal  or  immaterial,  particularly
when considering the finely balanced conclusion reached  by  the  judge  and
the otherwise positive findings that he made about the relationship.  It  is
clear from his findings at [40] that the  only  evidence  he  considered  in
support of the appellant's claim of his changed intentions  since  2008,  as
to his place of work, was the parties' stated wish to start  a  family.  Had
he also taken into account the  fact  that  the  couple  were  purchasing  a
property in the UK it may well  be  that  his  conclusion  would  have  been
different.

Accordingly I find  that  the  failure  to  consider  this  evidence  was  a
material omission amounting to an error of law and  I  therefore  set  aside
the judge's findings on the parties' intentions.


As already mentioned, Mr  Pettersen  was  content  for  me  to  re-make  the
decision on the evidence before  me  and  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
evidence that the couple were purchasing a property together in  Manchester.
Adding that evidence into the balance  undertaken  by  Judge  McCarthy,  and
considering the evidence that the couple  wished  to  start  a  family,  and
taking  note  also   of   the   appellant's   qualifications   and   evident
employability in the UK as a quantity surveyor, I find no  reason  to  doubt
that their intentions were and are as claimed, namely to put down  roots  in
the UK and settle here permanently and I accept that the  balance  falls  in
the appellant's favour in that respect.


Turning to the other requirements in paragraph 352A and Appendix  FM,  there
has been no challenge to the judge's findings that they had been  satisfied.
I have some reservations as to whether the complex history of  the  couple's
relationship  would  indeed  fall  within  the  terms  of  paragraph   352A,
particularly considering the qualification in paragraph 352A(ii) as  to  the
timing of the sponsor's  departure  from  her  country  "in  order  to  seek
asylum".  However  the  respondent  has  not  sought  to   challenge   Judge
McCarthy's finding that this was a pre-flight case falling within  paragraph
352A. Accordingly I accept that the appellant has  demonstrated  an  ability
to meet the criteria in paragraph 352A of  the  immigration  rules.  However
even if that were not the case the appellant has, on the other  unchallenged
findings made by the judge in regard to suitability and the  genuineness  of
the marriage, clearly met the requirements in Appendix FM. The  respondent's
decision, furthermore, makes it clear that the  financial  requirements  and
the English language requirements were met.

Of course since the respondent's decision is appealable only on  the  ground
that the refusal of entry clearance was contrary to s6 of the  Human  Rights
Act 1998, the fact that the appellant could meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules is not the end of the matter. However,  as  found  in  the
case of Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487  it  can  be  a
weighty matter, and that is particularly so in this case, given  the  nature
of the  appellant's  application.  Judge  McCarthy's  conclusion,  that  the
decision to refuse entry clearance was proportionate and thus not in  breach
of Article 8, was based upon the fact  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules. The question of the couple's  ability
to relocate to Zimbabwe was of some  weight  in  his  consideration  in  the
circumstances. However, in light of the judge's observations at [28]  as  to
the serious consequences to the sponsor's private life of expecting  her  to
move to Zimbabwe, considering that she has been recognised as a  refugee  in
the UK, and given Ms Pettersen's  properly  made  acknowledgement  that  the
first ground of appeal effectively fell away if the second ground  was  met,
I do not consider that such a consideration would tip the balance in  favour
of the public interest when there was  otherwise  an  ability  to  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules.

Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse   entry
clearance to the appellant amounts to an unjustified interference  with  the
appellant's family life with the sponsor and that is  it  not  proportionate
in terms of Article 8.  I  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.










Signed:[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 16 May
2017
