








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/09234/2018
                                                               HU/09237/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Suhel ahmed
                                JIKRA SADIYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel, Waterstone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, citizens of Bangladesh, have  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Mill of the First-tier Tribunal (F-tT) sent on  6
    February 2019 dismissing their appeal against the decision made by  the
    respondent on 28 March 2018 to refuse them leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The appellants advance two  grounds,  the  first  contending  that  the
    judge erred in refusing to adjourn the second that he erred in  failing
    to carry out a structured Article 8 assessment.

3.   The first ground focuses on the judge's treatment  of  the  adjournment
    issue at paras 14 - 15:

         "14. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellants.   I
             am satisfied that intimation of the hearing had been  made  to
             them.  An earlier hearing on the appeals had been assigned for
             15 January 2019.  The basis of the adjournment was in  respect
             of the Second Appellant's stated early pregnancy difficulties.
              An adjournment was granted on that basis  and  a  fresh  date
             fixed to take place on 29 January  2019.   By  way  of  letter
             dated 25  January  2019  the  First  Appellant  wrote  to  the
             Tribunal seeking a further adjournment, again  in  respect  of
             the Second Appellant's  'pregnancy  complication'.   This  was
             accompanied by a letter dated 13  December  2018  from  Newham
             University Hospital, NHS Barts Health Trust, referring  to  an
             appointment which the  Second  Appellant  had  on  Tuesday  29
             January 2019 at the antenatal department.  It  is  clear  that
             this appointment was a standard routine  appointment  and  was
             not one of critical consequence.  Indeed,  the  terms  of  the
             letter refer to the fact  that  if  the  appointment  was  not
             convenient then a telephone call should be made to  arrange  a
             fresh appointment.  On 25 January 2019 this second application
             to adjourn was refused.  On 28 January 2019 a  further  letter
             was received by the First Appellant by  fax,  again  making  a
             request for an adjournment on  exactly  the  same  grounds  as
             before.  The First Appellant stated that he would  have  tried
             to attend the appeal himself in  the  absence  of  the  Second
             Appellant,  but  the  appointment  was  urgent.    The   First
             Appellant states that the appointment is so urgent that if  it
             is missed the Second Appellant's pregnancy related things will
             get more complex.  There  is  no  merit  in  this  suggestion.
             There is also a lack of specification of  the  current  up  to
             date problems  which  the  Second  Appellant  is  said  to  be
             suffering from.  She is not heavily pregnant.  She is, on  the
             basis of the documentary evidence earlier provided, around  12
             weeks pregnant.  The adjournment request on  25  January  2019
             has attached to it a letter report from Dr Rajrathnam  who  is
             the Second Appellant's general practitioner.  This  refers  to
             her being 11 weeks pregnant and she was stated to be suffering
             'pregnancy  related  sickness,  pelvic  pains,   fatigue   and
             lethargic'.   There  is   nothing   acute   certified.    Both
             Appellant's could have attended the hearing.


         15.  I approached the further application  for  an  adjournment  in
             accordance  with  the  decision  of  the  Court   in   Nwaigwe
             (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  I considered
             the issue of fairness for the Appellants.  I took into account
             the fact that lengthy detailed written witness statements were
             available  and  which  had  been  lodged  on  behalf  of   the
             Appellants setting out the entirely of their  cases.   I  took
             into account that none of this evidence was  being  challenged
             because there was no Home Office Presenting  Officer.   I  was
             satisfied that there was no obvious issues which I required to
             clarify  from  the  Appellants  in  order  to  reach  a   fair
             determination of the appeals.  I was not satisfied that  there
             was evidence which justified the absence of the Appellants  at
             the appeal given that a former adjournment  had  already  been
             granted and there was no supporting evidence to justify  their
             failure to attend."

4.   As pleaded, the first ground really subdivides into three.   The  first
    paragraph assails the judge's approach to  the  fact  that  a  previous
    application to adjourn had been granted "on the same basis" as that  on
    which he refused  it.   I  do  not  find  this  contention  persuasive.
    Clearly the judge considered that  it  was  not  in  the  interests  of
    justice that cases should be adjourned, more so when these had  already
    been one adjournment granted.  Given that by the time he came to assess
    the case there had been  a  further  written  application  to  adjourn,
    refused on the papers, it was only to be expected that the judge  would
    scrutinise  the  application  closely,  taking  stock  of  the  further
    evidence but also keeping in mind its prehistory.

5.   The second paragraph of the challenge raised to  the  judge's  decision
    not to adjourn takes issue with the judge's apparent disregard for  the
    known medical history of the second appellant, namely that she had  had
    a miscarriage.  It is argued that it was prejudgmental of the judge  to
    assert at paragraph 14 that there was no  urgency  to  the  appellants'
    expressed need to attend an appointment on the same  day  and  "nothing
    acute certified" in the letter from the second appellant's  GP.   Taken
    on its own, I do not consider this paragraph discloses an error of law.
     The supporting evidence  did  not  state  in  terms  that  the  second
    appellant's medical appointment  had  to  take  priority  for  pressing
    medical reasons. It may have been unduly dismissive  of  the  judge  to
    have treated the second appellant as having no pressing  medical  needs
    because "[s]he is not heavily pregnant", but the judge was entitled  to
    view adversely the lack of evidence indicating a pressing medical  need
    for both to attend the appointment.  The  judge  will  also  have  been
    aware that the first appellant had failed to attend the scheduled  Home
    Office interview, and that the second appellant's need  to  attend  her
    medical appointment did not obviously prevent the first appellant  from
    attending, particularly when  they  were  notified  that  their  second
    written requests for an adjournment had been refused.  That said, there
    is an element of confusion in the judge's treatment of  the  supporting
    evidence, illustrated by the final sentence of paragraph 15  ("...  and
    there was no supportive evidence to justify their failure to attend") -
    presumably  the  judge  meant  no  sufficiently  compelling  supportive
    evidence.

6.   The third  paragraph  of  the  appellants'  challenge  focuses  on  the
    judge's stated reason for proceeding to deal with the appeals in  their
    absence in terms of "none of the written statements"  being  challenged
    because there was no Home Office Presenting Officer and "there were  no
    obvious issues which I required to clarify from the appellants in order
    to reach a  fair  determination"  (paragraph  15).   In  order  to  act
    consistently with this reasoning, the judge's  assessment  should  have
    been based on taking the appellant's evidence at its highest.  In fact,
    however, the judge  did  not  do  so.   In  assessing  the  appellants'
    connections with the UK and degree of integration, the judge refused to
    accept the first appellant's claim to  have  business  interests  here,
    stating at paragraph 22:

         "22. The First Appellant refers to having invested a  large  amount
             of money in his business in the United Kingdom.  There  is  no
             specification  as  to  the  name  of  the  business  nor   any
             documentary evidence in  relation  to  the  existence  of  his
             business nor its operations nor its level of turnover  nor  of
             any tax paid.  This is despite the First Appellant claiming to
             have paid all the relevant taxes."

7.   At paragraph 23 the judge stated that he found the  evidence  given  by
    the appellants regarding whether they had  been  continuously  resident
    lawfully "less than candid  and  this  impairs  their  credibility  and
    reliability".  The last statement is particularly troubling,  since  if
    the  judge  considered  the  appellant's  credibility  and  reliability
    impaired he was doing the opposite of taking the witness  statement  at
    their highest.  Such an approach was procedurally unfair.

8.   In my judgment the judge's  error  in  the  treatment  of  the  written
    evidence undermined his stated basis for adjourning.  If he was not  in
    fact prepared to treat their witness as credible on their face, and not
    in need of clarification,  then  he  should  have  asked  whether  that
    impacted on his ability to make a fair determination.

9.   For the above reasons I set aside the judge's decision for  a  material
    error of law.

10.  I see no alternative to the  case  being  remitted  to  the  Ft-T  (not
    before Judge Mill).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 June 2019
              [pic]





