
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09766/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |On 26 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  nasir [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Haq, solicitor agent for Harris & Green,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Nasir [I], was born on [ ] 1986 and is a male citizen of
    Pakistan.  By a decision dated 30 June 2017, I found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Nasir [I], was born on  [
         ] 1986 and is a male citizen of Pakistan.  By a decision  dated  23
         March 2016, the respondent refused the appellant's application  for
         leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  Appendix  FM  and
         paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended).   The  respondent  refused
         the appellant under the parent route of Appendix  FM  and  also  as
         regards private life (paragraph 276ADE).  Further,  the  respondent
         considered there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  which  might
         engage Article 8 ECHR.  The appellant and his wife Ms [N] have  two
         children born in 2011 and 2016 respectively.  The judge records  in
         his decision that contact between the appellant  and  the  children
         following the breakdown of the marriage with Ms [N]  had  proceeded
         by agreement  but  the  "situation  had  deteriorated"  [17].   The
         appellant says that he was compelled by  the  mother's  failure  to
         cooperate over contact to make an application to the Family  Court.
         By the time the appellant appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal,
         a first contact session had been  due  to  take  place  at  Bingley
         Contact Centre on 22 October 2016 but had been cancelled  at  short
         notice on account of the mother being unwell.

         2.   Having set out the circumstances and the reasons for  refusal,
         the judge's decision reaches  a  somewhat  abrupt  conclusion.   At
         [25], the judge records that "the situation has changed  since  the
         appellant made his application [for further leave to remain]."  The
         judge notes that the appellant  had  made  an  application  to  the
         Bradford Family Court, that both the children are British  citizens
         and that it would not be reasonable to expect either child to leave
         the United Kingdom (although he gives no reasons for that finding).
          The judge then concluded [26] that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
         requirements  of  EX.1  and  then  allows  the  appeal  under   the
         Immigration Rules.

         3.   The grounds of appeal raise the requirements under Appendix FM
         of E-LTRPT2.4.  This is the Rule whereby an  applicant  may  obtain
         leave to remain on the basis of contact with the child with whom he
         or she does not live.  The respondent complains that the judge  had
         allowed the appeal in effect under this provision  of  Appendix  FM
         (although he makes no direct reference to it) without making proper
         findings as to the nature and extent of the  parental  relationship
         with the children or whether the appellant  had  provided  evidence
         that he was taking and intended to  take  an  active  role  in  the
         children's upbringing.   There  is,  however,  a  more  fundamental
         problem  with  the  judge's  decision.    As   noted   above,   the
         respondent's decision to refuse the application is dated  23  March
         2016 and therefore falls within the "new" provisions for  statutory
         appeals.  The judge had no jurisdiction to allow the  appeal  under
         the Immigration Rules.  The appeal  could  only  be  considered  on
         human rights grounds, in this instance Article 8 ECHR.   The  judge
         refers to Article 8 at [10] and correctly records  that  the  facts
         are to be assessed as at the date of the  hearing  [11].   However,
         the remainder of the analysis indicates that the judge has  applied
         the Immigration Rules rather than considering the appeal on Article
         8 grounds.  In the circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision.
          The decision can be remade in the Upper Tribunal; it appears  that
         any further evidence to bring the facts as regards  contact  up-to-
         date will be brief.

         Notice of Decision

         4.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  dated  28
         October 2016 is set aside.  None of  the  findings  of  fact  shall
         stand.  The decision will be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
         Tribunal Judge Clive Lane) at Bradford on a date to be fixed.

         DIRECTIONS : The parties are directed to file at the  Tribunal  and
         to  serve  on  each  other  any  evidence  upon  which   they   may
         respectively intend to rely no less  than  10  days  prior  to  the
         resumed hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  the  case  of  the
         appellant, such evidence should include copies of  relevant  Family
         Court orders as appropriate.

         No anonymity direction is made."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 8 January  2018,  Mrs  Pettersen,
    for the Secretary of State, told me that, subject to confirmation  that
    the appellant has the benefit of an order issued by  the  Family  Court
    providing that he have contact with his British  children,  the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse the appellant leave
    to remain should be allowed.  It had been hoped that the  Family  Court
    proceedings would have been concluded and the order made  available  in
    time for the resumed hearing but Mr  Haq,  who  appeared  as  solicitor
    agent for the appellant's solicitors, told me that this order would not
    be available until 15 January 2018.  I asked Mr Haq to send a  copy  by
    email of the order when it is available both to Mrs  Pettersen  and  to
    myself.  I told Mrs Pettersen that  she  may  make  representations  in
    writing about the order when it arrives.  She told me that, given  that
    it is very likely to indicate that contact  is  continuing,  she  would
    have no further comment to make.  Having now received  a  copy  of  the
    court order  and  a  helpful  email  in  response  from  Mrs  Pettersen
    indicating that she did not wish to make  any  further  submissions,  I
    remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 23 March 2016 to  refuse  him  further
    leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

 3. The appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 23  March  2016
    is allowed.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
