
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10409/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 21st of October 2020 and further   |On the 17th of February 2021     |
|written submissions dated 27 January 2021.|                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                JAE BONG JUN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Maqsood, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    appellant at the hearing and the written submissions of
                    Counsel Mr Z. Malik.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mills) (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "FtTJ".) By its decision, the Tribunal allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision, dated, 9 May 2019 to  refuse
    his human rights  claim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity order and Counsel did not seek to advance any grounds  as  to
    why such an order would be necessary.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Jun  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-to-
    face hearing and that this could take place  via  Skype.  Both  parties
    have indicated that they were content for the  hearing  to  proceed  by
    this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral
    submissions to be given by each of the parties.

 3. The hearing took place on 21  October  2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court  at
    Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely  via  video  as  did  the
    appellant and his solicitors. There were no issues regarding sound, and
    no substantial technical problems were encountered during  the  hearing
    and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make  their  respective
    cases by the chosen means.

 4. I am grateful to Ms Petterson and  Mr  Maqsood  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.

The background:

 5. The immigration history of the appellant is set  out  in  the  decision
    letter dated 9 May 2019 and the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 8-18
    although it does not refer to the judicial review proceedings  and  the
    decision reached by consent in 2019. I have taken the  chronology  from
    the papers in the appellant's bundle.

 6. The appellant entered the UK with entry clearance as a  student  on  19
    July 2005. His leave was valid until 30 September 2006.

 7. On 2 October 2006, the appellant applied further leave to remain  which
    was granted on 18 October 2006 until 30 November 2007.

 8. On 30 September 2007, the appellant applied further leave to remain  as
    a student was granted on 4 December 2007 until 30 September 2010.

 9. On 30 September 2010, the appellant applied further leave to remain  as
    a student was granted on 2 November 2010 until 4 February 2014.

10. On 7 January 2014, the appellant applied leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    student which is withdrawn on 14 January 2014. For the purposes of that
    application Mr Jun relied upon an  English  certificate  which  he  had
    obtained after sitting the test at  Cauldron  College  on  19  November
    2013.

11. On 8 January 2014, the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student which was refused with a right of appeal on 6 March 2014.

12. On 14 March 2014, the appellant lodged an appeal which was dismissed by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ross) on 16 December 2014.

13. On 29 December 2014, the appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which was refused on 10 February 2015.

14. On 30 March 2015, the appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which was refused on 18 June  2015.  The  appellant  was
    "appeals right exhausted" following that decision.

15. On the 19 July 2015, the appellant reached his "ten -year  anniversary"
    of residence in the UK.

16. On 20 July 2015, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  under  10
    year-long residence rules  which  was  refused  and  was  certified  as
    "clearly unfounded" under section 94 of the 2002 Act on 15 June 2016.

17. The decision of 15 June 2016 is set out in the papers at  [154AB].  The
    decision sets out the  appellant's  immigration  history  as  recounted
    above and included in it the circumstances following the refusal of his
    appeal to the FtT and that the appellant was "appeal rights  exhausted"
    on 18 June 2015. The decision noted that he had made an application  on
    20 July 2015 for leave to remain under the 10 years long residence rule
    but that he could not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  276B  (v)
    because the application was 31 days out of time. The second reason  for
    refusal was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had used deception in his application made on 8 January  2014
    and that the scores taken for the test taken on 19  November  2013  was
    fraudulently obtained. His presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good because his conduct made it undesirable to
    allow him to remain in the UK (see paragraph 276 A1 and by reference to
    paragraph 276B (ii)). Other reasons for refusal under paragraph 276 ADE
    related to his failure to meet the suitability requirements and in  any
    event could not meet those particular  requirements  given  that  there
    were no very significant obstacles to his reintegration (paragraph  276
    (1) (vi)). Finally, the Secretary of State certified the application as
    "clearly unfounded under section 94 of the 2002 Act.

18. The appellant sent a PAP  letter  to  the  respondent  challenging  the
    certification on 15 November 2016.

19.  On  30  November  2016,  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider   the
    certification decision (see [AB 147]).

20.  On  29  January  2017,  the   respondent   maintained   the   original
    certification under Section 94 and the decision made reference  to  the
    application made on 20 July 2015 on the grounds of long  residence  and
    that it had been properly refused under paragraph 276B (ii);  reference
    was made to the submission of the English test for the purposes of  the
    application made on 8 January 2014 and the following an interview  that
    took place in February 2016, it concluded that the  appellant  obtained
    the ETS certificate by deception. Thus his presence in the UK  was  not
    conducive to the public good. He also could not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements under the rules. The certificate was maintained.

21. On 22 February 2017, the appellant applied leave to  remain  under  the
    family and private life route which was  refused  under  paragraph  353
    with no right of appeal on 7 November 2017.

22. In a decision dated 7 November  2017  but  served  on  29  March  2018,
    reference is made to the appellant seeking to challenge the decision on
    the ETS certificate and also for leave to remain outside the  rules  on
    the basis of his private life. The  application  was  considered  under
    Paragraph 353 having previously made a human  rights  claim  which  had
    been refused. Reference was made to the decision of 20  July  2015  for
    leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  long  residence.  The  decision
    considered that the submissions had all been previously considered in a
    decision dated 29 January 2017 and that it had no realistic prospect of
    success under Paragraph 353. The certificate  was  also  maintained  in
    those circumstances.

23. On 15 November 2018, a decision was made (at [[AB 64]) making reference
    to the previous challenge to the ETS certificate and his application on
    the grounds of his private life but was found that the appellant  could
    not meet the rules nor were there any "exceptional circumstances" for a
    grant of leave to remain.

24. On 2 December 2018, the respondent made removal directions.

25. On 22 January 2019, the appellant began proceedings for judicial review
    challenging the decision to remove the appellant, and also  challenging
    the decision of 15 November 2018 as a fresh claim. The  grounds  lodged
    cited the decision in Ahsan ( at paragraph 11).

26. On 23 January 2019, the removal directions were cancelled.

27. On 20 February 2019, a consent order was reached between  the  parties.
    The respondent agreed to withdraw the decision of 15 November 2018  and
    to reconsider the appellant submissions made  on  29  March  2018.  The
    respondent also agreed to review the  initial  findings  on  the  TOEIC
    certificate in a letter dated 29 Jan 2017 and in  the  decision  of  15
    November 2018.

28. The respondent  reconsidered  the  appellant's  application  and  human
    rights claim made on 29 March 2018 in a decision dated 9 May 2019.

29. The decision letter refers to the appellant having made a human  rights
    application on the 29 March 2018 and that it had been "reconsidered and
    refused." The decision letter began  by  setting  out  the  appellant's
    immigration  history  which  I  have  summarised   in   the   preceding
    paragraphs. The decision  letter  made  reference  to  there  being  no
    reference made about a partner, parent, or dependent  children  in  the
    United Kingdom under the  family  life  rules  under  Appendix  FM  and
    therefore his claim was only considered under the private life route.

30. When considering a private life rules under paragraph  276ADE  (1)  the
    respondent stated that his application fell for refusal on  grounds  of
    suitability set out in section S-LTR of Appendix FM. In particular  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of S-LTR 4.2 and therefore  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1).

31. The reasons given in the decision letter stated that the appellant,  in
    support of his Tier 4 (General)  student  application  submitted  on  8
    January 2014 he submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational  Testing
    Service ("ETS"). He stated that he had attended Cauldon College  on  19
    November 2013 and undertook the speaking component  of  the  ETS  TOEIC
    English language test.

32. The decision letter went on to state:

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test. Using voice verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests. ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to
         the SSHD that there was significant evidence to conclude that your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test
         taker. Your scores from the test taken on 19 November 2at Cauldon
         College have now been cancelled by ETS.

         On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the
         Secretary of State is satisfied that your certificate was
         fraudulently obtained and that you use deception in your
         application of 8 January 2014.

         The Home Office had been informed by ETS that analysis of the
         claimants speaking test, taken on 19 November 2013 at Cauldon
         College, indicated that a proxy test taker had been used. Please
         see attached print out entitled "ETS lookup tool" which links your
         case to the use of an invalid certificate.

         Additionally, the Home Office has access to a "revised lookup tool"
         specifically developed within the Home Office using the same
         information provided to us by ETS which can identify the number of
         other tests taken at any given date/time slot and college by
         entering college name, date, and time slot.

         The results from the "revised lookup tool" show that on 19 November
         2013 at Gordon College, a total number of 37 speaking and writing
         tests (including yours) were taken. The data shows that 30 (81%) of
         those results are deemed invalid i.e. obtained by the use of a
         proxy and seven test results (90%) were "questionable" i.e. that
         the school could not be relied upon due to the general practice of
         fraud. None of the results were "released" meaning that ETS
         consider them to have been legitimately obtained and therefore
         reliable.

         The evidence, taken in the round, demonstrates that Cauldon College
         was not operating under genuine test conditions at the date of your
         own test."

    The decision letter then went on to make reference to a number of legal
    authorities including Qadir and SM (ETS - evidence - burden  of  proof)
    [2016] UKUT 0029 and cited part  of  the  judgement  dealing  with  the
    evidence of Dr Harrison and that  subsequent  to  that  decision  those
    queries were considered an address by Prof French in a report dated  20
    April 2016. It  was  therefore  stated  that  in  light  of  that,  the
    Secretary of State maintained her view that the ETS verification system
    is "adequately robust and rigorous."

    The decision letter then went on to make reference  to  the  interviews
    that were undertaken. "It is noted that in your case,  you  did  attend
    such interview. The outcome of that interview  was  not  credible.  The
    interviewing officer did not accept your account that you take the test
    because you were unclear about the agent's name, you stated  that  each
    element of the test took 60 minutes and you also stated that  the  cost
    of the test was �85, which is much lower than the actual price."

    The decision letter went on to state:

         "in addition to the evidence and the ETS lookup tool revised lookup
         tool, the secretary of state together other evidence during the
         course of the ETS litigation and other high-profile cases. These
         are enclosed, listed below, and explained here:

           . witness statement from Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington
             on behalf the Secretary of State concluding that proxy test
             takers were used to sit examinations in place of applicants
             based on their discussions with ETS staff.

           . The expert report of Richard Heighway from Kroll Ontrack
             concluding that the TOEIC system attributing a genuine test
             takers recording to a different candidate over a genuine test
             takers recording to be reused by multiple candidates would be
             very unlikely.

           . A report from a Home Office analyst concluding that the test
             centre was not operating under genuine test conditions."

    For those reasons, the Secretary of State therefore was satisfied  that
    he had used deception in his application of 8 January 2014.

33. The decision letter made reference to there  being  no  reference  made
    about a partner, parent, or dependent children in  the  United  Kingdom
    under the family life rules under Appendix FM and therefore  his  claim
    was only considered under the private life route.

34. The decision letter also noted that as he had been found unsuitable, he
    could therefore not meet the rules  on  eligibility  grounds.  However,
    notwithstanding the above, consideration was given to  his  eligibility
    under Paragraph 276 ADE (1) on the basis of his private  life.  It  was
    noted that he was a national of South Korea having entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a Tier 4 student Visa on 19 July 2005.  He had not lived  in
    the UK continuously for at least 20 years, and that there would  be  no
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration into South Korea having
    spent 30 years living in his home country prior to  entry  to  the  UK,
    without evidence to the contrary.

35. The respondent went on consider whether  there  were  any  "exceptional
    circumstances" which would give rise to a grant of leave outside of the
    rules but for the reasons given in the decision concluded that  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to return to South  Korea.  Consequently,  his
    application was refused.

36. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT (Judge
    Mill) on 6 November 2019. In a decision promulgated on 8 November 2019,
    the FtTJ allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  Article
    8 grounds. In summary, the FtTJ considered  the  evidence  advanced  on
    behalf the  respondent  to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  had  use
    deception, but for the reasons set out at paragraph [22] -[28]  reached
    the conclusion that the respondent had not  discharged  the  evidential
    burden on her by  reference  to  the  generic  evidence  and  also  the
    specific individual evidence that related to this appellant.

37. The FtTJ then considered the period of time that the appellant had been
    lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not become appeal rights exhausted  until  18  June  2015
    following his appeal before the tribunal on 16 December 2014 which  was
    dismissed. The judge stated that the letter advising him of failing  to
    obtain permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was in a letter of 18
    June  2015  but  deemed  service  would  have  been  two  working  days
    thereafter and as 18 June 2015 was a Thursday, the deem  service  would
    have been on Monday which was 22 June 2015.  The  judge  recorded  "the
    appellant's evidence which is not  contradicted  is  in  fact  that  he
    received notice the following day, being 23 June 2015. He  had  section
    3C leave until then". The judge concluded that the appellant  made  his
    application for 10-year long residence on 20 July  2015  which  was  28
    days thereafter thus his period of lawful residence  did  not  end  but
    continued. The application made on 22nd of July 2015 was, as  a  result
    of his findings was validly made as the appellant had accrued 10  years
    of residence in the UK by that time. The  judge  therefore  found  that
    having looked back  at  the  application  made  on  20  July  2015  the
    appellant should have succeeded in that he met  the  immigration  rules
    for 10-year long residence. The judge therefore considered this to be a
    "persuasive and weighty  issue  which  favours  the  appellant  in  any
    ultimate proportionality balancing exercise " at [34] and that  in  any
    human  rights  appeal  provided  Article  8  (1)  is  engaged  in   the
    requirements of immigration law met, there would be no public  interest
    in an appellant's removal from the UK  (applying TZ (Pakistan)  and  PG
    (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and OA and  others  (human  rights:
    "new matter": section 120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 000 65.

38. The judge reminded himself that this is an Article  8  appeal  "outside
    the immigration rules" and applying the public interest  considerations
    under S117, found that he had been in United Kingdom 14 years and  that
    the lawful nature of that length of time  was  "significant  and  is  a
    strong indicator of private life in the UK which engages Article 8". He
    was satisfied that the appellant could speak English  and  was  not  in
    receipt of state benefits but is not truly independent. The judge found
    that he was likely to be in a position to obtain employment and support
    himself in the event of his immigration status being resolved. He found
    that the weight should be attached to the private  life  of  those  who
    stated to be precarious however, weighing against  that  was  the  fact
    that he found the appellant did meet the immigration rules for 10 years
    long residence and that this was "a significant factor which ultimately
    determines the appeal positively in the appellant's favour."

39. Finally, the judge recorded at [40] that following the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision and OA and others which clarified  that  unless  there  was  a
    discrete public interest factor making an appellant's removal  portion,
    human rights appeal should be allowed where the judge finds that the 10-
     year requirement is satisfied and there  is  nothing  to  indicate  an
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  by  the  appellant  would
    likely be rejected by the Secretary of State. The judge found that that
    was the position in the present appeal.

40. The judge therefore allowed the appeal under the immigration rules  and
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

41. Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of the Secretary of State and
    was granted on 7 April 2020 by FtTJ Osbourne who stated as follows:

         Permission is granted.

         "the grounds assert that the judge erred in law for  the  following
         reasons: misdirected himself in law in finding that  the  appellant
         meets the requirements of paragraph 276B 10 yours lawful continuous
         residence: at [32] the judge found that the appellant  was  "appeal
         rights exhausted" in June 2015 and that any 3C leave came to an end
         on 23 June 2015: wrongly found that the appellant's leave  did  not
         end on 23rd June because he made an application for further ILR  on
         20 July 2015: the appellant became an over stayer on 23 June  2015:
         following Ahmed[2019] EWCA Civ 1070 an exceptional period does  not
         cure a break in continuity of lawful  leave  and  appellant  cannot
         rely on paragraph 276B (iv) to argue that any period of overstaying
         should be disregarded for the purposes  of  establishing  10  years
         continuous lawful residents. Failure to have regard to  a  material
         matter: ETS interview which is  relied  in  upon  the  respondent's
         bundle.

         In an otherwise careful decision, it is nonetheless  arguable  that
         the judge failed to  consider  the  ETS  interview  which  material
         evidence is in the respondent's bundle: it is arguable  a  material
         error of law to have failed to consider that evidence:  insofar  as
         the authority of the above case  of  Ahmed  is  concerned,  if  the
         respondent wish to rely upon it, then they should have provided  to
         the judge said that he could consider it: they failed to do so  and
         cannot criticise the judge for their own failure.

         The  above-mentioned  arguably  material  error  of  law  had  been
         identified that ground is arguable.

42. Ms Petterson relied upon the written grounds of appeal. There were also
    further  written  submissions  submitted  by  direction  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

43. There were also written submission filed on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    dated 17 July 2020.

44.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
    their assistance and their clear oral submissions.



Preliminary issue:

45. Before dealing with the substantive grounds, it is necessary to address
    a preliminary issue raised by Mr Maqsood on behalf of the appellant. It
    had not been raised in the written submissions previously served on the
    Tribunal and the respondent however I am satisfied  that  Ms  Petterson
    was able to provide her submissions on this issue.

46. It relates to the grant of permission. Mr Maqsood  submitted  that  the
    FtTJ when  granting  permission  considered  that  the  arguable  error
    related to the interview which related to the first ground.  Whilst  in
    the decision and set out above the line it  is  stated  "permission  is
    granted", the reasons later on making clear  that  permission  was  not
    granted in relation to the second ground. When looking at the  decision
    of Safi and others, the judge in the "reasons  part"  of  the  decision
    states that he granted permission in relation to the ETS ground but not
    to the other. Therefore, this should be read  as  a  limited  grant  of
    permission.

47. Ms Pettersen submitted that the decision did not say that the grant  of
    permission was limited. Had that been  the  case,  a  different  notice
    would have been sent to the Secretary of State  making  it  plain  that
    there had only been limited permission granted and giving the Secretary
    of State the opportunity and being put on notice to renew the  grounds.
    Thus, she submitted the grounds were not limited.

48. I have considered the submissions of the parties. The relevant decision
    is that of Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT
    388 (IAC).

49. The headnote to that decision stated as follows:

         (1)  It is essential for a judge  who  is  granting  permission  to
         appeal only on limited grounds to say so, in terms, in the  section
         of the standard  form  document  that  contains  the  decision,  as
         opposed to the reasons for the decision.

         (2)  It is likely to be only in very exceptional circumstances that
         the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission that
         a decision which, on its face, grants permission to appeal  without
         express limitation is to be construed  as  anything  other  than  a
         grant  of  permission  on  all  of  the  grounds  accompanying  the
         application for permission, regardless of what might be said in the
         reasons for decision section of the document.

50. The grant of permission purports to exclude permission for Ground 1 but
    not only it is unclear as to the basis of this but  the  FtTJ  has  not
    done so in a way which complies with Safi  and  others  (permission  to
    appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) as set  out  above.   The  FtTJ
    failed to incorporate his intention  to  grant  permission  on  limited
    grounds within the decision section of the standard document, where  it
    is simply stated, 'permission to appeal is granted'. If a judge intends
    to grant permission only on limited grounds, he or she must  make  that
    fact absolutely clear. That is not the position here and  there  is  no
    reference to the appeal grounds being limited in the way set out by the
    Upper Tribunal in Safi ( see paragraph 43). I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there are any exceptional circumstances that exist to limit  the  grant
    of appeal nor have any been identified by Mr Maqsood and I  am  further
    satisfied that  there  is  no  unfairness  to  the  appellant  who  has
    submitted written submissions dealing with all of the grounds and  thus
    being able to engage with the issues raised.

51. I shall therefore deal with both grounds.

The "ETS "Ground:

52. Ms Pettersen relied upon the written ground and submissions in which it
    was argued that the FtTJ when he reached the conclusion that there  was
    "nothing other than generic evidence which the respondent relies  upon"
    (at [26]) failed to take into account the ETS interview  transcript  in
    the respondent bundle. The appellant was found not to be credible as  a
    result of that interview therefore the lookup tool questionable  result
    combined with the non-credible interview transcript was adequate enough
    to discharge the evidential burden of raising a  prima  facie  case  of
    deception. The judge consequently erred in law and it was  material  to
    the  outcome  as  otherwise  it  would  have  been  a  public  interest
    consideration to be weighed against the appellant's  human  rights  and
    suitability bar under the rules.

53. In her oral submissions she submitted that the FtTJ made  no  reference
    to the credibility interview and that the failure to refer  to  it  was
    material because  it  was  before  the  judge  and  was  therefore  his
    conclusion was wrong. She submitted that the appellant  was  given  the
    opportunity to explain how we took the test and how much it  cost  when
    interviewed but the interviewing officer found him not be credible.

54. Mr Maqsood submitted that the respondent had failed to  appreciate  the
    distinction  between  an  "invalid"  categorisation  and  that   of   a
    "questionable" categorisation. In  this  case  the  test  results  were
    "questionable", and the results are  cancelled  due  to  administrative
    irregularities at the test centre. The FtTJ was  expecting  to  see  in
    addition to the generic evidence, other evidence that that which stated
    the test results were "questionable" that  is,  evidence  of  it  being
    categorised as invalid.

55. He submitted that the decision of the judge at [26] should be  read  to
    mean that there was nothing other than the  generic  evidence  to  show
    that there was an invalid test as opposed to a credible  test  to  show
    deception. The failure to omit reference to the  interview  was  not  a
    material error.

56. Mr Maqsood refer the  Tribunal  to  the  decision  in  Shehzad  and  in
    particular paragraph 30 where the court  contrasted  "invalid"  results
    with those of "questionable".

57. He submitted that  the  interview  was  not  capable  of  changing  the
    category of "questionable" into one that was "invalid".

58. He further submitted that it was important to note the decision  letter
    and that it was clear in that document that the respondent's  case  was
    that they had received notification of invalidity from ETS, taken  with
    the interview. He submitted the judge  had  omitted  reference  to  the
    interview but "questionable" notification evidence for  the  respondent
    was an acknowledgement that the appellant did not use deception. If  he
    had, the ETS lookup tool process explained in  the  respondent  generic
    evidence would have  given  a  notification  of  validity  rather  than
    questionable  and  that  the  questionable  notification  did  not  add
    anything to the interview transcript and supports the appellant's  case
    that it could not have been a proxy test taker because if it  had  been
    the notification would have been "invalid".

59. He submitted that the respondent had been misconceived as to the effect
    of a question or notification on the clear authority of  the  Court  of
    Appeal and against  the  widely  understood  point  of  a  questionable
    notification which could not show deception and cannot be combined with
    the interview as it did not  support  the  interviewer's  remarks  that
    contradicted the remarks at the end of the hearing.

60. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtTJ in  the  light  of
    those submissions and the evidence that was before the Tribunal.

61. The first issue identified before the FtTJ was whether  the  respondent
    had established that there was evidence, specific  to  this  appellant,
    which was sufficient to  found  a  suspicion  that  the  appellant  had
    cheated in his test.

62. At paragraphs [22]- [24], the judge properly directed  himself  to  the
    case law and the burden and  standard  of  proof  in  relation  to  the
    deception issue. The legal burden of proving that  the  applicant  used
    deception lies on the Secretary of State albeit there is a three- stage
    process. The Secretary of State must first adduce  sufficient  evidence
    to raise the issue of fraud. The claimant has then a burden of  raising
    an  innocent  explanation  which  satisfies  the   minimum   level   of
    plausibility. If that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
    establish  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   that   this   innocent
    explanation is to be rejected. There is one  civil  standard  of  proof
    (which  is  the  standard  to  be  applied).  The  seriousness  of  the
    consequences does not  require  a  different  standard  of  proof  that
    flexibility in  its  application  will  involve  consideration  of  the
    strength and quality of the evidence. The more serious the consequence,
    the stronger must be the evidence used for the necessary standard to be
    reached.

63. In the decision of SM & Qadir [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  the  three-stage
    approach was summarised. That involves considering, first, whether  the
    Secretary of State has met the burden on her  of  identifying  evidence
    that the TOEIC certificate was obtained by  deception;  second  whether
    the claimant satisfies the evidential  burden  on  her  of  raising  an
    innocent explanation for the suggested deception;  and  third,  if  so,
    whether the Secretary of State can meet the legal burden of showing, on
    the balance of probabilities, that deception in fact took place.

64. It is for the respondent to prove a prima facie case of  deception  for
    the appellant to answer ("the evidential burden") (see the decision  in
    Shehzad paragraph 3 at [22]). Thus, the Secretary of State  must  first
    adduce sufficient evidence to raise the issue of fraud.

65. At [23] the FtTJ  directed  himself  to  the  decision  of  Shehzad  at
    paragraph 40 and the distinction made there between English  tests  are
    judged to be "invalid" as opposed to  "questionable".   Furthermore  at
    [24] the FtTJ made reference to the "standard generic  evidence"  which
    the respondent relied upon including the witness  statements  of  Peter
    Millington and Rebecca Collings, and that in her statement at paragraph
    9  it  also  highlighted  the  differentiation  between   invalid   and
    questionable  results.  Having  considered  those  matters   the   FtTJ
    concluded "questionable results do not of themselves  raise  issues  of
    direct fraudulent practice."

66. On the facts of this appeal, the respondent relied upon  the  "standard
    generic evidence" and in relation to evidence that was specific to  the
    appellant, the respondent relied upon the lookup tool evidence (page  8
    of the bundle) and this clearly specified  that  the  appellant's  test
    results were "questionable".

67. The FtTJ found at [26] that other than the lookup tool  evidence  there
    was nothing other than generic evidence  which  the  respondent  relied
    upon. The judge noted that a  transcript  of  the  test  had  not  been
    produced, no personal analysis had been undertaken  nor  had  the  test
    been made available to enable the appellant  the  fair  opportunity  of
    doing so. At [27] the judge reminded himself of the decision in Shehzad
    and that in the circumstances when  the  Secretary  of  State  had  the
    "questionable" result it did not discharge  the  initiating  burden  of
    proof. The judge concluded that "there is no case for the appellant  to
    answer."

68. Whilst the FtTJ did  not make reference to the interview that had taken
    place two years later, it was  open to the FtTJ to conclude   from  the
    evidence that was before the FtTJ that the only evidence  that  related
    to the test and was specific to the  Appellant and  was  identified  as
    such was a "questionable" test and not an "invalid" one.

69. The respondent's case as set out in  the  decision  letter  is  not  in
    accordance with the actual evidence. As Mr Maqsood has pointed out, the
    decision letter proceeds on the basis that the appellant has an invalid
    test certificate which is not the case.

70. In this context I have considered the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    (as cited above) in respect of the test results which are  said  to  be
    "questionable". What is set out at  paragraph  [25  -  30]  is  that  a
    questionable designation  means  there  may  not  have  been  deception
    because unlike where there has been an invalid designation,  there  was
    not a matched voice with the person who took a test using  a  different
    name. The Court of Appeal concluded that the Secretary of  State  would
    face difficulties in respect of the evidential burden if there were  no
    individual evidence which shows that test results were invalid.

71. I am satisfied that the judge did properly apply that decision  to  the
    appeal before him and when reading  the  conclusions  reached  make  it
    plain that his assessment of the evidence was to the  effect  that  the
    only evidence before the Tribunal was in the form of generic statements
    and that there was no specific evidence to establish that the Appellant
    had obtained fraudulently the TOEIC certificate.

72. Whilst there was no reference made to the credibility interview,  I  am
    not satisfied that this was an error of any materiality. The  interview
    that took place two years later on 22 February 2016. The conclusions of
    the interview were set out at p52 RB. The  interviewer  had  to  answer
    three questions; Was the applicant able  to  answer  the  questions  in
    basic English? The answer recorded is "Yes". The next question was "did
    the applicant answer in a fluent manner, suggestive of  the  fact  that
    they had not been coached in providing specific answers  by  rote?  The
    answer recorded is "yes". The last question was "Were there any  points
    in the interviews where the applicant appeared  to  lack  credibility?"
    The answer was "yes" and then set out "Applicant wasn't too clear about
    the agents name and the applicant said that each element  of  the  test
    took about 60 minutes as well as the cost of  the  test  to  be  at  85
    pounds which is lower than the actual price."

73. Thus, the interviewer  concluded  positively  for  the  applicant  when
    considering his level of English but not in respect of  the  agent  and
    the cost and length of the test.  However, there was no evidence before
    the FtTJ of what the cost of the test or the  length  of  the  test  to
    support the interview. That being the case, the FtTJ could  not  attach
    weight to that interview without  any  supporting  material.  The  only
    evidence that was specific to this applicant related  to  the  look  up
    tool which had given a "questionable" result. Consequently,  the  judge
    concluded that the evidential burden on the  Respondent  had  not  been
    discharged. Given the evidence that I have set out above,  that  was  a
    decision that was open to the judge to reach.

74. I remind myself of the words of Lord Justice  Underhill  in  Ahsan  (as
    cited) at paragraph 33 and that although it seems clear that  deception
    took place on a wide scale it does not follow  that  every  person  who
    took the TOEIC test was engaging in deception.

Ground 1: misdirection in law; Paragraph 276B continuous lawful leave.

75. I now turn to the remaining ground which is it asserted that  the  FtTJ
    erred in law in finding that the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B for 10 years continuous lawful residence.

76. Ms Pettersen relied upon the grounds. It is submitted that at [32]  the
    FtTJ found that the appellant became appeal rights  exhausted  in  June
    2015 after his appeal was  dismissed  and  PTA  refused  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Therefore, the FtTJ found that  the  appellant's  section  3C
    leave came to an end on 23 June 2015 (see paragraph 32).

77. However, at [33] it is submitted that the judge erroneously went on  to
    find the appellant's lawful leave did not end on 23 June  2015  because
    he made a further application for ILR on 20 July 2015. The FtTJ  stated
    " the appellant made his application for 10-year long residence  on  20
    July 2015 which was 28 days thereafter. His period of lawful  residence
    therefore did not end and continued. His application made  on  22  July
    2015 was, as a result of my findings, validly made as the appellant had
    accrued 10 years lawful residence in the UK by that time. He entered on
    19 July 2005 and his 10-year long residence application was made on  20
    July 2015".

78. The respondent's grounds submit  that  the  judge  plainly  misdirected
    himself in law in finding that the appellant's lawful leave  continued.
    The appellant became an over stayer after 23 June 2015  and  is  lawful
    continuous leave came to an end. It was not extended by the  submission
    of a separate application for ILR on 20 July 2015. Even if based on the
    judge's finding that the ILR application had been made within  28  days
    of the appellant's section 3C leave expiring but did not cure the  fact
    that the appellant's continuous lawful leave had come to an end  on  23
    June 2015.

79. The grounds make reference to the sub provision within  paragraph  276B
    which refers to exceptions or periods disregarded by the  Secretary  of
    State for the calculation of ILR by reference to paragraph 34E does not
    cure a break in continuity of lawful leave relying on the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Ahmed, R (on the application of) v the Secretary
    of State for Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 at  paragraphs  15  -
    17.

80. The written submissions at paragraph 10 submit that  in  light  of  the
    decision in Ahmed, paragraph 276B (v) does not  cure  a  break  in  the
    continuity of lawful leave. Periods of  overstaying  that  fall  within
    paragraph 39E cannot be counted towards establishing  a  period  of  10
    years continuous lawful residence.

81. Therefore, the FtTJ erred in law in finding that  the  appellant  could
    satisfy the terms of paragraph 276B.

82. It is also submitted that the judge erred in law by allowing the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules as the appellant did not meet the rules and
    secondly the judge did not have jurisdiction to allow the appeal  under
    the Rules against a decision dated 9 May 2019.

83. The error is material to the outcome of the human rights appeal because
    it plainly affected the judge's reasoning in that  regard,  and  it  is
    pivotal to the judge's decision in allowing  the  human  rights  appeal
    where at paragraph 34 the judge described his finding under  the  rules
    as "persuasive and weighty".

84. On behalf of the appellant, written submissions were  provided  by  his
    previous counsel Mr Malik dated 17 July 2020. Mr  Maqsood  relied  upon
    those grounds.

85. At paragraph 15 it is submitted that the Secretary of State submissions
    in relation to paragraph 276B are misconceived and do not meet the real
    point made by the appellant or the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
    allowing the appeal.

86. The written grounds go on to state that the appellant had no difficulty
    in accepting that he became an over stayer on 23  June  2015.  At  that
    point he was short of around 25 days of completing his 10 years in  the
    United Kingdom. He completed his 10 years on 19 July 2015. However, the
    Secretary of State refused his application made on 20 July 2015 on  the
    basis that he relied on a fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate.  The
    Secretary of State is certified that decision under section 94  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration, and Asylum  Act  2002  so  there  was  no  in
    country right of appeal.

87. By applying the decision  of  Ahsan  v  Secretary  of  state  for  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [120],  and  in  the  light  of  the
    finding that the appellant did not commit TOEIC fraud, the secretary of
    state is obliged to put the appellant into the position he  would  have
    been had the allegation and earlier decisions based upon  it  not  been
    made. This will result in a grant of  leave  to  remain  or  reasonable
    opportunity to make or vary an  "in  time"  application  for  leave  to
    remain.

88. This is a material bearing  on  the  proportionality  assessment  under
    Article 8 and in the light of the Court of Appeal guidance in Ahsan  at
    [120] the public interest did not require the appellant's removal  from
    the United Kingdom. He is in the position he is  due  to  an  unfounded
    allegation  of  TOEIC  fraud  against  him  in  response  to  his  2015
    application and  then  maintained  that  unfounded  allegation  in  the
    decision that triggered the appeal. His removal therefore would not  be
    justified and proportionate.

89. The judge at [31] followed the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in
    Ahsan at [120].  The  respondent's  grounds  do  not  engage  with  the
    approach taken in  Ahsan  and  that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  was
    "inevitable" that the appeal had to be allowed  in  Article  8  grounds
    given the finding that the appellant did not commit TOEIC fraud.

90. Mr Masqood in his oral submissions  stated  that  he  agreed  that  the
    second sentence of paragraph 33 was incorrect  this  is  where  it  was
    stated "his period of  lawful  residence  therefore  did  not  end  and
    continued." He also stated that he accepted that  allowing  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules was erroneous but that both errors were not
    material to the outcome.

91. He submitted that he accepted that the  appellant's  section  3C  leave
    ended on 23 June 2015 as noted in the permission grounds and  that  the
    section 3C leave was not resurrected under 276B on  20  July  2015.  He
    submitted that the parties would agree that the appellant had lived  in
    the UK lawfully for  nine  years  11  months  and  four  days  and  was
    therefore short of the 28 days to complete 10 years on 16 July 2015.

92. He submitted on 20 July 2015 application it is accepted that it was  an
    in-time application as it was made within  28  days  and  this  is  not
    challenged in the grounds. The respondent's case is that even if  TOEIC
    allegation had not caused the application to be refused the application
    made on 20 July 2015 would not have succeeded due to  the  decision  in
    Ahmed.

93. However, he submitted that if the TOEIC allegation was  not  made  out,
    the appellant should be put in the position as if that  allegation  had
    never been raised. His argument runs thus that he would have  succeeded
    in June 2016 if the respondent had not made  the  allegation  regarding
    TOEIC.

94. Mr Maqsood referred the tribunal to the decision made on 15  June  2016
    (p150) where the long residence application was considered. In relation
    to that decision the application for leave to remain was  submitted  on
    long residence grounds on 20  July  2015  31  days  out  of  time.  The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that 10 years long residence under
    paragraph 276A (i) with reference to 276B (v) and because of the  TOEIC
    allegation.

95. He submitted that at the time of the refusal of  his  application,  the
    decision in Ahmed was  not  known  and  therefore  the  respondent  was
    considering the application under paragraph 276B(a) (i) with  reference
    to paragraph 276B (v). After Ahmed, the respondent adopted the position
    as upheld by the Court of Appeal and that paragraph  276B(v)  does  not
    cure the defect under 276B(a) (i). When the decision was made it was 31
    days as opposed to 28 days, but according to the finding  made  by  the
    FtTJ, the application was made within 28 days and thus the reference to
    31 days in the decision letter was wrong if  taking  into  account  the
    tribunal's findings.

96. The respondent takes no  issue  with  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    application was made within 28 days and the respondent made a  decision
    under paragraph 276A(i) with reference to 276B(v). Thus,  he  submitted
    the respondent cannot say that the point would have counted against the
    applicant when the decision was made because the decision was  made  on
    the understanding of the provisions before the decision in Ahmed.

97. He submitted that if the TOEIC allegation had not  been  made  and  the
    application was refused because of 31 days (rather than  28  days)  the
    decision would not have been certified and he would have had a right of
    appeal and the Tribunal would have found that the application was  made
    within 28 days. Therefore, he submits the respondent  cannot  say  that
    the application would have been refused at the date  the  decision  was
    taken because of Ahmed. He submitted that Ahmed would not have mattered
    in 2016 and that the appellant was entitled to be put in  the  position
    as if the TOEIC allegation not  been  made.  Therefore,  there  was  no
    material error at paragraph 33 or in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

98. As to the materiality point, he made reference to the policy  guidance.
    He accepted that neither advocate before the FtTJ made any reference to
    the policy guidance nor was  a  copy  of  the  policy  put  before  the
    Tribunal. Similarly, no policy was put before this  tribunal.  However,
    he submitted that as the respondent had a policy of granting 276B leave
    to every person completed nine years 11 months and two days in the  UK,
    the policy at page  14  was  clear.  The  policy  had  not  changed  he
    submitted in regard to this aspect of the grounds.

99. Mr Maqsood returned to the decision of Ahsan.  He  submitted  that  the
    respondent had completely missed the point of that  decision  and  that
    the context of Ahsan can only be appreciated if you look at it in  2016
    when the decision of Ahmed was not available.

100. In his reply he submitted that the appellant was  entitled  to  be  put
    back in the position he would have been had the  TOEIC  allegation  not
    been raised and that the judge was right to allow the appeal on Article
    8 grounds and that it would be  for  the  respondent  to  exercise  her
    discretion bearing in mind that finding.

101. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

Discussion on ground 2:

102. The following day on the 22nd of  October  2020  the  Court  of  Appeal
    handed down its judgment in in Hoque and  others  v  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1357.

103. In light of its relevance to the issues that I have to decide  in  this
    appeal, I invited the parties to make further  written  representations
    in the light of that decision.

104.  Following  the  service  of  those  directions,  there  has  been   no
    compliance on behalf of the Secretary of State. Further  correspondence
    was sent by the Tribunal to  elicit  reasons  for  the  delay  and  the
    provision of further time. By the 15 January 2021  there  had  been  no
    reply or provision of further submissions on behalf of the Secretary of
    State and therefore further directions were  served  upon  the  parties
    which required the submissions of the appellant to be filed.

105. In compliance with those directions, written submissions were  sent  to
    the Tribunal on 25 January 2021 and were settled by new Counsel  Mr  Z.
    Malik. Those written submissions refer to  the  decision  of  Hoque  at
    paragraph 2 and that the cases concerned were  described  as  cases  of
    "open ended overstaying". The submissions accept  that  a  person  with
    "open ended overstaying", without more, does not qualify for indefinite
    leave to remain under paragraph 276B of the immigration  rules.  It  is
    also stated that the appellant became an overstay on 23 June  2015  and
    was short of completing his 10 years residence which was  completed  on
    19 July 2015. However, the respondent had refuses application  made  on
    20 July 2015 on the basis that he relied on fraudulently obtained TOEIC
    certificate and had gone on to certify the decision of  section  94  of
    the 2002 act so that there was no in country right of appeal.

106. The written grounds go on to cite the decisions of the Court of  Appeal
    in Ahsan and Khan [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 and a more  recent  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal (presidential panel) in Patel  (historic  injustice:
    NIAA Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 351. By reference to those  decisions  it  is
    submitted that on the findings of the  FtTJ  that  he  did  not  commit
    fraud, the Secretary of State is obliged to put the appellant into  the
    position he would have been had the allegation in the  early  decisions
    based upon it not been made. This will result in a grant  of  leave  to
    remain  or  at  least  reasonable  opportunity  to  make  or  vary   an
    application for leave to remain that was wrongly refused.

107. It is further submitted  that  this  had  a  material  bearing  in  the
    assessment of  proportionality  and  Article  8  and  thus  the  public
    interest did not  require  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  appellant  was  in  the  present  position  because  the
    respondent had made the unfounded allegation of fraud  against  him  in
    response to his 2015 application and maintained that allegation in  the
    decision that triggered the appeal before the FtTJ.

108. Consequently, it is submitted that  the  judge  followed  the  guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal and thus made no error of law allowing the
    appeal in Article 8 grounds.

109. I have therefore considered those  written  submissions  alongside  the
    previous oral submissions made by Mr Maqsood.

110. Having considered the submissions of the parties I  am  satisfied  that
    the FtTJ did not materially in law in the way advanced by the Secretary
    of State.

111. Dealing with the  first  issue,  it  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the judge found that the appellant became appeal rights
    exhausted in June 2015 after his appeal was dismissed and permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused. However, the judge went on to
    find that the respondent's lawful leave did not end  on  23  June  2015
    because he made a further application for indefinite leave on  20  July
    2015 (see paragraph  [33]).  Thus,  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in law in reaching finding  that  the  respondent's
    lawful leave continued.

112. In this respect it is accepted on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    FtTJ was wrong when he stated that his period of lawful  residence  did
    not end but continued. It is accepted that the appellant became an over
    stayer on 23 June 2015.

113. I should also state at this stage it is also accepted that by  allowing
    the appeal under the immigration rules the judge was also in error.

114. However, I accept the submissions made on behalf of the appellant  that
    neither of those errors were material to the outcome of the appeal  and
    the decision that was ultimately reached by the FtTJ.

115. Whilst the appellant became an over stayer on  23  June  2015  and  was
    short of approximately 25 days of completing  10  years,  he  completed
    that on 19 July 2015 as the chronology sets out. The  application  made
    on 20 July 2015 was refused on the basis that the application was  made
    31 days out of time. However, the unchallenged  findings  of  the  FtTJ
    reached a different view and that the application was  made  within  28
    days of the section 3C leave ending  on  23  June  2015  and  thus  the
    respondent was wrong in the decision letter.

116. The grounds advanced on behalf of the respondent do not challenge  that
    issue but submit that in light of the decision of  R  (Masum  Ahmed)  v
    SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 paragraph 276B (v) does not cure a  break  in
    the continuity of lawful leave and that the period of overstaying  that
    falls within paragraph 39E cannot be  counted  towards  establishing  a
    period of 10 years continuous lawful residence.

117. The Secretary of State has not provided any submissions in relation  to
    the decision in Hoque nor engaged with the reasoning of  the  Court  of
    Appeal based on the earlier decisions in R (Masum Ahmed) v SSHD  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1070 in the light of the decision in Hoque.

118. In the decision of R (Juned Ahmed) v SSHD [2019]  UKUT  10,  Sweeney  J
    considered the situation where the current application for ILR was made
    within 14 days of the ending of previous leave.  The  appellant  argued
    that it made his application for leave to remain within 28 days of  his
    leave expiring and that the time spent waiting for the decision  should
    be added to the period of continuous lawful residence. It was held  the
    provisions of paragraph 276 B (v) were freestanding  and  that  it  was
    obvious that it was additional to subparagraph (i) (a) and  any  period
    of overstaying would result in a failure to satisfy the requirements of
    rule.

119.  In the decision of R (Masum Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070,  which
    was an application to  refuse  permission  to  appeal,  considered  the
    situation when 10 years continuous lawful residence  was  claimed  when
    past applications have been made, and  granted,  with  the  benefit  of
    paragraph 39E. The appellant argued that the  gaps  in  his  period  of
    residence, when he had applied for extensions for leave to  remain  out
    of time should be disregarded by reason of paragraph 276B (v) and  that
    as a  result  he  could  demonstrate  10  years  of  continuous  lawful
    residence. The court considered whether the operation of paragraph 276B
    (v) operated to cure short gaps between periods of leave to remain.  It
    was determined that  the  requirements  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    immigration rules  were  freestanding  and  the  intention  behind  the
    drafting of 276B(v) could not be that it was to provide an exception to
    276B (i) (a).

120. Both decisions relied on the same reasoning but  without  the  analysis
    of the context of the Immigration Rules in question.

121.  However in Hoque v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  and
    Another [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 the Court of Appeal went  on  to  consider
    whether past or  present  overstaying  meant  that  a  person  who  had
    otherwise remained continuously in the UK with leave for 10 years could
    not qualify for ILR under the long residence rule in paragraph 276B  of
    the Immigration Rules and did so by a full  analysis  of  the  relevant
    rules.

122. By a majority, the Court  held  that  where  an  individual  became  an
    overstayer and remained as such, neither (a) the reference  in  present
    paragraph 276B to the current period of overstaying  being  disregarded
    where paragraph 39E applies, nor (b)  the  reference  in  the  previous
    version of paragraph 276B to "any period of overstaying for a period of
    28 days or less" being disregarded enabled  an  individual  to  satisfy
    276B(i)(a), by counting any part of the period of overstaying so as  to
    show  10  years  continuous  lawful  residence  .  In  each  case,  the
    overstaying  is,  in  Underhill  LJ's  phrase,   open-ended.   Properly
    construed, paragraph 276B does not enable a person who  had  leave  but
    who becomes an overstayer and remains as such,  to  contend  that  such
    open-ended overstaying counts towards the 10- year requirement.

123. Thus the court held that an over stayer applying for  indefinite  leave
    to remain ("ILR") relying upon paragraph 276B of the immigration  rules
    cannot rely upon his time in  the  UK  while  the  application  ILR  is
    pending in order to make up the required period of 10 years  continuous
    lawful residence (as set out in conclusion of the UT in R(Juned  Ahmed)
    V SSHD).

124. The factual circumstances of the appellant do not fall within those  of
    the appellants in the decision  of  Hoque  or  Ahmed.  On  the  factual
    circumstances here, the appellant became an overstayer when  he  became
    "appeal rights exhausted" on the 18 June 2015 (or as the FtTJ found) on
    23 June 2015. The respondent has not challenged the finding of the FtTJ
    as regards the date of the 23 June 2015 as the relevant date either  in
    the grounds or in the written submissions (see paragraphs  5-7  of  the
    written submissions). He had not attained 10 years lawful residence  at
    that date. He made an application on the 20th of July 2015 which was 28
    days after he became appeal rights exhausted by which time, he had been
    in the UK for 10 years, having arrived on the 19 July 2005.  Therefore,
    as the  appellant  had  accumulated  10  years  lawful  and  continuous
    residence and the requirement of the disregard applied, as found by the
    FtTJ, the period of overstaying during that period applied.

125. It is also the case that the refusal of  his  application  made  on  20
    July 2015 was due to the assertion made that  his  application  was  31
    days out of time. In the light of the unchallenged finding made by  the
    FtTJ, that was an error, and the application was made  within  28  days
    and thus the disregard applied.

126. It is therefore not been demonstrated that the FtTJ  was  an  error  as
    asserted in the grounds by reference to the decision in Ahmed.

127. Furthermore, the appellant's application was refused on the basis  that
    he had obtained leave by deception in  an  application  made  in  2014,
    relying on a fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate.  The  finding  of
    the FtTJ, which I have  concluded  was  not  in  error,  was  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the burden on her to demonstrate that the
    appellant had used deception in  that  application.  Having  made  that
    finding, the judge was entitled  to  consider  the  relevant  case  law
    concerning the effect upon an  appellant  who  is  in  that  particular
    factual situation.

128. In my view the judge was correct in his citation  of  the  decision  in
    Ahsan at paragraph [31] of his decision.

129. Paragraph 120 of Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009  reads as follows;

         "The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on a human
         rights appeal an appellant were found not to  have  cheated,  which
         inevitably means that the section 10 decision had been  wrong,  the
         Secretary of State would  be  obliged  to  deal  with  him  or  her
         thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not  been  made,
         i.e., as if their leave to remain had not been  invalidated.  In  a
         straightforward case, for example, she  could  and  should  make  a
         fresh grant of leave to remain equivalent to that  which  had  been
         invalidated. She could also, and other things being  equal  should,
         exercise any relevant future discretion, if necessary "outside  the
         Rules", on the basis that the appellant had in fact  had  leave  to
         remain in the relevant period notwithstanding  that  formally  that
         leave remained invalidated. (I accept that how to exercise  such  a
         discretion would not  always  be  easy,  since  it  is  not  always
         possible to reconstruct the world as it would have been;  but  that
         problem would arise even if the decision were quashed  on  judicial
         review.) If it  were  clear  that  in  those  ways  the  successful
         appellant could be put in substantially the same position as if the
         section 10 decision had been  quashed,  I  can  see  no  reason  in
         principle why that should not be taken  into  account  in  deciding
         whether a human  rights  appeal  would  constitute  an  appropriate
         alternative remedy. To pick up a particular point relied on  by  Mr
         Biggs, I do not regard the fact that a person  commits  a  criminal
         offence by remaining in the UK  from  (apparently)  the  moment  of
         service of a  section  10  notice  as  constituting  a  substantial
         detriment such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to  have  the
         notice quashed, at least in circumstances where there has  been  no
         prosecution. (It is also irrelevant that  the  appellant  may  have
         suffered collateral consequences from the section  10  decision  on
         the basis that his or her  leave  has  been  invalidated,  such  as
         losing their job; past damage of that kind cannot alas be  remedied
         by either kind of proceeding.)"

130. Paragraph 37(iii) of Khan confirmed that in making any future  decision
    the Respondent would "not hold any previous gap in leave caused  by  an
    erroneous decision in relation to ETS against  the  relevant  applicant
    and will have to take into account all the circumstances of each case".



131. Further, whilst paragraph 37  records  the  respondent's  undertakings,
    the clear ratio of both Khan and Ahsan is that a person  who  has  been
    subject to an erroneous decision in relation to an  ETS  decision  must
    not be put in a worse position than if the adverse decision -  in  this
    case a curtailment decision - had not been made.

132. A more recent decision cited in Mr Malik's written submissions is  that
    of Patel (historic injustice: NIAA Part 5A) [2020]  UKUT  351  and  the
    headnote which reads as follows:

         "... (2) Cases that  may  be  described  as  involving  "historical
         injustice" are... where the Secretary of State forms a  view  about
         an individual's activities or behaviour, which leads to an  adverse
         immigration decision; but where her view turns out to  be  mistaken
         (e.g. Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009). Each  of  these  failings
         may have an effect on an individual's Article 8 ECHR case....".

133. The panel at [46], quoted paragraphs [120] - [121]  of  Ahsan,  and  at
    [47], said:

         "Although not immediately apparent, one way in which this  kind  of
         erroneous treatment of an individual can have a bearing on  Article
         8 proportionality is in an ensuing  human  rights  appeal,  as  was
         envisaged by Underhill LJ. In such an appeal, the individual  would
         be able to argue that, if the respondent did not form the  mistaken
         view of their conduct, he or she would have  been  given  leave  to
         remain, and  that  this  should  be  given  way  to  the  balancing
         exercise,  comparably  with  how  the  Court  of  Appeal,   in   AA
         (Afghanistan) et cetera, spoke of the respondent taking account  of
         past mistakes in deciding whether to  exercise  discretion  in  the
         individual's favour."

134. Both the decisions in Ahsan and Khan are primarily concerned  with  the
    availability and nature of a right of appeal in which the  respondent's
    allegation of proxy test taking  could  be  fairly  considered  on  the
    merits.  The decision in Ahsan involved direct challenges to  decisions
    to remove taken under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  as
    it was prior to the amendments wrought by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    The decision in Khan, was concerned with the appeals regime  introduced
    by the Immigration Act 2014, involved direct challenges to  curtailment
    decisions in respect of  which  there  were  no  rights  of  appeal.  A
    compromise was reached by the parties in Khan in which  the  appellants
    would make human rights claims  and,  if  they  were  successful  in  a
    subsequent human rights appeal on the basis that they  did  not  cheat,
    save in the absence of a new factor, the respondent would  rescind  her
    curtailment decisions and  afford  them  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    secure further leave to remain [23].

135. The factual circumstances of this appellant are not comparable  to  the
    appellant's in Khan or Ahsan.  Nor are his circumstances  analogous  to
    the appellants in the  case  of  Hoque  and  others  (as  cited).   The
    decisions in Khan  and  Ahsan  do  not  set  out  how  a  human  rights
    application should be decided in the event of a  finding,  such  as  in
    this appeal, that the  respondent has not discharged   the  burden  and
    thus deception has not been proven and that this had  been  the  reason
    for refusing his application for leave  to  remain  on  long  residence
    grounds.

136. However, I would accept the submission made in the written  submissions
    by Mr Malik and supported by his reliance on paragraph  120  of  Ahsan,
    and the case law I have referred to above, that in  the  light  of  any
    judicial finding made, the respondent would provide that person with  a
    further opportunity to make  any  application  or  to  be  put  in  the
    position they would have been. That was the  decision  reached  by  the
    FtTJ. Whilst he erroneously allowed the appeal  under  the  immigration
    rules, in the light of the above, his  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR was a decision reasonably open to the judge
    to make in the light of the factual findings he made on this particular
    appellants appeal.

137. For those reasons I am not satisfied that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ
    demonstrates any error on a point of  law  that  was  material  to  the
    outcome and therefore the decision to allow the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds shall stand.



Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtTJ shall stand.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 28 January 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.




