
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10631/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2020                          |On 28 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOUT


                                   Between

                              anthony earl webb
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Gordon and
                    Thompson Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. This is the remaking component of the Upper Tribunal's decision in this
    appeal. Whilst it was the Secretary of State who successfully  appealed
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as matters  now  stand
    it is appropriate to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were  at  first
    instance: Mr  Webb  is  therefore  once  more  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State is the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born in March 1991.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in December 1997  at  the  age  of  six.  He  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain  on  24  August  2004.  Following  a
    conviction in February 2010 for conspiracy  to  commit  robbery  and  a
    consequent sentence of three years' imprisonment in  a  Young  Offender
    Institution, the respondent commenced deportation action. The appellant
    successfully resisted this on appeal in 2011.  His  current  appeal  is
    against the respondent's decision of 13 September  2017,  refusing  his
    human rights claim which  had  been  made  in  response  to  a  further
    decision to deport him, dated 31 July 2017. The deportation action  was
    based a number of convictions acquired between 2012 and 2016,  together
    with police intelligence that the appellant was a member  of  a  London
    gang.

The error of law component of the decision in this appeal


 3. By a decision promulgated on 23 October 2019, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.  The  judge
    concluded that the appellant was not a "persistent  offender"  and  was
    not associated with a  gang.  Whilst  describing  the  appellant  as  a
    "stranger to Jamaica", the judge allowed the appeal not on the basis of
    the private life limb of Article 8, but in relation to family life.  He
    concluded that it would have been "unduly harsh"  for  the  appellant's
    children to go to Jamaica and for them to be separated from him  if  he
    were to return there alone.

 4. On appeal by the respondent, the panel (comprising Lord  Uist,  sitting
    as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal,  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-
    Taylor) found that the judge had materially erred in law by failing  to
    provide adequate reasons for his  conclusions  on  the  "unduly  harsh"
    issue. The judge's decision was  set  aside.  The  full  error  of  law
    component of the Upper Tribunal's decision in this appeal is  appended,
    below.

 5. Under the sub-heading "Disposal", it was concluded that in light of the
    factual issues in the case and the absence of any application from  the
    appellant  to  adduce  further  evidence,   a   resumed   hearing   was
    unnecessary.  With  reference  to  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended ("NIAA 2002"), the  parties
    were directed to provide written submissions on the following matters:

          a) whether the appellant was a "persistent offender"  or  whether
             his offending had caused "serious harm";

          b) whether the appellant is "socially and culturally  integrated"
             in the United Kingdom;

          c) whether there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
             appellant's integration into Jamaican society;

          d) whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's partner
             and three relevant children to leave the  United  Kingdom  and
             reside in Jamaica;

          e) whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's partner
             and the three  relevant  children  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom were the appellant to be deported to Jamaica alone;

          f) whether, notwithstanding an inability to satisfy either of the
             two exceptions under section 117C(4)  and  (5),  it  would  be
             disproportionate to deport the appellant.

 6. Four specific findings made by the judge were preserved:

        a) the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
           current partner;

        b) the appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
           with his two biological children with whom he  lived,  and  with
           his step-daughter;

        c) the appellant left Jamaica at the age of 6;

        d) the appellant was not currently a member of a gang.

Procedural history and issues arising from the Covid-19 pandemic


 7. In compliance with the directions  referred  to  above,  the  appellant
    filed and served written submissions, dated 5 March 2020  and  received
    by the Upper Tribunal the following day. Prior to the respondent  being
    in a position to provide a response, the Covid-19 pandemic  took  hold.
    Directions were issued on 16 April 2020 (appended below). It transpired
    that the relevant Senior Presenting Officer with conduct  of  the  case
    (Mr Kotas) had not received the appellant's  written  submissions.  The
    Tribunal forwarded the submissions onto Mr  Kotas.  Further  directions
    were sent out on 18 May 2020. On 28 May 2020, the respondent filed  and
    served her written submissions in response to those from the appellant.
    There was no reply from the appellant within the stipulated  timeframe.
    On 19 June 2020, directions were  issued  by  email  in  the  following
    terms:

           "This appeal is awaiting a re-making decision in the Upper
           Tribunal. Pursuant to directions sent out on 18 May 2020, the
           respondent filed and served written submissions on 28 May 2020
           (attached).

           Any reply from the appellant was due to be filed and served by 4
           June 2020.  To date, there has been no such reply.

           There is now a further and final opportunity for the appellant
           to file and serve any reply to the respondent written
           submissions.  Any such reply must take note of what is said at
           [3]-[5] of those submissions.  Any reply, should also, if
           appropriate, address the issue of whether a hearing should be
           conducted, notwithstanding the Tribunal's previously stated view
           that one is not necessary.

           Any reply must be filed and served no later than 5 days from the
           date of this email direction."

 8. On 26 June 2020 the following response was received from the appellant:

           "Re: Mr - Earl Anthony Webb 28 March 1991 Jamaica

           HU/10631/2017

           We write further to the Tribunal directions dated 19 June 2020.

           Please note that the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Office
           (SSHD) were served the appellant's bundle as this was an  appeal
           from the SSHD. Although we are sympathetic that Mr Kotas did not
           have access to the papers when drafting the response, we  cannot
           be held responsible for it in any sense. In any  case  Mr  Kotas
           was familiar with the case since he represented the SSHD at  the
           hearing before you on 15 January 2020.

           The Tribunal is  respectfully  invited  to  dismiss  the  SSHD's
           appeal. In the alternative, we submit that this appeal  requires
           a hearing given  the  issues  involved  and  complexity  of  the
           evidence."

 9.  Having  received  these  responses  from  the  parties,  the  Tribunal
    considered whether a further hearing was  required.  Ultimately,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  concluded  that  a  further  hearing  was
    required (a Note and Directions Notice, dated  6  July  2020,  to  this
    effect is appended, below). In this respect, it should be observed that
    the appellant's representatives might have provided greater  assistance
    to the Tribunal, particularly in respect of the  reply  dated  26  June
    2020.  Contrary to what is said  therein,  the  stage  at  which  these
    proceedings constituted the respondent's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    has been and  gone.  In  addition,  simply  stating  that  "the  issues
    involved and complexity of the evidence" necessitated a further hearing
    did nothing to substantiate the assertion.

10. However, the remaking decision involves four minor children  (three  of
    whom  play  an  important  part  in   this   case)   whose   particular
    circumstances have not been assessed since the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was written on 18 October 2019. Although there  had  been
    no application under rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce new evidence, in  Judge  Norton-Taylor's
    view it was important to be in a  position  to  conduct  an  up-to-date
    assessment of the children's situation (whether  by  any  new  evidence
    and/or in light of more detailed oral submissions).

11. A further reason for holding a resumed hearing was the significance  of
    the private life exception contained in section 117C(4) NIAA 2002. This
    was not dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal,  a  fact  featured  only
    very briefly in the written submissions of 5 March 2020.  Again,  there
    was value to be gained from  receiving  further  evidence  and/or  oral
    submissions on this issue.

The resumed hearing


12. The resumed hearing took place on a face-to-face basis at Field House.

The documentary evidence


13. The appellant filed a consolidated bundle for the hearing running to  a
    total of 182 pages, which we have read and  taken  into  account.  This
    included  four  witness  statements  for  the  appellant,  two  witness
    statements for the appellant's  partner,  Ms  Micah  Martson,  and  two
    witness statements for the appellant's uncle,  Mr  Ryan  Powell.  Those
    statements and supporting documents in the  bundle  evidence  that  the
    appellant and Ms Martson have been together since 2014. Ms Martson is a
    British citizen. They have two children together: K, born in June 2016,
    and J, born in April 2019. Ms Martson also has a child from a  previous
    relationship, T (now aged 8), who lives with Ms  Martson  and  who  has
    since the age of three regarded the appellant as a  father.  All  three
    children  are  British  citizens.  The  appellant  also   has   another
    biological child from a previous relationship, JW  (born  in  September
    2008), who is a  Ghanaian  national.  In  his  witness  statements  the
    appellant describes having limited contact  with  JW  as  a  result  of
    difficulties between him and his ex-partner's new partner.

14. In his statements, the appellant said that he had been granted bail  to
    live with Mr Powell at his home address, which is not far from that  of
    Ms Martson, but that since the pandemic started he had been living with
    Ms Martson and the children in her house.  He  said  that  if  he  were
    deported to Jamaica his family would be 'broken' and Ms  Martson  would
    not be able to cope with three children and working and studying at the
    same time. He said he wants to continue to be part  of  his  children's
    upbringing and to give them the 'best chances in life as possible'.  He
    apologised for his past actions and said that he had grown and  changed
    as a person. He said that he also did not want to leave his  uncle,  Mr
    Powell, who is like a father to him. The appellant has  a  Construction
    Skills Certification Scheme Card (CSCS Card) as a Labourer and has been
    doing a course (City & Guilds Level 3 Diploma) that will enable him  to
    become a qualified  Gas  Engineer.  He  is  currently  prohibited  from
    working under the terms of his temporary admission.

15. Ms Martson in her statements says that she is a  graduate  of  Kingston
    University, and that she is currently undertaking a PGCE with  the  aim
    of becoming a secondary school teacher. In her  statement  prepared  in
    advance of a hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in February  2019,  she
    confirms that she was then also working part-time in a  Pupil  Referral
    Unit. She describes the appellant as a doting and supportive father  to
    the three children and says that she is very reliant on the appellant's
    support 'as it is the only support I have'.

16. Mr Powell in his statements says that the appellant has lived with  him
    ever since he came to the United Kingdom when he was 6  years  old.  He
    says that the appellant has been a supportive father  to  the  children
    and that every Sunday he brings the family round to Mr  Powell's  house
    for a family dinner. He confirms that  T  sees  the  appellant  as  her
    father.

17. A letter from the headteacher of T's school  dated  11  September  2019
    confirms that she had 100% attendance in the last academic  year,  that
    the appellant and Ms Martson are registered with the school  as  father
    and mother and that T's grandmother also regularly brings T to and from
    school.

18. In addition to the appellant's bundle, we had the previous respondent's
    bundle, but the only document to which we were referred in that  bundle
    was the transcript of the sentencing remarks  of  the  trial  judge  in
    relation to the conviction for conspiracy to rob on  8  February  2010,
    for which  he  was  sentenced  to  three  years  in  a  Young  Offender
    Institution, and which was the triggering offence for the making of the
    first deportation order against him on 13 September 2011. That  offence
    was a "steaming exercise", robbing multiple passengers on  tube  trains
    and buses. Sentencing the appellant  and  his  co-defendants  for  that
    offence, the trial  judge  noted  that  the  offence  was  particularly
    serious because there was more than one offender, the  defendants  were
    part of a gang, the offence undermined the safety of travellers on  the
    bus or underground, weapons were available for use (at least one  knife
    and some bottles) and because of the "sheer number" of  robberies  that
    were  committed  (11  robberies).  He  described  them   as   "horrific
    offences".

19. We were also provided at  the  hearing  (and  accepted  into  evidence,
    without objection from  Mr  Sharma)  an  updated  copy  of  the  Police
    National Computer (PNC) record for the appellant. This shows  that  the
    appellant  has  recently  been  convicted   of   a   further   offence,
    specifically that on 16 October 2020 the appellant  pleaded  guilty  to
    possession of a controlled drug, Class B, cannabis/cannabis resin on 20
    August 2020 and was fined �80. The PNC record shows that the  appellant
    has been convicted of a total of 12 offences in the eleven years  since
    he was first convicted as a juvenile on 18 March 2009 for possession of
    a knife blade/sharp pointed  article  in  a  public  place.  Since  the
    conviction for conspiracy to rob on 8 February 2010,  he  has  received
    two further convictions for possession of a knife in a public place (on
    13  April  2012  and  11  May  2015),  for  which  he  was   sentenced,
    respectively, to 8 weeks and 12 weeks (suspended). In July 2015 he  was
    convicted of three drugs possession offences (one Class B cannabis; two
    Class A  heroin  and  crack  cocaine)  and  sentenced  to  a  12  month
    conditional  discharge  and  two  community  orders.  In  2016  he  was
    convicted for an offence of possessing a prohibited weapon  (a  CS  gas
    cannister) committed during the  operational  period  of  his  previous
    suspended sentence and sentenced to a total of six weeks' imprisonment.
    In 2019 he was convicted of two driving offences and disqualified  from
    driving for 6 months  as  a  result  of  endorsements  on  his  driving
    licence.

20. The OASys report for the appellant, completed in October 2017, which is
    in the appellant's bundle, concludes that he was assessed at that  time
    as a Low Risk to children, known adults and staff, but as a Medium Risk
    to the public.  It  is  notable,  in  the  light  of  his  most  recent
    conviction for cannabis possession, that in  the  OASys  report  it  is
    recorded that he started smoking cannabis at the age of 14  years  old,
    but 'ended this activity some few months ago and has no  temptation  to
    begin again'.

The oral evidence


21. At the hearing, the appellant adopted  his  four  statements.  In  oral
    evidence, he said that he has had to retake part of  the  Gas  Engineer
    course and is due to do this in January 2021. He said that he takes the
    children to and from school, takes his son to football on Saturdays and
    his daughter to acting school, or looks after J while Ms Martson  takes
    them. He said that while Ms Martson is at university, he looks after J.
    He said that he did not think Ms Martson would be able to complete  her
    PGCE without his help and that she did not have family who can  assist.
    He said that one of Ms Martson's sisters has her own two  children  and
    her other sister does not have children but works seven  days  a  week,
    working at home. He said that his  relationship  with  JW  was  getting
    better and that he had last seen him on his birthday in September  2020
    and had started speaking to him two or three times per  week.  Although
    he is on good terms with his ex-partner, her new partner is still  very
    jealous and that is why he did not ask her to provide  a  statement  in
    support of his appeal. When asked again by Mr Kotas whether  there  was
    anyone else around who helps out with the children, he said no and that
    T's dad was not around. The letter from the headteacher of  T's  school
    was  then  put  to  him,  where  the  headteacher  mentions  that   T's
    grandmother regularly takes her to and from school. He  said  that  the
    letter was not incorrect, but that the grandmother  has  back  problems
    and cannot help out all the time. He denied  seeking  to  minimise  the
    grandmother's involvement. He said that  Mr  Powell  helps  financially
    with the children, but not in other practical ways.

22. The appellant said that Ms Martson and the children had  no  connection
    with Jamaica and had never been to Jamaica. He himself  had  only  been
    back to Jamaica once for a two week holiday in 2016.  He  stayed  in  a
    hotel with a family friend (who is also the headteacher of a  secondary
    school in north London) and did not visit any relatives there. He  said
    he knew no one in Jamaica and did not know the culture.

23. Regarding his driving convictions,  he  said  that  (contrary  to  what
    appears on the PNC record) he  had  not  had  his  licence  revoked  on
    grounds  of  physical  fitness,  but  because  he  was  driving   while
    uninsured. He accepted, however, that he knew he should not  have  been
    driving. When asked about his most recent conviction, and  why  he  had
    offended again despite facing deportation, he said that he  had  turned
    to smoking cannabis because of the deportation action  which  he  found
    stressful. He said that he did not want anything to  do  with  cannabis
    anymore and could take a test to prove it.

24. Ms Martson adopted her two statements. In oral evidence she  said  that
    her mother (T's grandmother) helps with picking up and dropping off the
    children to school, but not as much as the  appellant  because  of  her
    back problems. She accepted the letter from the school was correct, but
    that recently the grandmother had not done as much. She denied  seeking
    to minimise the involvement of the grandmother. She said that  she  had
    no one else who could assist and no family nearby. She  did  not,  when
    first asked, even mention her  sisters.  When  asked  whether  she  had
    siblings she said one was a solicitor and lived with  her  mother,  and
    her other sister worked full-time as a carer and also had two  children
    of her own. She said that she had not mentioned her sisters when  first
    asked because they have lives of their own and she does  not  see  them
    often. She said that if the appellant was not around she would  not  be
    able to complete her PGCE  or  work.  She  said  that  the  course  was
    currently partly online and partly in person. She said that she had  no
    ties to Jamaica and she could not afford to go to  another  country  as
    she needs to pass her PGCE. She said her course is  for  one  year  and
    will finish in the summer  of  2021.  From  April  2021  she  would  be
    applying to schools for jobs. She said that  she  receives  maintenance
    through student finance, which helps pay the rent.  She  receives  some
    financial assistance from her mother and Mr Powell,  but  nothing  from
    the appellant as he is not permitted to work at present. She said there
    was nothing in Jamaica for her. She  said  her  daughter  was  with  an
    acting agency and her son is doing football with  Tristar.  They  would
    lose that if they went to Jamaica. She said that if the appellant  went
    to Jamaica without them she was afraid that her children would take the
    wrong paths because of being fatherless, and that the  children  listen
    to the appellant more than they listen to her. She  said  that  in  her
    experience of working in  the  Pupil  Referral  Unit  children  without
    fathers get into trouble. She said she had not told the  children  that
    the appellant may be deported as  she  felt  they  were  too  young  to
    understand. She said they did not have any significant  health  issues,
    although T has asthma.

25. Mr Powell adopted his two statements. In oral evidence he said that  he
    sees the appellant's children every Sunday for a family dinner and also
    during the week sometimes. He  said  that  they  have  a  large  family
    network  who  had  really  helped  out  financially   with   costs   of
    representation for  the  appellant.  He  said  that  he  was  currently
    unemployed having lost his job due to the pandemic and was on Universal
    Credit. He said that Ms Martson's mother (T's grandmother) helps out  a
    lot with the children, especially with J. He said  that  she  comes  to
    their house and they go to hers. He said that the last time he went  to
    Jamaica was 2003 and that he had an 'old grand-aunty'  there  and  'her
    immediate offsprings'. He does not regard them as close family  to  the
    appellant and did not suggest that they  meet  when  he  paid  for  the
    appellant to have a holiday to Jamaica in 2016.

26. The appellant acknowledged in answer to questions from Mr Kotas that he
    had not sought a variation to his 'bail conditions' when moving in with
    Ms Martson at the start of the pandemic. The  parties'  representatives
    were not, however,  clear  what  the  position  was  in  this  respect.
    Following the hearing Mr  Kotas  notified  the  Tribunal  that  he  had
    checked the position with the Criminal Casework Directorate  (CCD)  who
    confirmed that the appellant  was on Temporary Admission from 4  August
    2017 and the Notice of Restriction letter dated 31 July  2017  required
    him to reside at Mr Powell's  address.  The  appellant  had  then  been
    placed on immigration bail by the respondent from  22  September  2018.
    CCD could find no evidence from the CID database that the appellant has
    been granted permission to change  his  place  of  residence  and  they
    believe he is therefore in breach of his bail conditions. The appellant
    has not sought to dispute this.

The parties' submissions


27. Mr Kotas for the respondent submitted that the appellant was clearly  a
    persistent offender and that his original offence was plainly one  that
    had caused serious harm. He referred us to the  sentencing  remarks  of
    the trial judge. As to whether the  appellant  would  face  significant
    obstacles in relation to integration into Jamaica, Mr  Kotas  submitted
    that in the  light  of  the  legal  authorities,  whether  or  not  the
    appellant has family in Jamaica is relevant but not  determinative  and
    it is for the Tribunal to make a broad evaluative judgement. The  legal
    test is an elevated threshold. The appellant has a CSCS card, no mental
    health issues, he  is  confident  and  resourceful.  Although  he  left
    Jamaica at age 6 and is effectively a stranger to the  country,  he  is
    not someone with no  memory  of  Jamaica.  Although  it  may  take  the
    appellant time and effort to form a private life,  his  case  does  not
    meet the elevated threshold and there are not significant obstacles  to
    his integration into Jamaica. As to whether relocation to Jamaica would
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner or the children,  Mr  Kotas
    did not press that point but relied on his  skeleton  argument.  As  to
    whether the appellant's deportation to Jamaica would be unduly harsh on
    the appellant's partner or the children, Mr Kotas submitted that  there
    had been an attempt by the appellant and his partner  to  minimise  her
    mother's involvement with the family. He submitted that there  was  not
    anywhere near sufficient evidence before us, in terms  of  professional
    evidence, such as  an  independent  social  worker  report  or  medical
    evidence, to demonstrate that the deportation of the appellant would be
    unduly harsh for his partner or the  children.  Although  the  children
    would be upset, and so would the appellant's partner, there is  nothing
    in this case to show that there  would  be  any  consequences  for  the
    family going beyond the ordinary consequences  of  deportation.  As  to
    whether there are in the  appellant's  case  exceptional  circumstances
    going beyond the two statutory exceptions, Mr Kotas submitted  that  at
    this point the appellant's offending history should be brought into the
    equation. The appellant has continued to offend even while  faced  with
    deportation proceedings and has therefore  shown  a  contempt  for  the
    criminal law of the United Kingdom. Although  the  appellant  would  if
    deported lose not only his close family but also his extended family in
    the United Kingdom,  and  although  the  appellant  has  been  lawfully
    present in the United Kingdom for most of his life, there are not  here
    very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public  interest  in  the
    deportation of the appellant.

28. Mr Sharma for the appellant adopted his written submissions of 5  March
    2020. He submitted that although the appellant's offences in  the  past
    have caused serious harm, and although he has continued to  offend,  he
    should not now be regarded as a 'persistent offender' or as someone who
    has  caused  serious  harm  applying  the  approach  in  Chege  ("is  a
    persistent  offender")  [2016]  UKUT  187  (IAC)  and  Andell  (foreign
    criminal - paragraph 398) [2018] UKUT 198 (IAC) (a decision we note was
    disapproved in SC  (paras  A398-399S:  "foreign  criminal":  procedure)
    Albania [2020] UKUT  187  (IAC)).  This  is  because  his  more  recent
    offending (in particular the driving offences and most recent  class  B
    drug offence) was different in character to the block of  offending  in
    2015-2017, was not so serious and was not linked to gang  activity.  He
    submitted these factors are relevant to proportionality,  even  if  the
    appellant is in any event a foreign criminal as defined in  s  117D  of
    the NIAA 2002  by  dint  of  having  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of more than 12 months.  As  to  whether  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Jamaica,  Mr
    Sharma submitted that the appellant  is  ignorant  of  the  culture  of
    Jamaica and has no lived experience of that, and that his uncle is also
    removed from the culture having not been to the country since 2003.  He
    submitted that ignorance of the culture can place an individual at risk
    on return and forms a barrier to integration.  He  submitted  that  the
    fact that the appellant has a CSCS card does not mean that  he  can  be
    employed in Jamaica, he has limited skills  and  may  not  be  able  to
    compete in the Jamaican employment market. He submitted that  the  fact
    that the appellant would likely be returning on his  own  would  itself
    create a barrier to integration, while if he was returning with  family
    that would impose additional stress which would also pose a barrier  to
    integration. As to whether the appellant's deportation will  be  unduly
    harsh on his partner and children, he submitted that it  would  plainly
    be unduly harsh for the entire family unit to relocate to Jamaica where
    none of them had ever been and where the move would  involve  uprooting
    the children from their education and away from all  their  family  and
    friends in the United Kingdom, in particular the grandmother and uncle.
    He further submitted that it would be unduly harsh on  the  appellant's
    partner and the children if they remained in the United  Kingdom  while
    he was deported. His partner is in full-time education and has a career
    path that depends on completing that, but if  the  appellant  went  she
    would have to stop her course and would then be  a  single,  unemployed
    mother of three children. He submitted  that  we  could  take  judicial
    notice of the impact on children of losing a father, as well as  of  Ms
    Martson's own experience working with children in  the  Pupil  Referral
    Unit. Taking into account all  the  circumstances,  he  submitted  that
    deportation would constitute a disproportionate interference  with  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8.

Findings of fact


29. There is little dispute on the evidence.

30. The appellant's criminal record is incontrovertible and is set  out  in
    the PNC record that we have summarised above.

31. The appellant was born in Jamaica and lived there  for  the  first  six
    years of his life before coming to the United Kingdom to live with  his
    uncle, Mr Powell. He has now lived in the United Kingdom for 23 of  the
    29 years of his life, and was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on  24
    August 2004 (when he was 13).  He  has  been  educated  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has worked in the United Kingdom.  He  has  no  friends  in
    Jamaica and no family there with  whom  he  has  any  real  connection,
    although there are distant relatives on his uncle's  side  who  he  has
    never met. Apart from a two-week holiday in Jamaica in  2016,  and  his
    earliest years, he has no lived experience of Jamaica and  is,  as  the
    First-Tier Tribunal judge found, effectively  a  stranger  to  Jamaica,
    although not a complete stranger.

32. The appellant has been in  a  committed  family  relationship  with  Ms
    Martson since 2014. She is a British Citizen. We accept that  he  is  a
    supportive and loving father to J (now aged 20 months), K (now aged  4)
    and T (now aged 8) and participates daily in their care and upbringing,
    although he is not currently able to provide them  with  any  financial
    support. All three children are British Citizens.  The  appellant  also
    has a current parental relationship with his oldest son, JW  (now  aged
    12), albeit that it is not particularly strong, given  that  there  had
    previously been a fairly lengthy break in that  relationship  and  even
    now they meet in person only very infrequently. Ms Martson is studying,
    and needs support with childcare to enable her to complete her PGCE and
    obtain employment. Ms Martson and the children have  full  and  settled
    lives in the United Kingdom and we  accept  (though  we  have  received
    limited evidence on this) that Ms Martson and the  older  children  (JW
    and T) have their own social networks in the United Kingdom, as well as
    their immediate family connections, including Mr Powell,  Ms  Martson's
    mother and sisters and their families. The  same  will  be  true  to  a
    lesser extent for K who is younger, while J is too young  to  have  any
    significant connections of his own apart from his immediate family.

33. We find that the family  also  has  a  support  network.  Ms  Martson's
    mother, in particular, frequently assists with the children,  taking  K
    and T to and from school and assisting with J at home. In this respect,
    we find that the appellant and Ms Martson sought to downplay  her  role
    and in the light of Mr  Powell's  evidence  and  the  letter  from  the
    school, we find that Ms Martson's mother provides  significant  support
    to the family, notwithstanding her back troubles. Mr Powell also  lives
    near the family and can help with the children, especially  at  present
    while he is unemployed. Mr Powell and members of  the  extended  family
    have provided funding  for  the  appellant's  representation  in  these
    proceedings.

Conclusions


34. Having set out our findings of fact, we now place these in the  context
    of the relevant legal framework. That in turn involves the  application
    of the mandatory considerations contained within  section  117B-D  NIAA
    2002, which we shall address as they arise.

Is the appellant a "persistent offender" or has his offending "caused
serious harm"?


35. The terms "persistent offender" and "caused  serious  harm"  appear  in
    both section 117D(2)  of  the  NIAA  2002  and  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Mr Sharma has invited us  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant meets these definitions, and we have agreed to do so,  having
    heard argument on the same. However, for the reasons that  we  set  out
    below,  whether  he  does  meet  those  definitions  or  not   is   not
    determinative of the appeal and does not even affect  the  legal  tests
    that  we  must  apply  when   considering   the   appellant's   appeal.
    Nonetheless, we accept that whether and to what extent the appellant is
    a "persistent offender" or has "caused serious harm" are  matters  that
    we can take into account when deciding, at the final stage, whether  or
    not there are "very compelling circumstances" over and above those  set
    out in the two statutory exceptions in section  117C(4)  and  (5)  NIAA
    2002,(and reflected in paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules) that might outweigh the public interest in  deportation  in  the
    appellant's case.

36. In this appeal, the appellant contends that his  deportation  would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights. As such, Part 5A of the NIAA  2002
    applies (see s 117A(1)) and  the  Tribunal  is  required,  by  dint  of
    section  117A(2)(b),  to  have  regard  in  cases  involving   "foreign
    criminals" to the considerations in section 117C. "Foreign criminal" is
    defined in section 117D(2) NIAA 2002 as follows:

           "(2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a)  who is not a British citizen,

           (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
           and

           (c)  who-

           (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least
           12 months,

           (ii)  has been convicted of an offence that has  caused  serious
           harm, or

           (iii)  is a persistent offender."

37. There is no dispute that the appellant fulfils that definition  because
    he is not a British citizen, he has been convicted of an offence in the
    United Kingdom, and "has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least 12 months."  That the  3-year  sentence  of  imprisonment  was
    imposed in 2010 and was the index offence in respect  of  the  previous
    deportation action and appeal in 2011, is immaterial.  At paragraph  43
    of OH (Algeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1763, Irwin LJ  (with  whom  the  other
    members of the Court agreed) concluded that:

           "... the natural meaning of the words in section 117D(2)(c  )(i)
           is: "who has [in  the  past]  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months"."

38. Thus, the fact that the  appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  3  years'
    imprisonment in the past is sufficient to engage section 117D(2)(c)(i).
    In this regard, see also the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Rexha
    (S.117C - earlier offences) [2016] UKUT 335 (IAC), at paragraphs 14 and
    15.

39. It follows  that,  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is  a  "persistent
    offender" or has "caused serious harm" makes no difference to the  fact
    that he is a "foreign  criminal"  to  whose  case  we  must  apply  the
    provisions of section  117C,  including  the  two  Exceptions  in  that
    section (Exception 1 and Exception 2) which we address below.  Further,
    the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53  made  clear  that  in
    considering  those  two  Exceptions  the  offending  history   of   the
    individual foreign criminal and his offending history are not  relevant
    so that  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  is  a  "persistent
    offender"  or  has  "caused  serious  harm"  is  not  relevant  to  the
    application of those two Exceptions.

40. The Immigration Rules reflect sections 117C and 117D  and  provide  for
    two equivalent exceptions (in paragraphs 399A and 399 respectively)  to
    apply where paragraph 398(b)  or  paragraph  398(c)  apply.  Paragraphs
    398(b) and 398(c) thus fulfil the same function to  the  definition  of
    "foreign criminal" in section 117D, in that they provide a 'gateway' to
    the two exceptions. Set in context, those paragraphs are as follows:

           "Deportation and Article 8

           A398. These rules apply where:

           (a) a foreign criminal liable to  deportation  claims  that  his
           deportation  would  be  contrary   to   the   United   Kingdom's
           obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

           (b) a foreign criminal applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
           against him to be revoked.

           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and

           ...

           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or

           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A."

41. In his written submissions, Mr Sharma focused on paragraph  398(c).  He
    argued that, on the facts, the appellant is not a "persistent offender"
    and  does  not  show  a  "particular  disregard  for  the  law".  As  a
    consequence, it appeared to be the appellant's submission  that  he  is
    not a "foreign criminal". However, as noted above, at the  hearing,  Mr
    Sharma accepted (as had, indeed, been conceded  before  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal) that the appellant is a "foreign criminal". He was  right  to
    do so because paragraph 398(c) plainly does not replace the  definition
    of "foreign criminal". It could not do so as far as the statute  itself
    is concerned since it is trite law that  the  Rules  cannot  amend  the
    statute and when  deciding  this  appeal  we  must  apply  the  primary
    legislation (cf paragraph 19 of SC (Zimbabwe)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  929).
    Nor does it do so as far as the Rules  are  concerned  since:  (i)  the
    expression "foreign criminal" in A398 of the Rules must be construed by
    reference to the definition set out in section 117D NIAA 2002  (see  SC
    (paras A398-339D: 'foreign criminal': procedure)  Albania  [2020]  UKUT
    187 (IAC)); and, (ii), the  appellant's  case  falls  within  paragraph
    398(b) in any event since he was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
    of less than 4 years but at least 12 months.

42. It follows that whether or not the appellant is a "persistent offender"
    or has "caused serious" harm does not change the legal  tests  that  we
    must apply on this appeal, but we have nonetheless  considered  whether
    and to what extent the appellant  meets  these  definitions  so  as  to
    inform our overall assessment of the  balancing  exercise  required  by
    Article 8, as codified in section  117C(6)  and  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" test which we deal with in the last substantive  section
    of our judgment below.

43. The meaning of the phrase  "persistent  offender"  was  authoritatively
    considered by the Court of Appeal in SC (Zimbabwe).  At  paragraph  25,
    Coombe LJ (with whom the other members of the Court  agreed)  expressly
    approved the following passages of the guidance set out  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC):

           "53.  Put simply, a "persistent offender" is someone  who  keeps
           on breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to
           keep on offending until the date of the relevant decision or  up
           to a certain time before it,  or  that  the  continuity  of  the
           offending cannot be broken. Whilst we do not accept  Mr  Malik's
           primary submission that a "persistent offender" is  a  permanent
           status that can never be lost once it is acquired, we do  accept
           his  submission  that  an  individual  can  be  regarded  as   a
           "persistent offender" for the purpose of the Rules and the  2002
           Act even though he may not have offended for some time.  Someone
           can be fairly described as a person who keeps breaking  the  law
           even if he is not currently offending. The question  whether  he
           fits that description will depend on  the  overall  picture  and
           pattern of his offending over his entire offending history up to
           that date. Each case will turn on its own facts.

           54.  Plainly, a persistent offender is not  simply  someone  who
           offends more than once. There has to  be  repeat  offending  but
           that repetition, in and of itself, will not be  enough  to  show
           persistence. There has to be  a  history  of  repeated  criminal
           conduct carried out over a sufficiently long period to  indicate
           that the person concerned is someone who keeps on  re-offending.
           However, determining whether the offending is persistent is  not
           just a mathematical exercise. How long a  period  and  how  many
           offences will be enough will depend very much on  the  facts  of
           the particular case and the  nature  and  circumstances  of  the
           offending. The criminal offences need not be the same,  or  even
           of the same character as each other. Persistence may be shown by
           the fact that  a  person  keeps  committing  the  same  type  of
           offence, but it may equally be shown by the  fact  that  he  has
           committed a wide variety of different offences over a period  of
           time."

44. In essence, the assessment is fact-sensitive and must be carried out by
    the Tribunal with reference to the individual's offending history as  a
    whole.

45. The appellant's criminal record shows that he has accrued 9 convictions
    for 12 offences within the period 2009 to 2020. The offences up to 2016
    include, in addition to  the  index  robbery  offence,  three  offences
    involving possession of a knife, and one involving possession of  a  CS
    gas canister, as well as Class A and Class  B  drug  offences.   It  is
    right that there was a gap in the offending behaviour between 2016  and
    November 2018, and that the more recent offences have been different in
    character to the earlier offences and less serious in nature than those
    previously committed (although driving when prohibited to do so  whilst
    uninsured cannot properly be said to be trivial in any  way).  However,
    it is plain that the appellant knew that he should not  be  driving  at
    all, and (given his previous conviction for the same)  that  he  should
    not be in possession of cannabis.  It is  equally  plain  that  he  was
    aware of his own previous criminal history, the deportation action  and
    the consequences that committing further offences might  well  have  on
    his future.  Notwithstanding this, he has committed further offences.

46. We have taken account of the fact that the appellant was a  minor  when
    he committed the first two offences on his record.  In so  far  as  the
    "persistent  offender"  assessment  is  concerned,  case-law  does  not
    indicate that this fact should count against  the  attribution  of  the
    epithet, although in this case we do  consider  it  to  be  a  relevant
    matter weighing in favour of the appellant.

47. Nonetheless, having applied the guidance set out in the authorities and
    having regard to the facts of this case, we conclude that the appellant
    is  a   "persistent   offender"   within   the   meaning   of   section
    117D(2)(c)(iii) NIAA 2002. He has, over  the  course  of  a  relatively
    extended period, kept breaking the law. He has not accrued a very  high
    number of convictions, but they are  spread  out  over  the  period  in
    question (even taking account of the gap between 2016 and 2018).   Some
    of the offences have been similar in nature, others not: this does  not
    provide  any  real  assistance  to  the  appellant.   Even  after   the
    successful appeal in 2011 and the gap in  offending  between  2016  and
    2018, the appellant re-offended. It is clear to us that there has  been
    persistence in his conduct. This is not a case in which it can be  said
    that the appellant had been a persistent offender, but lost this status
    by virtue of cessation of offending between 2016 and 2018.

48. Mr Sharma's reliance on the additional words, "who shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law" in paragraph 398(c) of the Rules is misconceived
    in so far as the approach to be taken in an  appeal  is  concerned.  As
    stated previously, it is the definition within section 117D(2)(c )(iii)
    which is important.

49. Even if it had to be shown that the appellant did  show  "a  particular
    disregard for the law", the facts of this case satisfy the  test.  With
    reference to what we have already said concerning  the  persistence  of
    his offending, the appellant has repeatedly broken  the  law  over  the
    course of a number of years.  It is of some significance  that  one  of
    the offences for which he was convicted in September 2016 was  that  of
    committing an offence during the  operational  period  of  a  suspended
    sentence.  This is indicative of a  complete  disregard  of  a  penalty
    previously imposed.  The fact that the appellant  continued  to  offend
    after having succeeded in his 2011 appeal and having been given a  very
    clear warning as to his future conduct is also relevant. So too are the
    2018 motoring offences and the 2020  drugs  offence.   They  bring  the
    appellant's disregard for the law up to date, as  it  were.  They  took
    place after the respondent had instigated the second set of deportation
    proceedings against him, and this  must,  in  any  view,  constitute  a
    relevant contextual factor. Finally, it cannot be  the  case  that  the
    test can only be met if the individual is, as at the date  of  hearing,
    displaying the "particular disregard for the law".  That would  be,  to
    put it bluntly, absurd. As with the question  of  whether  they  are  a
    "persistent offender", the assessment must be holistic,  having  regard
    to the entirety of the relevant conduct. We find that the appellant has
    shown "a particular disregard for the law".

50. As regards the question of whether the appellant's offences have caused
    "serious harm", the Upper Tribunal in Wilson (NIAA Part 5A; deportation
    decisions) [2020] UKUT 350 (IAC) recently summarised the relevant  case
    law as follows:

           53.   The current case law on  "caused  serious  harm"  for  the
           purposes of the expression "foreign criminal" in Part 5A of  the
           2002 Act can be summarised  as  follows  (drawing  predominately
           from the judgment of Simon LJ in R (Mahmood and others):-

           (1) Whether P's offence is "an offence that has  caused  serious
           harm" within section 117D(2)(c)(ii) is a matter for the judge to
           decide, in all the circumstances, whenever Part 5A falls  to  be
           applied.

           (2) Provided that the judge has considered all relevant  factors
           bearing on that question;  has  not  had  regard  to  irrelevant
           factors; and has not reached a perverse decision, there will  be
           no error of law in the judge's conclusion,  which,  accordingly,
           cannot be disturbed on appeal.

           (3) In determining what factors are relevant or irrelevant,  the
           following should be borne in mind:

           (a) The Secretary of State's view of  whether  the  offence  has
           caused serious harm is a starting point;

           (b) The sentencing remarks should be  carefully  considered,  as
           they will often contain valuable information; not least what may
           be said about the  offence  having  caused  "serious  harm",  as
           categorised in the Sentencing Council Guidelines;

           (c) A victim statement adduced in the criminal proceedings  will
           be relevant;

           (d) Whilst the Secretary of State bears the  burden  of  showing
           that the offence has caused serious harm, she does not  need  to
           adduce evidence from the victim at a hearing before  the  First-
           tier Tribunal;

           (e) The appellant's own evidence to the First-tier  Tribunal  on
           the issue of seriousness will usually need to  be  treated  with
           caution;

           (f) Serious harm can involve  physical,  emotional  or  economic
           harm and does not need to be limited to an individual;

           (g) The mere potential for harm is irrelevant;

           (h) The fact that a particular type of offence contributes to  a
           serious/widespread problem is not sufficient; there must be some
           evidence that the actual offence has caused serious harm.

51. Applying that guidance to the facts of the present case, we  take  into
    account the view of the Secretary of State, and also the view of  trial
    judge for the appellant's robbery conviction who  regarded  the  eleven
    offences (and one attempt) committed as being 'horrific' with a  number
    of aggravating factors as we have set out above. In our judgment, it is
    plain that this offence caused "serious harm" to its victims.

Exception 1: the private life exception under section 117C(4) NIAA 2002


52. Section 117C(4) provides as follows:

           "(4) Exception 1 applies where-

           (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
           of C's life,

           (b)  C is socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and

           (c)   there  would  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   C's
           integration  into  the  country  to  which  is  proposed  to  be
           deported."

53. All three limbs of the exception must be  satisfied  in  order  for  an
    individual to succeed.

54. The respondent accepts that the appellant has been lawfully resident in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life.  That  concession  is  plainly
    correct.  Section 117C(4)(a) is satisfied.

55. As to the second limb under section 117C(4), the respondent has adopted
    what may be described as a neutral position on the question  of  social
    and cultural integration  (see  paragraph  15  of  her  latest  written
    submissions).

56. In assessing this issue, we have considered CI  (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ  2027  and  Binbuga  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551.   In  summary,   those
    authorities show that all cases are fact-sensitive, the concept  of  an
    individual being a "home grown criminal" should not be applied to cases
    being considered under section 117C, and the individual needs  to  show
    that they have accepted and assumed the core values, ideas, customs and
    social behaviour of the culture of the United Kingdom.

57. The relevant factual matters in the present  case  in  support  of  the
    existence of social and  cultural  integration  are  as  follows:-  the
    appellant arrived in this country at a young age and has lived here for
    23 years.  He was educated here,  has  worked,  and  has  formed  close
    relationships, not least with his uncle, Mr  Powell,  and  his  current
    partner.  He is also the father of three children and  the  step-father
    of another. Whilst the relationship with JW had previously  effectively
    ceased, it has been rekindled in the past year, although he has limited
    physical contact with him. He is a loving and supportive father to  the
    other three children and participates fully in their daily  lives.  His
    immediate family in the United Kingdom are all  British  Citizens,  his
    children are at school and undertaking extra-curricular activities such
    as football and acting and he supports them in  those  activities.  His
    partner is working and studying for a PGCE,  and  he  supports  her  in
    doing this. In other words, there is nothing to suggest that (on a  day
    to day basis) the appellant has  not  accepted  and  assumed  the  core
    values, ideas, customs and social  behaviour  of  the  culture  of  the
    United Kingdom.

58. Against the appellant is his offending history. As regards convictions,
    we have discussed  these  when  addressing  the  "persistent  offender"
    issue, above. In and of themselves, we do not consider that they  broke
    what had plainly been social and  cultural  integration  prior  to  the
    start of the offending period.  We have considered the admitted  period
    of gang membership  as  part  and  parcel  of  my  overall  assessment.
    However, it is a preserved finding of fact from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant has not been  a  member  of  the
    gang in question  for  some  years.   His  membership  was  not  for  a
    prolonged period in any event. Given the obvious integration  prior  to
    that membership and its relatively short  duration,  we  conclude  that
    there was no break in the appellant's social and cultural assimilation.

59. Alternatively, if such a break  was  created  by  the  gang  membership
    combined with the offences committed whilst he was associated with that
    group, we conclude that relevant social and  cultural  integration  has
    been re-established over the fairly significant period of time since he
    ceased involvement with the gang.

60. In all the circumstances, section 117C(b) is satisfied.

61. We turn now to the question of whether the appellant would  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to "integration" into Jamaican society  were  he
    to be deported.

62. The term "integration" has been discussed in a number of cases, but the
    authoritative statement of its content can be found at paragraph 14  of
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813:

           "14.  In  my  view,  the  concept  of   a   foreign   criminal's
           "integration" into the country to which it is proposed  that  he
           be deported, as set out  in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court  or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for  a  broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how  life  in
           the society in that country is carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
           participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to  be
           accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in
           that society and to build up within a reasonable time a  variety
           of human relationships to give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life.

63. This well-known passage was the subject of further consideration in  AS
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1284, in which at paragraphs 58 and 59, Moylan LJ (with
    whom the other members of the Court agreed) concluded:

           "58. I do not consider that Mr Buley's  categorisation  of  some
           factors as "generic" is helpful. Consideration of the  issue  of
           obstacles to integration requires consideration of all  relevant
           factors some of which might be described  as  generic.  What  Mr
           Buley identified as "generic" factors, as referred to above, can
           clearly be relevant to the  issue  of  whether  there  are  very
           significant obstacles to integration. They can form part of  the
           "broad evaluative judgment" as is specifically  demonstrated  by
           the reference  in  Kamara  to  "good  health"  and  "capable  of
           working".

           59. I also reject Mr Buley's submission that, following  Kamara,
           whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to be determined by
           reference to their ties or links to the other country.  This  is
           to turn what Sales LJ said in Kamara into just the sort of gloss
           which he expressly warned against. It is clear, to repeat,  that
           generic factors can be of significance and can  clearly  support
           the  conclusion  that  the  person  will  not   encounter   very
           significant obstacles to integration."

64. The practical approach to arriving at the answer to the question  posed
    by section 117C(4)(c ) was stated by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 9
    of Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932 in the following terms:

           "The task of the Secretary of State, or  the  Tribunal,  in  any
           given case is simply to  assess  the  obstacles  to  integration
           relied on,  whether  characterised  as  hardship  difficulty  or
           anything else, and to decide whether they regard them  as  "very
           significant"."

65. In this case, the obstacles to integration  that  the  appellant  would
    face on return to Jamaica include the following:- he  personally  knows
    nobody there, he has no lived experience of  Jamaican  society  and  is
    effectively a stranger both to the country of Jamaica and  its  culture
    and society. Although he has a CSCS card as a labourer  in  the  United
    Kingdom, there is no evidence before us as  to  whether  that  will  be
    accepted in Jamaica. He has not yet completed  his  studies  as  a  gas
    engineer and although it is possible that he will have done before  any
    deportation actually takes place, we must  determine  matters  as  they
    stand at the date of the hearing and we do not  take  that  possibility
    into account. Although no country evidence has been presented to us  of
    any difficulties that a new immigrant to Jamaica may  face  culturally,
    socially or in terms of finding employment, we are prepared  to  assume
    (in the appellant's favour) that, being a stranger to the country, with
    limited  qualifications  and  work  experience,  it  is  likely  to  be
    difficult for him to integrate into Jamaica socially and culturally and
    to find employment in Jamaica. It may also be difficult for him to find
    accommodation, although we have again heard no evidence on that.

66. However, while the appellant is a stranger to  Jamaica,  he  is  not  a
    complete stranger. His earliest childhood was spent there  and  he  has
    returned for a holiday. His uncle has distant family there, and so  the
    appellant may be able to draw on those connections. Even if that is not
    possible, he speaks the native language (English), he  is  of  Jamaican
    ethnic origin, he is  young  and  healthy  and  no  evidence  has  been
    presented to us to suggest that someone with those characteristics will
    not be able to integrate into Jamaican society and culture, in time and
    with the usual effort that is required by anyone moving to a new place.
    Further, although his work experience and qualifications  are  limited,
    he does have that experience and qualifications in labouring work of  a
    type that is universally required. There is no evidence before us  that
    there is any particular problem with unemployment in Jamaica,  or  that
    new immigrants such as the appellant  might  have  particular  problems
    obtaining employment. Although, as noted, we  are  prepared  to  assume
    that it will be difficult for the appellant to  obtain  employment,  we
    are not prepared to find that it will not in time be possible  for  the
    appellant to find employment. At least, we are satisfied that he is  in
    as  good  a  position  as  any  immigrant  to  the  country  to  obtain
    employment.

67. In  those  circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  obstacles  to
    integration that the appellant would face if deported  to  Jamaica  are
    not "very significant" obstacles and accordingly Exception 1 in section
    117C(4) NIAA 2002 does not apply.

Exception 2: the family life exception under section 117C(5) NIAA 2002


68. Section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 provides as follows:

           "(5) Exception 2 applies where C has a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh."

69. By s 117D(1), "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of
    18 and who (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of  seven  years  or  more,  and  a
    "qualifying partner" means a partner who (a) is a  British  citizen  or
    (b) is settled in the United Kingdom within the meaning of s 33(2A)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971 (IA 1971). The appellant's current partner, Ms
    Martson and the three children  who  live  with  her  are  all  British
    citizens and therefore "qualifying" for the purposes of the  exception.
    The appellant's eldest child, JW, is also "qualifying" because although
    he is a Ghanaian citizen, he has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of seven years or more.

70. It is a preserved finding from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  Ms
    Martson, and that  he  also  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his two biological  children  and  his  stepdaughter.
    The evidence presented to us confirms this.

71. In respect of the appellant's eldest child, JW, the First-Tier Tribunal
    found (at paragraph 33) that the appellant did not play any significant
    role in his life. However,  at  this  hearing  new  evidence  has  been
    presented on the basis of which we accept that the appellant  does  now
    have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  JW,  albeit
    that he sees him in person only very infrequently.

72. The authoritative statement of  the  law  as  regards  the  meaning  of
    "unduly harsh" is contained in the judgment of Lord Carnwath JSC in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, at paragraph 23:

           "23. On the other  hand  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
           clearly intended to introduce  a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of
           "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. Further
           the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison.  It  assumes
           that there is a "due" level of  "harshness",  that  is  a  level
           which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant  context.
           "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level. The relevant
           context is that set by  section  117C(1),  that  is  the  public
           interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
           for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a  parent.
           What it does  not  require  in  my  view  (and  subject  to  the
           discussion of the cases in  Page  11  the  next  section)  is  a
           balancing  of  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
           offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by  the
           section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary
           to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica)  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932,  [2017]  1
           WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a  requirement  to
           show "very compelling reasons".  That  would  be  in  effect  to
           replicate the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with
           respect to sentences of four years or more."

73. However, Lord Carnwath's judgment was subjected to further scrutiny  by
    the Court of Appeal in the recent case of  HA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, in  the  course  of
    which Underhill LJ (with whom the other members of the Court of  Appeal
    agreed) gave further guidance on "unduly harsh"  and  as  to  how  Lord
    Carnwath's judgment in KO (Nigeria) is to be interpreted. It  is  worth
    setting out a substantial part  of  Underhill  LJ's  judgment  on  this
    issue, beginning at paragraph 50 where, having set out various passages
    from Lord Carnwath's judgment, he discussed their effect as follows:

           "50.  What light do those passages shed on the meaning of
           "unduly harsh" (beyond the conclusion on the relative
           seriousness issue)?

           51.  The essential point is that the criterion of undue
           harshness sets a bar which is "elevated" and carries a "much
           stronger emphasis" than mere undesirability: see para. 27 of
           Lord Carnwath's judgment, approving the UT's self-direction
           in MK (Sierra Leone) , and para. 35. The UT's self-direction
           uses a battery of synonyms and antonyms: although these should
           not be allowed to become a substitute for the statutory
           language, tribunals may find them of some assistance as a
           reminder of the elevated nature of the test. The reason why some
           degree of harshness is acceptable is that there is a strong
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals
           (including medium offenders): see para. 23. The underlying
           question for tribunals is whether the harshness which the
           deportation will cause for the partner and/or child is of a
           sufficiently elevated degree to outweigh that public interest.

           52.  However, while recognising the "elevated" nature of the
           statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the fact
           that the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by the
           test of "very compelling circumstances" in section 117C (6) . As
           Lord Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23 of his
           judgment, disapproving IT (Jamaica) , if that were so the
           position of medium offenders and their families would be no
           better than that of serious offenders. It follows that the
           observations in the case-law to the effect that it will be rare
           for the test of "very compelling circumstances" to be satisfied
           have no application in this context (I have already made this
           point - see para. 34 above). The statutory intention is
           evidently that the hurdle representing the unacceptable impact
           on a partner or child should be set somewhere between the (low)
           level applying in the case of persons who are liable to ordinary
           immigration removal (see Lord Carnwath's reference to section
           117B (6) at the start of para. 23) and the (very high) level
           applying to serious offenders.

           53.  Observations of that kind are, I hope, helpful, but they
           cannot identify an objectively measurable standard. It is
           inherent in the nature of an exercise of the kind required
           by section 117C (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals
           should in each case make an informed evaluative assessment of
           whether the effect of the deportation of the parent or partner
           on their child or partner would be "unduly harsh" in the context
           of the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
           criminals; and further exposition of that phrase will never be
           of more than limited value."

74. Underhill LJ then went on to address the particular  arguments  of  the
    parties in that case as follows:-

           "54.  The Appellants of course accept that Lord Carnwath said
           what he said in the passages to which I have referred. But they
           contend that it is not a complete statement of the relevant law
           and/or that it is capable of being misunderstood. In their joint
           skeleton argument they refer to the statement in para. 23 of
           Lord Carnwath's judgment that "one is looking for a degree of
           harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
           any child faced with the deportation of a parent" and continue:

                 "This statement, taken in isolation, creates the
                 opportunity for a court or tribunal to reach a conclusion
                 on undue harshness without due regard to the section
                 55 duty or the best interests of the child and without
                 careful analysis of all relevant factors specific to the
                 child in any particular case. Instead, such considerations
                 risk being 'swept up' under the general conclusion that the
                 emotional and psychological impact on the child would not
                 be anything other than that which is ordinarily expected by
                 the deportation of a parent ...that cannot have been the
                 intention of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) , which
                 would otherwise create an unreasonably high threshold."

           Mr de Mello and Mr Bazini developed that submission in their
           oral arguments. In fact it comprises two distinct, though
           possibly related, points. I take them in turn.

           55.  The first is that what Lord Carnwath says in the relevant
           parts of his judgment in KO makes no reference to the
           requirements of section 55 of the 2009 Act [Borders Citizenship
           and Immigration Act 2009] and is likely to lead tribunals to
           fail to treat the best interests of any affected child as a
           primary consideration. As to that, it is plainly not the case
           that Lord Carnwath was unaware of the relevance of section 55:
           see para. 15 of his judgment, quoted at para. 41 above. The
           reason why it was unnecessary for him to refer explicitly
           to section 55 specifically in the context of his discussion of
           Exception 2 is that the very purpose of the Exception, to the
           extent that it is concerned with the effect of deportation on a
           child, is to ensure that the best interests of that child are
           treated as a primary consideration. It does so by providing that
           those interests should, in the case of a medium offender,
           prevail over the public interest in deportation where the effect
           on the child would be unduly harsh. In other words,
           consideration of the best interests of the child is built into
           the statutory test. It was not necessary for Lord Carnwath to
           spell out that in the application of Exception 2 in any
           particular case there will need to be "a careful analysis of all
           relevant factors specific to the child"; but I am happy to
           confirm that that is so, as Lord Hodge makes clear in his sixth
           proposition in Zoumbas.

           56.  The second point focuses on what are said to be the risks
           of treating KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the
           degree of harshness goes beyond "that which is ordinarily
           expected by the deportation of a parent". Lord Carnwath does not
           in fact use that phrase, but a reference to "nothing out of the
           ordinary" appears in UTJ Southern's decision. I see rather more
           force in this submission. As explained above, the test
           under section 117C(5) does indeed require an appellant to
           establish a degree of harshness going beyond a threshold
           "acceptable" level. It is not necessarily wrong to describe that
           as an "ordinary" level of harshness, and I note that Lord
           Carnwath did not jib at UTJ Southern's use of that term.
           However, I think the Appellants are right to point out that it
           may be misleading if used incautiously. There seem to me to be
           two (related) risks. First, "ordinary" is capable of being
           understood as meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in
           any event rare. That is not the correct approach: see para. 52
           above. There is no reason in principle why cases of "undue"
           harshness may not occur quite commonly. Secondly, if tribunals
           treat the essential question as being "is this level of
           harshness out of the ordinary?" they may be tempted to find that
           Exception 2 does not apply simply on the basis that the
           situation fits into some commonly-encountered pattern. That
           would be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a parent's
           deportation will depend on an almost infinitely variable range
           of circumstances and it is not possible to identify a baseline
           of "ordinariness". Simply by way of example, the degree of
           harshness of the impact may be affected by the child's age; by
           whether the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or
           separated father may still have a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a child who lives with the mother); by the
           degree of the child's emotional dependence on the parent; by the
           financial consequences of his deportation; by the availability
           of emotional and financial support from a remaining parent and
           other family members; by the practicability of maintaining a
           relationship with the deported parent; and of course by all the
           individual characteristics of the child.

           57.  I make those points in response to the Appellants'
           submissions. But I am anxious to avoid setting off a further
           chain of exposition. Tribunals considering the parent case under
           Exception 2 should not err in law if in each case they carefully
           evaluate the likely effect of the parent's deportation on the
           particular child and then decide whether that effect is not
           merely harsh but unduly harsh applying KO (Nigeria) in
           accordance with the guidance at paras. 50-53 above."

75. We have had regard to the whole of Underhill LJ's judgment, but  we  in
    particular  take  from  his  exposition  as  set  out  above  that   in
    considering whether the effects of deportation on  Ms  Martson  or  the
    children would be "unduly harsh", we have to  consider  whether,  given
    the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals  in
    general, the effects would in the particular circumstances of this case
    be significantly more than undesirable, albeit that they  need  not  be
    very compelling.

76. We add that although Underhill LJ was  at  pains  in  his  analysis  to
    explain why in his judgment Lord Carnwath's judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    was consistent with the duty in section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 (BCIA 2009) (reflecting  article  3.1  of  the
    United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child), to give  primary
    consider to the children's best interests,  Peter  Jackson  LJ  in  his
    concurring judgment (with which Popplewell LJ also  agreed)  reaffirmed
    the well-established position  that  a  decision  that  does  not  give
    primary consideration to the children's best interests will  be  liable
    to be set aside. He gave guidance as follows:-

           "152.  Parliament has enacted two important public interests in
           cases involving children. Section 117C of the Immigration Act
           2014 enshrines the public interest in the deportation of foreign
           criminals. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
           Immigration Act 2009 requires the Secretary of State to make
           arrangements to ensure that in her immigration functions she has
           regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
           children, which translates into a duty to make the best
           interests of the child a primary consideration. The decision-
           maker must bring both of these elements into play in accordance
           with the complete statutory code, applying (as may be
           appropriate in the individual case) the fulcrum of undue
           harshness, or of very compelling circumstances or of
           proportionality. A resulting decision to deport a parent may
           produce hugely detrimental consequences for a child but,
           provided his or her best interests have been adequately
           identified and weighed in the balance as a primary
           consideration, the decision will be lawful. But a decision that
           does not give primary consideration to the children's best
           interests will be liable to be set aside.

           153.  The practical effect of Section 55 has been summarised in
           Zoumbas. I draw particular attention to the final parts of Lord
           Hodge's summary, reproduced for convenience:

                 "(5)  It is important to have a clear idea of a child's
                 circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests
                 before one asks oneself whether those interests are
                 outweighed by the force of other considerations;

                 (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a careful
                 examination of all relevant factors when the interests of a
                 child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

                 (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or
                 she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

           154.  To these I would respectfully add that the Section 55 duty
           falls on the decision-maker. A child will not usually be in a
           position to urge his or her point of view and the decision-maker
           cannot treat the child as if he or she had some burden of proof.

           155.  The assessment that has to be carried out is therefore one
           that is adequately informed and specific to the individual child
           as a person distinct from the offending parent. It requires  the
           decision-maker, as part of the overall assessment,  to  look  at
           matters from the  child's  point  of  view  -  in  the  case  of
           Exception 2, the question explicitly concerns undue harshness to
           the child."

77. We now apply that guidance to the facts of this case. We begin with the
    question of whether it would be unduly harsh on the children and/or  Ms
    Martson if they were to leave the United Kingdom and go to Jamaica with
    the appellant.

78. The best interests of the children are a primary consideration  in  our
    assessment of whether it would be "unduly harsh" for them to leave  the
    United Kingdom and accompany the appellant to Jamaica.

79. In considering this question, we find that it is clearly  in  the  best
    interests of all the children involved in this case  that  they  remain
    living in the United Kingdom. Although the appellant's  two  biological
    children with Ms Martson are both young (4 and 1 years  of  age),  they
    are British, have lived in this country their entire lives,  and  would
    face obvious disruption were they to go to  Jamaica.   The  appellant's
    step-daughter is now aged 7 (she will be 8 in September of this  year).
    She is in school and will have formed more significant ties outside  of
    her immediate family unit.  As with her two step-siblings, leaving  her
    country of nationality will also entail real disruption. The same  goes
    to an even greater extent for JW who is older again.  He  would  likely
    also need to leave his mother in the  United  Kingdom  if  he  were  to
    follow the appellant to Jamaica and thus the effect  on  him  would  be
    even greater.

80. The fact of the children's British nationality is, both in  respect  of
    the best  interests  assessment  and  separately,  a  relevant  factor.
    However, the weight attributable to it  in  any  given  case  is  fact-
    sensitive (see Patel (British citizen child - deportation) [2020]  UKUT
    45 (IAC)). In the present case, no evidence has  been  adduced  by  the
    appellant to show that the children would be denied entry  to  Jamaica,
    or that they would be particularly disadvantaged  there  by  virtue  of
    their British nationality. There is no evidence to show that they would
     not, for example, be able to access healthcare and education  in  that
    country. There would be no linguistic barriers. The appellant's own two
    children are very young, and his step-daughter is not  at  a  stage  of
    particularly significant educational development.  There is no evidence
    that  any  of  the  children  suffer   from   physical   or   emotional
    difficulties, such that a relocation to Jamaica would  have  a  greater
    adverse impact upon  them.  However,  we  accept  that  T  and  K  have
    developed their own social networks outside of their immediate  family,
    which they would lose if they had to move.  Their  education  would  be
    disrupted. Both are pursuing hobbies (football and acting) which it may
    not be possible to pursue in the  same  way  in  Jamaica.  Further,  we
    accept  that  the  opportunities  for  them  in  Jamaica  in  terms  of
    education, extra-curricular activities and future prospects are  likely
    to be more limited than those in the United Kingdom.

81. Before reaching a conclusion on the circumstances of the  children,  we
    must also consider the position of Ms Martson. She is a British Citizen
    who has lived all her life in  the  United  Kingdom,  has  an  extended
    network of family and friends in the United  Kingdom  and  is  studying
    with a view to building a career here. She would lose all this  if  she
    had to move to Jamaica. Although she is young  and  healthy  and  would
    encounter no language barrier in Jamaica, she  would  likely  encounter
    difficulties obtaining  employment  there,  even  if  she  delayed  her
    departure until she had completed her PGCE. She would also  suffer  the
    additional emotional impact of needing to  care  for  and  support  her
    children in such a move without any support network or knowledge of the
    country and its culture. The significant impact  of  the  move  on  her
    would likely contribute to the emotional impact  of  the  move  on  her
    children.

82. Putting all the above  together,  we  find  that  although  this  is  a
    borderline case, it would be unduly harsh for Ms Martson, T  and  K  to
    relocate to Jamaica. J is so young that if his case were considered  in
    isolation we would not have considered it unduly harsh on him, but that
    is beside the point; he is part and parcel  of  the  family  unit.  The
    position of JW is a fortiori since he would have to leave his mother in
    order to accompany the appellant to Jamaica and given that he has lived
    with her and not the appellant his entire life that  would  plainly  be
    unduly harsh.

83. We then turn to address the second limb of the question  under  section
    117C(5), namely whether it would be "unduly harsh" on the children  and
    Ms Martson if they were  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    appellant be deported to Jamaica.

84. As with the first limb, we  begin  by  assessing  the  children's  best
    interests.  It is quite clear that for T, K and  J  these  lie  in  the
    family unit remaining together.  There is nothing to suggest  that  the
    appellant has been anything other than a good father/step-father to the
    three children. It is stating the obvious that all three children would
    miss him terribly if he were to be removed from their lives. As far  as
    the two younger ones are concerned, the appellant has always been  part
    of their lives.  His step-daughter has essentially regarded him as  her
    "dad" since the age of about 2 and thus in all likelihood for  as  long
    as she can remember. As for  JW,  although  he  has  limited  in-person
    contact with the appellant, we still accept that  it  is  in  his  best
    interests to have that contact rather than not to have it.

85. Again, therefore, it is a primary consideration for us  that  the  best
    interests of all the children lie in the  appellant  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom. In the case of T, K and (to a lesser extent, because of
    his age) J, their separation from the  appellant  will  undoubtedly  be
    very distressing for all concerned: they love him  and  him  them.  The
    loss of a loving father-figure for any child will inevitably cause real
    distress and disruption, and the present case is no different. We  take
    into account Ms Martson's views, based on her experience of working  in
    a Pupil Referral Unit, that the loss of a father figure can be a factor
    that  leads  to  a  child  exhibiting  poor,  anti-social  or  criminal
    behaviour. However, Ms Martson is not an expert; she speaks  only  from
    her personal experience and we do not  consider  that  we  can,  as  Mr
    Sharma invited us to,  take  'judicial  notice'  that  the  loss  of  a
    father's physical presence as a result of deportation is likely in  all
    cases (or even in a significant proportion of cases) to lead  to  poor,
    anti-social or criminal behaviour. This is a matter that would need  to
    be demonstrated by objective evidence, and we have received none.

86. On the evidence before us as a whole, we do not conclude that, having
    regard to their specific circumstances and characteristics, the impact
    of the appellant's departure on T, K and J would be "unduly harsh", as
    that term is properly to be understood (see in particular paragraphs 50-
    53 and 56 of HA (Iraq)). None of them have any relevant medical
    conditions, special educational needs, or other relevant
    vulnerabilities which would be likely to cause them particular
    emotional and/or developmental problems. The appellant is not currently
    contributing financially to their support, so his departure will not
    have a negative effect on the family's financial circumstances. The
    physical and emotional support that the appellant provides his family
    is very important, but there are other people around who would be able
    to help Ms Martson with the children if need be (in particular her
    mother and Mr Powell; but Ms Martson's sisters may also be able to
    assist from time to time). We take into account the fact that Ms
    Martson is a loving and capable mother to T, K and J, and, in light of
    what we say in the following paragraph, although she will undoubtedly
    upset by the applicant's departure, we conclude that she would
    nonetheless continue to provide the children with strong parental care.
    The appellant will also not be completely lost to the family
    emotionally: he will be able to remain in contact with them by
    telephone and, no doubt, video and social media. In time, the family
    may be able to visit him in Jamaica.

87. The position in respect of JW is, on the evidence before us,
    necessarily weaker from that concerning T, K and J. The appellant has
    had little real involvement in his upbringing and direct contact has
    been fairly minimal in recent times. Whilst we accept that JW would be
    distressed by his father's departure, there is no evidence to suggest
    that he would not receive the love and care from his mother and step-
    father in order to come to terms with this event without suffering any
    significant detriment. It is also the case that JW has no medical or
    other needs which render him particularly vulnerable to the effects of
    the appellant leaving the United Kingdom.

88. As to Ms Martson, she will obviously miss the appellant greatly  if  he
    goes. They have been partners since 2014  and  their  relationship  has
    survived difficult tests including  the  birth  of  two  children,  the
    appellant re-offending, being subject to  deportation  proceedings  and
    required to live apart from the family at Mr Powell's  address.  It  is
    clear to us that they have a  strong  relationship  and  are  committed
    parents to their children. However, it is  nonetheless  a  relationship
    that commenced at a time when  the  appellant  was  already  liable  to
    deportation as a result of his 2010 robbery offence and  in  the  early
    years of which relationship he committed a number of  further  offences
    which  both  would  have  known  rendered  him  vulnerable  to  further
    deportation action. There was thus a degree of  precariousness  to  the
    appellant's circumstances, which (whether  or  not  it  falls  squarely
    within the meaning  of  "precarious"  in  section  116B(5)  NIAA  2002)
    nevertheless has some bearing as a matter of fact on the likely  effect
    of breaking up that relationship by deporting the appellant since it is
    likely that Ms Martson and the appellant will always have  known  that,
    if he reoffended, he might face deportation again. Nonetheless, even if
    the  relationship  had  not  been  commenced   when   the   appellant's
    circumstances were precarious, it has still  been  a  relatively  short
    relationship  and  both  the  appellant  and  Ms   Martson   have   had
    relationships previously and have lived most  of  their  lives  without
    each other. While none of these factors mean that they will be any less
    upset at having to live in different countries, they do mean that there
    is nothing about the nature of the relationship, in and of itself, that
    would make the effects of deportation on Ms Martson unduly harsh.

89. It has been argued that if the appellant is deported  Ms  Martson  will
    have to give up her PGCE and will not be able to obtain employment, but
    we do not accept that. Even now Ms Martson has only two terms remaining
    of her PGCE. She will be even closer to the end of the  course  by  the
    time the appellant is deported (if he is deported). We consider it most
    likely that the family (in particular her mother and  Mr  Powell)  will
    rally to provide her with the necessary support to enable her to finish
    her PGCE. She will then likely be successful in obtaining employment at
    which point she is likely  to  be  able  to  pay  for  some  additional
    childcare, as needed. In any event, even if her family are not able  to
    provide her with the necessary support now, or she is not successful in
    completing her course or obtaining employment, we see no reason why  Ms
    Martson should not be able to achieve these goals in a few years'  time
    when J is a little older.

90. Putting all these factors together, and having regard to  the  guidance
    set out in the case-law, we  are  satisfied  that  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on Ms Martson, T, K, J, and  JW  would  not  be
    "unduly harsh". Focusing on these children,  there  really  is  nothing
    which in our judgment raises this case beyond  the  elevated  threshold
    imposed by the "unduly harsh" stipulation. The  family  will  miss  the
    appellant deeply, and his departure will cause a significant disruption
    to family life, but these  are  the  inevitable  and,  using  the  term
    advisedly, ordinary consequences of deportation. The position of JW  is
    a fortiori given the limited nature of the relationship between him the
    appellant.

91. It follows that we do not find that Exception 2 applies in this case.

"Very compelling circumstances" under section 117C(6) NIAA 2002


92. Section 117C(6) NIAA 2002 provides:

          "(6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
          a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the  public
          interest requires deportation unless there  are  very  compelling
          circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
          2."

93. The Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at paragraph 27 held that the  fall-back
    protection of section 117C(6) is  available  to  those  who  have  been
    sentenced to less than four  years  imprisonment,  notwithstanding  its
    apparent limitation on its face to those who  have  been  sentenced  to
    longer sentences. The Court  further  confirmed  that  this  assessment
    takes the place of, and constitutes, the assessment  of  the  balancing
    exercise required to ensure compliance with  Article  8  of  the  ECHR;
    there is no room for a further balancing exercise outside  the  statute
    and the Rules: see paragraph 36. The Court held (at paragraph 32)  that
    in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  all  factors  are  relevant,
    including those that were already considered under Exceptions 1 and  2,
    although in most cases an individual who is  a  'near  miss'  case  for
    Exception 1 or Exception 2 will not be able to rely on  the  very  same
    factors as constituting "very compelling circumstances, over and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". However, the Court added:

           "32. ...But again, in principle there may be cases in which such
           an offender can  say  that  features  of  his  case  of  a  kind
           described in Exceptions 1  and  2  have  such  great  force  for
           article 8 purposes that they do constitute such very  compelling
           circumstances, whether taken by  themselves  or  in  conjunction
           with other factors relevant to article 8 but not falling  within
           the factors described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision-maker,
           be it the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the
           matters relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether
           they are sufficiently compelling to  outweigh  the  high  public
           interest in deportation.

           33.  Although there is no "exceptionality" requirement, it
           inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
           which circumstances are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the
           high public interest in deportation will be rare. The
           commonplace incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in
           poor health or the natural love between parents and children,
           will not be sufficient."

94. The Court further emphasised (at paragraph 34) that the best  interests
    of children are again relevant  to  this  assessment  and  carry  great
    weight.

95. In assessing whether there are  "very  compelling  circumstances",  the
    extent and nature of the appellant's criminal record  becomes  relevant
    and, by virtue of  section  117C(2),  "the  more  serious  the  offence
    committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest  in
    deportation of the criminal".

96. The likelihood  of  reoffending  (where  it  is  possible  to  make  an
    assessment) is also  relevant.  However,  in  HA  (Iraq)  Underhill  LJ
    emphasised (at paragraph 142) that:

           "Where a tribunal is able to make an assessment that the foreign
           criminal is unlikely to reoffend, that is  a  factor  which  can
           carry  some  weight  in  the  balance  when   considering   very
           compelling circumstances. The weight which  it  will  bear  will
           vary from case to case, but it will rarely be  of  great  weight
           bearing in mind that, as Moore-Bick LJ says in Danso, the public
           interest in the deportation of criminals is not  based  only  on
           the need to protect the public from  further  offending  by  the
           foreign   criminal   question   but   also   on   wider   policy
           considerations of deterrence and public concern."

97. In this case, the principles enunciated by the  Grand  Chamber  of  the
    Strasbourg Court in Maslov (1608/03) are  also  relevant,  specifically
    the need to have regard to "the special situation of  aliens  who  have
    spent most, if not all, of their childhood in the  host  country,  were
    brought up there and received their education there" (paragraph 74) and
    that "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent  all  or  the  major
    part of his or her childhood  and  youth  in  the  host  country,  very
    serious reasons are required  to  justify  expulsion"  (paragraph  75).
    However, we are also mindful that we must  not  slavishly  apply  these
    principles because, as the Court of Appeal explained in  The  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ  1012,
    the Strasbourg case law "does not give the same significant  weight  to
    the need for deporting foreign criminals as the UK does", and "it  sees
    the public interest principally in terms of the potential damage caused
    by the particular individual re-offending, whereas that  is  merely  an
    element - and by no means even the most  important  element  -  of  the
    relevant public interest as perceived in the UK".

98. We now apply those principles to the facts of this case.  We  begin  by
    considering the public interest in his deportation by reference to  his
    offending history and likelihood of re-offending. In this  respect,  we
    have already concluded for the reasons set out above, that his original
    offence of robbery  caused  serious  harm.  Although  his  more  recent
    offending has been less serious, it has nonetheless been persistent  in
    our judgment for the reasons we have already set  out  above.  We  also
    consider that the likelihood is that the appellant will re-offend since
    he has done so  twice  already  even  while  facing  these  deportation
    proceedings and thus at a time when he must have known that any further
    offending would make it more likely he was to be deported. Although the
    appellant's criminal record is by no means  the  most  serious  in  the
    range of those crimes for which an individual may be deported,  equally
    it is not at the lower end of the range. His original sentence of three
    years' imprisonment was towards the upper end of the medium category of
    offenders (those sentenced to more than 12 months but  less  than  four
    years' imprisonment) who are liable to deportation under NIAA 2002  and
    the Rules. While his original sentence was for offending  as  a  minor,
    and we give that factor some weight, he has persisted in his  offending
    as an adult. In short, in our judgment,  there  is  nothing  about  the
    appellant's criminal record or the likelihood of his re-offending  that
    significantly lessens the  generally  strong  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign national criminals.  Even  if  we  assume  that,
    because the appellant has lived most of his life in  the  UK,  applying
    the Maslov principles (with the caveat we have set  out  above),  there
    needs to be a greater public interest in  his  deportation  than  there
    would be in cases where the individual had come more recently  to  this
    country, that threshold is met in our view: the  appellant's  offending
    and, importantly, the likelihood of re-offending is towards  the  upper
    end of the general scale.

99. Against the public interest in deportation, we  then  set  the  factors
    relevant to the Article 8 assessment for both  the  appellant  and  his
    family. In this respect, we take as our starting point the  assessments
    that we have made  under  Exceptions  1  and  2  above,  and  the  best
    interests of the children as we have found them to be in  remaining  in
    the United Kingdom and not breaking up the family unit. For the reasons
    we have set out, we did not find that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant re-integrating into Jamaican society, and we
    did not find that the effects on his family of his deportation would be
    unduly harsh if they remained in the UK, as it appears likely  will  in
    fact be the case. The appellant's case was not, in relation  to  either
    statutory exception, a "near miss" case in our judgment, and there were
    no factors that we have already considered above which become so strong
    in a general Article 8 assessment as to become  "very  compelling".  In
    this respect, we take into account the appellant's very long  residence
    in the UK and the fact that he is completely  socially  and  culturally
    integrated (apart from his offending history), but this is not  in  our
    judgment sufficient to create a "very compelling" case.  Nor are  there
    any factors relevant to Article 8 that we have not  already  considered
    in making our assessment for the purposes of the  statutory  exceptions
    that we could now bring into consideration in relation to whether "very
    compelling" circumstances exist.

100. It  follows  that  in  our  judgment  there  are  no  "very  compelling
    circumstances"  in  the  appellant's  case  that  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation in  his  case.  Therefore,  he  cannot  satisfy
    section 117C(6) NIAA 2002.



Notice of Decision

101. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and has been set aside.

102. We re-make the decision by dismissing the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed: H Stout            Date:  18 January 2021

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Stout



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:  H Stout           Date:  18 January 2021

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Stout


APPENDIX 1: ERROR OF LAW COMPONENT TO THE UPPER TRIBUNAL'S DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10631/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              EARL ANTHONY WEBB
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Turnbull, Counsel, instructed by Bhattari and
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference,  we  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and  to
    the Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel  ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on   23
    October 2019, in which he allowed the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 13 September 2017, refusing his  human
    rights claim. That claim was made  in  response  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision  to  deport  the  Claimant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following a series of convictions, together with  alleged  associations
    with a London-based gang.

 3. The Claimant, a Jamaican national born in March 1991,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in December 1997  at  the  age  of  6.  He  was  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain on 24 August 2004. On 8  February  2010  the
    Claimant was convicted of conspiracy to commit robbery and sentenced to
    3 years in a Young Offenders' Institution.  This  prompted  deportation
    action by the Secretary of State. The  Claimant  successfully  resisted
    this on appeal in 2011 (DA/00751/2011). Notwithstanding  this  reprieve
    and the issuance of a letter from the Secretary of State warning him of
    his future conduct, the Claimant continued to commit  offences  between
    2012 and 2016, resulting in renewed deportation action against him. The
    Claimant committed  further  offences  in  November  2018  relating  to
    driving a vehicle without either a licence or insurance.

 4. The Claimant has three  biological  children  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst he did not have regular contact with the eldest of these, he has
    resided with the other two, together with their mother and her daughter
    from a previous relationship. It is these relationships, together  with
    his absence from Jamaica since the age of 6, which the Claimant  relied
    upon when putting forward his human rights claim to  the  Secretary  of
    State and when presenting his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. At that appeal, the central issues to be addressed were:

              i. whether the Claimant can bring himself  within  either  the
                 family life or private life exceptions  contained  in  sub-
                 sections 117C(4) and (5) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
                 and Asylum Act 2002, as amended ("NIAA 2002") and paras 399
                 and 399A of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")?

             ii. if not, whether the Claimant could nonetheless  show  "very
                 compelling circumstances over and above" those described in
                 the two exceptions, with reference to section 117C(6)  NIAA
                 2002  (in   other   words,   would   his   deportation   be
                 disproportionate when  balanced  against  the  very  strong
                 public interest)?

The judge's decision

 6. At para 33 the judge finds that the Claimant did not play a significant
    role in the life of his  eldest  child  and  could  not  rely  on  this
    relationship. By contrast, the judge finds that the Claimant did play a
    very significant role in the lives of his two other  children  and  his
    step-daughter. At paras 39 and 42 the judge  considered  the  issue  of
    whether the Claimant was a "persistent offender" within the meaning  of
    section 117D(2)(c)(iii) NIAA 2002.  On  the  basis  that  the  motoring
    offences of November 2018 were of a different "nature" to  the  pattern
    of previous offending, the judge concluded that he was not  in  fact  a
    "persistent offender". There is then a finding that,  contrary  to  the
    evidence adduced by the  Metropolitan  Police,  the  Claimant  was  not
    currently associated with gang culture and had not been so for  several
    years.

 7. The judge agreed with the conclusion of the  First-tier  Tribunal  from
    2011 that the Claimant was, to all intents and purposes, "a stranger to
    Jamaica". However,  notwithstanding  repeated  references  to  "private
    life", it is clear from para 42  that  the  judge  did  not  allow  the
    Claimant's appeal on the basis of  the  private  life  exception  under
    section 117C(4) NIAA 2002, but only  in  respect  of  the  family  life
    enjoyed with his partner, their two children, and the step-daughter. It
    is appropriate to quote at some length from para 42:

           "Inevitably, deportation would  have  a  substantial  effect  on
           private life  and  in  all  but  exceptional  cases  the  public
           interest requires such an outcome. However in  this  appeal  the
           evidence has been  quite  consistent  and  convincing  that  the
           Appellant plays a very significant role in the  lives  of  those
           who would be affected by his deportation, although in  the  past
           he has shown himself to have had considerable disregard for  the
           law. He has reoffended and been involved with offensive  weapons
           and the supply of drugs in the past. However he has appeared  to
           have taken his family responsibilities seriously  and  continues
           to be a caring and constant father. The best  interests  of  the
           children at an important stage in their  development,  in  these
           circumstances, are not outweighed by those other factors  raised
           in this appeal. I find that it would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
           children, given the circumstances that have been raised, for the
           Appellant  to  be  removed  to  Jamaica.  The  children  of  the
           Appellant and his partner are British and in  the  circumstances
           there is  no  realistic  likelihood,  so  I  have  been  led  to
           understand, for those remaining members of the family  to  leave
           the United Kingdom to live in Jamaica."

 8. The appeal was duly allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  and,  purportedly
    "under the immigration rules."  Of  course,  there  is  no  longer  any
    jurisdiction to allow an appeal with reference solely to the Rules.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are twofold: first, that the
    judge provided inadequate reasons for concluding that the Claimant  was
    not a "persistent offender"; secondly, that the judge failed to  direct
    himself correctly in law and/or failed to provide adequate  reasons  in
    relation to the "unduly harsh" test and the family life  exception.  On
    18 November 2019, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted
    permission.

The hearing

10. Prior to the hearing, Mr Kotas had applied to  vary  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal. In the event, this application was withdrawn
    before us and we need say no more about it.

11. Mr Kotas  relied  on  both  grounds  of  appeal.  In  response  to  our
    observation that any error by the judge relating to the Claimant  being
    a "persistent offender" was irrelevant, given that  he  was  clearly  a
    "foreign national criminal" within the meaning of section 117D(2)  NIAA
    2002 by virtue of the 2010 conviction and sentence (a status  that  had
    seemingly  been  accepted  by  the  Claimant  and  his  representatives
    throughout these proceedings), Mr Kotas nonetheless asked us to reach a
    conclusion on the issue for the sake  of  completeness  and  to  assist
    future consideration of this appeal should this become necessary.

12. As to the "unduly harsh" issue, Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the  judge's
    references to KO (Nigeria) [2018] 1 WLR  5273  and  MK  (Sierra  Leone)
    [2015) UKUT 223 (IAC) at para 41 were insufficient. In any  event,  the
    reasons provided for the conclusion that it would be "unduly harsh"  on
    the relevant children were the Claimant to  be  deported  were  plainly
    inadequate.

13. Ms Turnbull relied on her skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had decided this case based upon all of the evidence before  him.
    He was entitled  to  conclude  as  he  did,  both  in  respect  of  the
    "persistent offender" and "unduly harsh" issues.

Decision on error of law

14. In our judgment the judge materially erred in  law  when  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal.

15. Before turning to the error that is material to the outcome,  we  agree
    with Mr Kotas that  it  is  appropriate  to  consider  the  "persistent
    offender" issue. Although in our  view  the  judge  has  erred  in  his
    approach, it is clear that the Claimant  has  always  been  a  "foreign
    national criminal". Thus, the error is on one view irrelevant. However,
    in light of our conclusion on the "unduly harsh" issue, this appeal  is
    to be reconsidered in due course and it is important  that  any  errors
    are identified and considered at this stage.

16. When addressing the "persistent offender" issue at para 39,  the  judge
    failed to cite any of the  relevant  case-law  which  provides  binding
    guidance (see in particular, Chege  [2016]  UKUT  00187  (IAC)  and  SC
    (Zimbabwe) [2018] 1 WLR 4474). Paras 53 and 54  of  Chege  provide  the
    crux of the guidance:

           "53. Put simply, a "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on
           breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that  he  has  to
           keep on offending until the date of the relevant decision or  up
           to a certain time before it,  or  that  the  continuity  of  the
           offending cannot be broken. Whilst we do not accept  Mr  Malik's
           primary submission that a "persistent offender" is  a  permanent
           status that can never be lost once it is acquired, we do  accept
           his  submission  that  an  individual  can  be  regarded  as   a
           "persistent offender" for the purpose of the Rules and the  2002
           Act even though he may not have offended for some time.  Someone
           can be fairly described as a person who keeps breaking  the  law
           even if he is not currently offending. The question  whether  he
           fits that description will depend on  the  overall  picture  and
           pattern of his offending over his entire offending history up to
           that date. Each case will turn on its own facts.

           54. Plainly, a persistent offender is  not  simply  someone  who
           offends more than once. There has to  be  repeat  offending  but
           that repetition, in and of itself, will not be  enough  to  show
           persistence. There has to be  a  history  of  repeated  criminal
           conduct carried out over a sufficiently long period to  indicate
           that the person concerned is someone who keeps on  re-offending.
           However, determining whether the offending is persistent is  not
           just a mathematical exercise. How long a  period  and  how  many
           offences will be enough will depend very much on  the  facts  of
           the particular case and the  nature  and  circumstances  of  the
           offending. The criminal offences need not be the same,  or  even
           of the same character as each other. Persistence may be shown by
           the fact that  a  person  keeps  committing  the  same  type  of
           offence, but it may equally be shown by the  fact  that  he  has
           committed a wide variety of different offences over a period  of
           time."

17. A failure to cite applicable case-law will not normally  result  in  an
    error of law. However, it may be indicative of an error of approach. At
    the very  least,  quoting  relevant  passages  will  likely  assist  in
    addressing a judge's mind to the right questions.

18. The guidance in Chege, which was specifically approved by the Court  of
    Appeal in SC (Zimbabwe), shows that a careful assessment is required of
    the offending history. Whilst an individual with a very poor  past  can
    potentially lose the status of "persistent  offender",  an  absence  of
    very recent offending will not necessarily be sufficient  for  this  to
    occur. Further, and  importantly,  the  epithet  will  not  necessarily
    disappear simply because more recent offending is of a different nature
    from previous conduct.

19. Having regard to the above, the judge has clearly gone wrong in  basing
    his conclusion that the Claimant was not a "persistent offender" purely
    on the basis that the most recent offences in November 2018 were  of  a
    different nature from those committed in the past.  The  error  can  be
    categorised either as a misdirection in law or  a  failure  to  provide
    adequate reasons.

20. There is a further error here. In refusing the Claimant's human  rights
    claim, the Secretary of State  had  clearly  asserted  that  he  was  a
    "persistent offender" and a person whose offending had caused  "serious
    harm". These are alternatives. The judge  has  failed  to  address  the
    second possibility.

21. We now turn to the  material  error  itself.  Whilst  it  is  generally
    unhelpful to compare the facts of one case with those  of  another  (as
    the higher courts have repeatedly reminded us), there is some value  in
    referring to PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213. The appellant  in  that
    case was the father  of  three  minor  children,  with  whom  he  lived
    together with their mother. The children  were  all  British  citizens.
    Having committed a series of offences,  the  Secretary  of  State  took
    deportation  action.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  PG's  appeal,
    essentially on the basis that deportation would be contrary to the best
    interests of the children and that in turn it would be  "unduly  harsh"
    on them if he were to leave. That decision  was  upheld  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The Court of Appeal concluded that on the facts as  found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, the conclusion that it would be "unduly harsh"
    on the children was one at which no rational decision-maker could  have
    arrived. Thus, the Secretary of State's appeal was allowed outright and
    the deportation order restored.

22. Although the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal in the present case
    have not been framed in terms of an out-and-out rationality  challenge,
    PG (Jamaica) illustrates the need to provide clear and careful reasons,
    with specific regard to the applicable legal framework,  when  reaching
    conclusions on the "unduly harsh" issue. It is quite clear to  us  that
    at para 42 the judge has failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusion that it would be "unduly harsh" on  the  children  were  the
    Claimant to be deported  to  Jamaica.  His  reliance  on  the  Claimant
    playing a "very significant role" in the lives of the  children,  their
    best interests, and the apparent seriousness with  which  the  Claimant
    was taking his family responsibilities, does not  disclose  sustainable
    reasons for the conclusion that this was a  case  with  features  going
    beyond the inevitable and expected consequences of deportation.

23. We therefore set the judge's decision aside.

Disposal

24. This appeal shall be retained in the Upper Tribunal  and  the  decision
    remade. There is a good deal  of  evidence  on  file  relating  to  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in October 2019. There has  been
    no application by the  Claimant  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce new evidence,  nor  has
    there been any indication that there have been any material changes  in
    the Claimant's circumstances.

25. As matters stand, we see no reason  to  set  this  matter  down  for  a
    further hearing. Having said that, it is appropriate for us to  receive
    further written submissions from both parties.  This  is  in  the  main
    because in addition to re-deciding the "unduly harsh"  issue,  we  will
    have to address the private life exception under section  117C(4)  NIAA
    2002 and para 399A of the Rules and, if appropriate, whether there  are
    "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"  either  of  the  two
    exceptions. The judge  did  not  engage  with  these  issues.  Finally,
    notwithstanding the undisputed fact that the  Claimant  is  a  "foreign
    national criminal", for the sake of completeness we may wish to reach a
    conclusion on whether  the  Claimant  is  a  "persistent  offender"  or
    whether his offending has caused "serious harm".

26. When remaking the decision, the following findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are preserved:

              i. the Claimant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                 his current partner;

             ii.  the  Claimant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                 relationship with his two biological children with whom  he
                 lives, and with his step-daughter;

            iii. the Claimant left Jamaica at the age of 6;

             iv. the Claimant is not currently a member of a gang.



Anonymity

27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction. We see  no
    good reason for making one at this stage and do not do so.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

A remaking of the decision in this appeal shall be  made  following  receipt
of further written submissions from the parties.

Directions to the parties

   1) No later than 9 days from the issuance of this decision, the  Claimant
      shall file and serve written  submissions  on  the  following  matters
      (with reference to the evidence before the Upper Tribunal):

          a) Whether the Claimant is a "persistent offender" or whether his
             offending has caused "serious harm";

          b) Whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the Claimant's  partner
             and three relevant children to leave the  United  Kingdom  and
             reside in Jamaica;

          c) Whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the Claimant's  partner
             and the three relevant children to remain  in  United  Kingdom
             were the Claimant to be deported to Jamaica alone;

          d) Whether the Claimant is "socially and  culturally  integrated"
             in the United Kingdom;

          e) Whether there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
             Claimant's integration into Jamaican society;

          f) Whether, notwithstanding an inability to satisfy either of the
             two exceptions, it would be  disproportionate  to  deport  the
             Claimant.

   2)  No  later  than  9  days  from  receipt  of  the  Claimant's  written
      submissions, the Secretary of State is to file  and  serve  a  written
      response.


Signed   [pic]         Date: 20 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
APPENDIX 2: DIRECTIONS ISSUED ON 16 APRIL 2020

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10631/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                              Earl Anthony Webb
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DIRECTIONS NOTICE (T)

    1. This appeal is awaiting a remaking decision  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
       following its decision, promulgated on 26 February 2020, to set aside
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. At the end of the  error  of
       law decision, both parties were directed to file  and  serve  written
       submissions in respect of a number of issues. The  decision  in  this
       appeal was to be remade in light of these written submissions and the
       preserved findings of fact set out  at  [26]  of  the  error  of  law
       decision.

    2. In the event, written submissions from the Appellant received by  the
       Upper Tribunal on 6 March 2020. Having reviewed the  file,  I  cannot
       see any response  from  the  Respondent.  It  is  possible  that  the
       intervening event of the Covid-19  pandemic  may  have  affected  the
       ability of the Respondent to file and serve her written submissions.

    3. The Appellant's written submissions have now  been  provided  to  the
       Respondent by the Upper Tribunal.

    4. It remains the intention of the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision
       in this appeal based upon written submissions from the parties.

    5. In light of the above, I issue the following additional directions.

       Directions to the parties

        1) No later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the date of
           sending out will be stated on the covering  letter  or  covering
           email), the Respondent is to file and serve written submissions,
           addressing the issues set out in the directions at  the  end  of
           the error of law  decision  and  in  light  of  the  Appellant's
           written submissions;

        2) If so advised, the Appellant may then file and serve a reply, no
           later than 21 days after this notice is sent out;

        3) With liberty to apply

Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  any  address
provided by a named Senior Presenting Officer. The Respondent  should  serve
her  submissions  to  any  email  address  provided   by   the   Appellant's
solicitors.


Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX 3: DIRECTIONS ISSUED ON 18 MAY 2020

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10631/2017 (T)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                              Earl Anthony Webb
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        FURTHER DIRECTIONS NOTICE (T)

    1. The Tribunal last issued directions on 16 April 2020. The  respondent
       was to respond within 14 days. There has been no response.

    2. In previous correspondence the Senior Presenting Officer with conduct
       of the case indicated that he had been unable  to  see  the  relevant
       file  and  was  seeking  to  obtain  particular  documents  from  the
       appellant's representatives. In  light  of  the  circumstances  as  a
       whole, I will not proceed to remake the decision in  this  appeal  at
       this juncture. Instead, I make the following further directions.  The
       respondent is on notice that a response to  these  directions  within
       the time limit set out below is imperative, even if she is not  in  a
       position to file and serve final  submissions  due  to  the  lack  of
       relevant evidence.

       Directions to the parties

        1) No later than 10 days after this notice is sent out (the date of
           sending out will be stated on the covering  letter  or  covering
           email), the respondent is to file and serve written submissions,
           addressing the issues set out in the directions at  the  end  of
           the Tribunal's error  of  law  decision  and  in  light  of  the
           appellant's written submissions of 6 March 2020;

        2) No later than 10 days after this notice  is  sent  out,  if  the
           respondent is not in a position to file and serve submissions in
           accordance with direction 1), she must state this with  reasons,
           and indicate her view as to an appropriate way  to  resolve  any
           practical difficulties;

        3) If so advised, and no later than 17 days after  this  notice  is
           sent out the appellant may then file and serve a  reply  to  any
           submissions or other response  provided  by  the  respondent  in
           accordance with directions 1) or 2);

        4) With liberty to apply

Submissions should be filed and served using the email addresses  previously
used in correspondence.


Signed:  H Norton-Taylor        Dated: 18 May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX 4: NOTE AND DIRECTIONS OF 6 JULY 2020

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10631/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                              earl anthony webb
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                         NOTE AND DIRECTIONS NOTICE

    1. Having considered the written submissions provided  by  the  parties,
       the passage of time since the consideration of the  evidence  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal and since  the  Upper  Tribunal's  error  of  law
       decision, and the nature of the issues to be  addressed  in  remaking
       the decision in this appeal, I have reached  the  conclusion  that  a
       further hearing is now required.

    2. In coming to this conclusion, I have not been assisted by the absence
       of any application under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 for new evidence to be adduced.  It may be  that
       there is no such evidence.  However, the evidence  that  is  on  file
       and/or the written submissions from the appellant do not  address  in
       sufficient detail some of the core issues in the case; in  particular
       (but not limited to), the question of whether there  would  be  "very
       significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration  into  Jamaican
       society if he were to be deported.

    3. The parties are reminded of the preserved findings of fact,  set  out
       in the error of law decision.

       Directions to the parties

        1) Any application by the appellant to induce  new  evidence  under
           rule 15(2A) of the Procedure Rules must be made within  14  days
           of  this  Note  and  Directions  Notice  being  sent  out.   The
           appellant is reminded that updated witness statements constitute
           new evidence;

        2) Whether an application is made or not, the appellant  shall,  no
           later than 14 days of this Note and Directions Notice being sent
           out, state his views as to whether the resumed hearing shall  be
           conducted remotely or on a face-to-face basis;

        3) No later than 21 days after this Note and Directions  Notice  is
           sent out, the respondent shall state her views as to the  method
           of the resumed hearing;

        4) With liberty to apply


Signed: H Norton-Taylor         Date:  6 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

