
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10076/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 August 2019                |On 15 August 2019               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. U.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor as agent for A-R Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, entered the  United  Kingdom
         legally in April 2005 with leave to remain as a student. His  leave
         to remain was then extended on a number of occasions, in  different
         capacities. On 23 May 2016 he made in time, an  application  for  a
         grant of indefinite leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  his  long
         residency. This was refused on 16  April  2018  with  reference  to
         paragraphs 276B(i)(a) and 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.  As  to
         the first, the Respondent relied upon  a  break  in  the  chain  of
         lawful residence between 13.12.07 and 2.10.08. As  to  the  second,
         the Respondent  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  declared
         significantly different earnings figures in the course of  previous
         applications for leave to remain, to those which had been  declared
         to HMRC from time to time for the same periods when  declaring  his
         income for taxation purposes. Thus the Respondent inferred that  he
         had been dishonest in either the information provided to HMRC or in
         support of his applications for leave to remain.

      2. The Appellant's Article 8 appeal against that decision was heard on
         18 January 2019, and it was allowed by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         SLL Boyes in a decision promulgated on 15 March 2019.

      3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal by decision  of  20
         June 2019 of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  the  basis  it  was
         arguable the Judge had erred in finding  the  Appellant  had  acted
         innocently.

      4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.




    The hearing

      5. The hearing of the appeal was originally listed for 2 August  2019,
         but on that occasion the entire list had to  be  adjourned  because
         the presenting  officer  was  indisposed  on  the  morning  of  the
         hearing. Having consulted the Appellants and their  representatives
         to ascertain their availability, and  secured  a  court  room,  the
         entire list was adjourned to 7 August 2019 in an effort to minimise
         the expense and delay that the parties would otherwise face (two of
         the appeals being privately funded). Time for the  service  of  the
         Notice of Hearings was thereby abridged.

      6. On 6 August 2019 the Respondent applied by email of 1255 hours  for
         an adjournment of the entire list on the basis it  was  anticipated
         that it would not be possible to provide a presenting officer as  a
         result of seasonal staff shortages. That application was refused by
         email of 1414 hours on the basis there remained ample time for  the
         Respondent to  secure  adequate  representation,  if  necessary  by
         resort to the services of the Bar. The  application  has  not  been
         renewed. The Respondent did not attend the hearing.

      7. In the circumstances I was satisfied that the Respondent  is  aware
         of the hearing. I was not  satisfied  there  was  any  good  reason
         demonstrated as to why the appeal should be adjourned once again of
         the Tribunal's own motion. The issues were simple, and  it  was  in
         the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing without  delay
         and  with  minimal  further  expense,  and  the  appeal   therefore
         proceeded in the Respondent's absence, having considered paragraphs
         2, 36, and 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
         2008.




    The challenge raised in the grounds

      8. The grounds to the application for permission that was made to  the
         First-tier Tribunal asserted that the Judge's conclusion  that  the
         Appellant   acted   innocently   rather   than   dishonestly    was
         misconceived. The draftsman was plainly under the  impression  that
         the Judge's decision turned upon the failure of HMRC to pursue  the
         Appellant  for  penalties  and   interest   (so   that   this   was
         determinative of the issue of innocence/dishonesty), and  thus  set
         out  at  length  why  that  failure  would  be  immaterial  to  the
         assessment of the evidence that the Judge was required to undertake
         in order to decide whether the Respondent had discharged the burden
         of proof to show dishonesty on the Appellant's part.

      9. The difficulty  with  any  challenge  framed  in  those  terms,  as
         identified in the refusal of permission  to  appeal  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Gumsley of 3 May 2019, is that Judge Boyes  did  not
         approach the issue in the manner alleged.  Judge  Boyes  explicitly
         stated that he  did  not  consider  the  approach  of  HMRC  to  be
         conclusive, but that it was a matter  that  he  had  to  take  into
         account [49]. He also took into account that it was  HMRC  who  had
         identified further errors in the approach taken by the  Appellant's
         accountant to his financial affairs, when his tax  return  was  re-
         submitted [50].

     10. Although there is no express reference to it in his decision, I  am
         satisfied that the approach taken by Judge Boyes to dishonesty  was
         consistent with the guidance to be found  in  AA  (Nigeria)  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 773; mere negligence, or an innocent mistake, is not to be
         equated  with  dishonesty.   The  Judge  did  follow  the   correct
         structure, and properly applied the principles  set  out  in  Royal
         Brunei Airlines v Tan [1995] UKPC 4, so as to  distinguish  between
         mere carelessness and dishonesty

     11. In my  judgement  the  approach  Judge  Boyes  took  was  therefore
         entirely consistent with the guidance to  be  found  in  Balajigari
         [2019] EWCA Civ 673, promulgated subsequent to the hearing. It  was
         always entirely open to an Appellant when seeking to demonstrate an
         innocent explanation for  the  discrepancy  between  the  financial
         information  provided  to  the  Respondent  and  to  HMRC  to  make
         reference to the fact that HMRC had either  decided  to  impose  no
         penalty, or, to impose a lower rate penalty as evidence that  their
         enquiries had indicated carelessness  or  innocent  mistake  rather
         than dishonesty. Equally it was necessary that the Tribunal bear in
         mind that HMRC may decide not to investigate a case fully for other
         reasons, and that the decisions of HMRC are  not  determinative  of
         the issues the Tribunal is required to make findings upon.

     12. When the application  for  permission  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal the original grounds were repeated, and  in  addition,  it
         was asserted that the guidance in Balajigari was to the effect;

           . If HMRC has not imposed a penalty it does  not  preclude  UKVI
             from making a finding on dishonesty [#66-7]

           . The SSHDs findings under 322(5) are not bound by HMRC's  views
             as these are two public bodies performing different  functions
             under different statutory powers [#69]

           . Each case will depend on its own facts, but, where an earnings
             discrepancy is relied on, it is  unlikely  that  the  Tribunal
             will be prepared to accept a mere assertion from an  applicant
             or  their  accountant  that  the  discrepancy  was  simply   a
             "mistake" without a full  and  particularised  explanation  of
             what the mistake was and how it arose [#106]

     13. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the grant  of  permission
         to appeal, I am satisfied that this challenge is misconceived.  The
         Respondent does not assert that the decision  is  perverse  in  the
         sense that it is one that was  not  open  to  Judge  Boyes  on  the
         evidence before him. The decision that  he  reached  is  more  than
         adequately reasoned; MD (Turkey)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958.  If  the
         grounds are intended to advance a complaint that the  Judge  failed
         to give cogent reasons, the reality is that he gave ample reasons.

     14. There is of course only one standard of proof applicable: the civil
         standard of the balance of probabilities. It is  quite  clear  from
         his decision that the Judge applied throughout the correct standard
         of proof,

     15. The Respondent has not identified any material  evidence  that  was
         left out of account or any irrelevant matter that was brought  into
         account. Although the guidance to be found in  Balajigari  was  not
         available to Judge Boyes it is perfectly clear that his decision is
         consistent with it. He did not treat the failure of  HMRC  to  levy
         penalties as determinative of the Appellant's honesty, but  instead
         looked at all of the evidence before him, and concluded as  he  was
         entitled to do, that this was one of  those  occasions  upon  which
         there had been a genuine and innocent mistake.

     16. The Appellant  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the  scale  of  the
         discrepancy between  the  financial  information  provided  to  the
         Respondent and to HMRC was insufficient  to  shift  the  evidential
         burden to the Appellant to provide an apparently credible  innocent
         explanation for what had occurred.  If he were able to do so,  that
         would in turn give rise to an evidential burden upon the Respondent
         to establish that the explanation proffered was  untrue.  That  was
         the President's analysis of how  the  evidential  burden  of  proof
         could shift between  the  parties  during  an  appeal  Muhandiramge
         (section S-LTR.1.17) [2015] UKUT  675.  As  such  Judge  Boyes  was
         entitled to find that the Respondent had failed  to  discharge  the
         legal  burden  of  establishing  dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the
         Appellant. There was in  those  circumstances  no  enhanced  public
         interest in the dismissal of the Article 8 appeal.

     17. Neither the grounds to the application  for  permission  to  appeal
         advanced  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  the  grounds  to  the
         application advanced to the Upper Tribunal make  any  reference  to
         the  finding  by  Judge  Boyes  that  the  Appellant  had  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 276B in relation to  the  period  from  6
         October 2008 until the date of the hearing on 18 January 2019,  and
         that he was as a result entitled to a grant of ILR.

     18. Accordingly it was open to the Judge to conclude that the  decision
         under appeal engaged the Appellant's Article 8 rights and that  the
         balance of proportionality lay in the appeal  being  allowed  since
         the Appellant had established that he met the requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

     19. In the circumstances, and as set out above, I am not satisfied that
         the Judge fell into any material error of law when he  allowed  the
         Article 8 appeal, notwithstanding the terms in which permission  to
         appeal was granted. In my judgement the grounds  fail  to  disclose
         any material error of law in the approach taken by the Judge to the
         public interest that requires his decision  to  be  set  aside  and
         remade.




   DECISION

   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 15
   March 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision  to  allow
   the Appellant's human rights appeal which requires that decision  to  be
   set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 7 August 2019




