
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10556/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th April 2017                       |On 8th May 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                     h.a.
                                     s.a.
                                    s1.a.
                                    a.a.
                                    e.a.
                                    s2.a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Singh, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Office

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made because these cases centre around the claims
of four minors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, a family of six all of whom are citizens  of  Pakistan,
    appeal with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge McGavin) dismissing  their  appeals  against
    the Respondent's refusal to grant them leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on account of their family/private life.

Background

 2. The first and second named Appellants (Mr H.A. and Mrs  S.A.)  are  the
    parents of the remaining four Appellants, who are their dependent minor
    children. The eldest two have been in the United Kingdom for more  than
    seven years.  The eldest child (S1.A.) was born in Pakistan but arrived
    in the United Kingdom, aged 15 months, along with her  parents  on  4th
    March 2007.  They were in possession of a family visit visa valid  from
    4th December 2006 until 4th June 2007.   The  first  and  second  named
    Appellants did not seek to regularise their stay  on  expiry  of  their
    visit visa and remain in the United Kingdom without  leave.   They  had
    three more children (A.A., E.A. and S2.A.) who were born in the  United
    Kingdom in 2007, 2010 and 2014 respectively.

 3. On 6th March 2014 H.A. claimed asylum seven  years  after  his  arrival
    here.  The other family members were named as dependants on that claim.
     H.A.'s asylum claim was refused on  17th  April  2015  and  an  appeal
    against the refusal was dismissed on 29th October 2015.  An application
    was  then  made  for  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  but  this
    application was refused on 26th November 2015 and by 4th  January  2016
    H.A.'s appeal rights were exhausted.

 4. On 1st February 2016 H.A. then applied for leave to remain for himself,
    his wife and their four children under the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of family life and private life.  That application was refused on
    20th April 2016 by the Respondent  in  a  letter  of  that  date.   The
    Appellants'  appealed  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal

     The FtT Decision

 5. When the appeals came before the FtT on 7th July 2016,  the  Appellants
    elected to have their cases decided by way of a paper  hearing.   In  a
    well constructed and lengthy decision, the FtT Judge  took  account  of
    the documentary evidence which had been  provided.  In  particular  she
    noted there had been produced on behalf of the  family  a  social  work
    report, which was neither signed nor dated but did  indicate  that  the
    author had met the parents and children on 26th  April  2016  and  30th
    April 2016.

 6. The judge noted that the first and second Appellants are aged 47 and 37
    years respectively and that they entered the United Kingdom in 2007  as
    visitors. They overstayed their leave raising an asylum claim in  2014,
    seven years after their arrival. Their eldest child  who  was  born  in
    Pakistan accompanied them in 2007 and was 15 months old  at  the  time.
    The judge noted that at the time of the hearing before her, the  eldest
    child was 10 years of age (she is now 11 years of age) and had lived in
    the United Kingdom for eight and a half years.  The second child of the
    family who was born here was 8 years of age at the time of the  hearing
    and had therefore lived his whole life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    third and fourth children were aged 5 years and 21 months respectively.

 7. The judge noted the  evidence  contained  in  the  social  work  report
    concerning the family but gave cogent reasons why  she  did  not  place
    significant weight on it. She noted further that it was reasonable  for
    the two eldest children to leave the UK as they would be  leaving  with
    their parents and siblings as a complete family unit.  She  noted  that
    there was nothing in the evidence to persuade her that the  two  eldest
    children would be unable to attend school in Pakistan,  nor  that  they
    would be unable to cope with learning Urdu.  She  considered  that  the
    best interests of the children would be to remain  with  their  parents
    and therefore she dismissed all appeals.

 8. The Appellants' appealed the decision and permission being  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, renewed their applications  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith and the
    relevant parts of the grant reads as follows:

         "The grounds are difficult to follow but  read  as  a  whole,  they
         challenge the judge's treatment of  the  cases  of  the  two  elder
         children, both of whom have been in the  UK  for  more  than  seven
         years.  Although I share some of the  judge's  concerns  about  the
         'social worker report' the judge indicates at [34] that he can only
         give this weight as a letter of support.  The judge was  unarguably
         entitled to place that caveat on the weight to be given.  There  is
         though thereafter arguably no adequate consideration of the content
         of the report.  The judge has therefore  arguably  failed  to  take
         into account material evidence relating to the two children's  best
         interests.   I  am  also  concerned  that  by   considering   those
         children's best interests only after having reached the  view  that
         it is reasonable to expect them to return  to  Pakistan  [38],  the
         judge arguably fails to recognise the primacy of those interests as
         a consideration."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    FtT discloses an error of law requiring it to be set aside and remade.

UT Hearing

 9. Before me Mr Singh appeared for  the  Appellants  and  Ms  Fijiwala  on
    behalf of the Secretary  of  State.   Mr  Singh's  submissions  centred
    around the grant of permission and, following those lines, he submitted
    that the FtT had erred in two major respects:

       . the judge had failed  to  adequately  take  into  account  material
         evidence relating to the best interests of the two eldest  children
         of the family; and

       . the judge erred in failing to take into account the best  interests
         of the children as the primary consideration.

10. In expanding on the first point  Mr  Singh  said  that  the  judge  had
    apparently taken issue with the expertise of the author of  the  social
    work report [26].  He said that the qualifications of the social worker
    were listed and had been set out in the body of  the  report.   Further
    the social worker had said that he had interviewed not only the  eldest
    two children of the family but also had taken into account  the  wishes
    of the third child (the 5 year old) and therefore  there  was  material
    that the judge had not considered.

11. He said that the judge and her assessment of the evidence had seemingly
    not taken into account other evidence which was available to her.  When
    pressed by me at this point to particularise what  the  other  evidence
    consisted of he submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account evidence of supporting  reports  from  the  children's  school,
    family friends and their church.  In addition the children's own wishes
    had not been considered.  All those matters showed the  extent  of  the
    integration of the children in the community.

12. Ms Fijiwala also began her submissions by  referring  directly  to  the
    permission grant.  She said it was important to note that the grant  of
    permission also shared the judge's concerns  about  the  social  worker
    report.  She then referred to [36] to [38] of the FtT's decision.   She
    said that the judge was  clearly  setting  out  the  situation  of  the
    parents and their background, and that  was  relevant  because  it  was
    necessary to place the children's claims in context.

13. By [42] the judge deals  in  depth  with  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  Reference is made throughout the decision to the  supporting
    material. Clearly the judge kept it in mind because she made  reference
    to the children's education and to other parts  of  the  social  worker
    report in [38].  It had to be borne in  mind  that  this  was  a  paper
    hearing and the cases of the two eldest children  relied  heavily  upon
    the comments and evidence contained in the social worker  report.   The
    judge for good reason had found that she could not  place  weight  upon
    that report, having found that the author had overstepped his remit  by
    presenting a report as if he were an advocate on behalf of  the  family
    rather than setting out a report to assist the court.

14. Finally she drew my attention to MA (Pakistan) and Others  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705.  She submitted that in any event  the  central  point  of  the
    present appeals revolved around the question of  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the eldest two children of this family to relocate
    with their parents and other siblings to  Pakistan.   She  referred  to
    paragraph 47 of MA which she  said  provides  guidance  that  the  best
    interests of a child are not determinative in the reasonableness  test.
    Even where the best interests of the child are to stay, it may  not  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave.  She said that  this  was
    clearly the approach adopted by the FtT in the present appeals and  the
    judge had taken into account all the relevant  factors.   The  decision
    should therefore stand.

Consideration

15. As I understand the grant  of  permission  and  Mr  Singh's  subsequent
    submissions, it was said to be arguable that the FtT had erred  in  two
    respects;

       . because  there  was  no  adequate  consideration  of  the  material
         contained in the social worker report and thus the judge had failed
         to take  into  account  material  evidence  relating  to  the  best
         interests of the two eldest children of the family; and

       . the judge had failed to recognise the primacy  of  those  interests
         because she may have reached a  view  that  it  was  reasonable  to
         expect the eldest two children to relocate to Pakistan  before  she
         considered their best interests.

16. I find that these arguable errors are interrelated.  They raise  issues
    concerning:

      a) the best interests of the children, primarily the eldest two; and

      b) on  account  of  the  eldest  two  children  of  the  family  being
         qualifying children, the reasonableness test as set out in  Section
         117(6)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

17. I start my consideration by dealing with  the  first  point.   The  FtT
    indisputably gave the social worker's report  its  full  consideration.
    That report set out that the eldest two children have excellent  school
    reports, many friends and good community  connections  from  neighbours
    and church.  However, the judge  sets  out  in  [26]  to  [34]  of  her
    decision, a number of lengthy paragraphs discussing the content of  the
    report and her reasons as to why she can place little weight  upon  it.
    The grant of permission poses the question of whether the FtT failed to
    take into account material evidence relating to the best  interests  of
    the eldest two children.  I find that this is not the case.  The  judge
    can only deal with the evidence before her  and  in  [29]  specifically
    mentions school reports and letters from  the  children.   Therefore  I
    find that there is no evidence that the judge has not kept in mind  the
    material evidence concerning the eldest children's progress  at  school
    and community ties.

18. The report discloses  that  there  are  no  health  problems  with  the
    children.  The family unit is a happy one with no  reported  issues  of
    concern.  The children have expressed the wish that they do not want to
    return to Pakistan.

19. The report disclosed some concern on whether or not the children  spoke
    sufficient Urdu.  The judge in fact discounted that because as she  set
    out the parents both speak Urdu and it was clear  that  some  Urdu  was
    spoken at home because of the comment that the children struggled  with
    it.  The judge did not consider that to be an obstacle  to  return  and
    that is a finding that she was entitled to make.

20. Given the ages of the children it is hardly surprising that  they  have
    expressed a wish to remain in the UK.  They are not  mature  enough  to
    make such a decision for themselves and are making it from  a  position
    of knowing life only in the UK.  The FtT judge was concerned about  the
    tenor of what the children said to the social worker concerning life in
    Pakistan.  It must be remembered that H.A. claimed asylum  and  it  was
    found that that claim was not a credible one and therefore there was no
    risk to his return together with his family members back  to  Pakistan.
    In this context,  it  is  not  helpful  that  the  social  work  report
    providing evidence on behalf of the eldest  two  children  includes  an
    observation stating:

         "Surely this is not a safe country to send the children and sending
         them  to  Pakistan  would  be  psychological  (sic)  damaging   and
         traumatising to treat innocent children who already call  Liverpool
         their home."

21. Contrary to Mr Singh's assertion, I find that the judge did not fail to
    adequately take into account material evidence relating to  the  eldest
    two children of the family.  She has  had  regard  to  the  report  put
    before her and I see no evidence that the judge has  somehow  sidelined
    material evidence.  Looking at the evidence holistically, the judge has
    reached a conclusion that the best interests of the eldest children are
    to  remain  with  their  parents  and  return  to  their   country   of
    nationality.

22. Likewise so far as the second point is concerned I see nothing to raise
    concerns that the judge has failed to  recognise  the  primacy  of  the
    children's  best  interests  as  a  consideration  before  she  reached
    conclusions on the reasonableness test.

23. As Ms Fijiwale pointed out the  decision  must  be  read  as  a  whole.
    Whilst it is correct to say that by [35] the judge  seemingly  makes  a
    conclusion on the reasonableness test, it is clear that she  was  aware
    and kept in mind that the best interests of the children are  of  prime
    importance.  One needs look no further than [10] to see that the  judge
    reminds herself and takes into account the skeleton argument  submitted
    on behalf of the Appellants.  That skeleton argument sets out that  the
    best interests of the children are paramount (sic) and  refers  to  the
    social worker's report.  The judge then  takes  this  up  at  [28]  and
    outlines that the author of the social work report states that  he  has
    been instructed to explore the best interests and views  of  the  three
    eldest children.

24. The judge then at [38] and [42] goes into considerable detail outlining
    that the best interests of the children are a primary consideration.

25. Altogether I find I am satisfied for the foregoing  reasons,  that  the
    decision of the FtT discloses no material error of law requiring it  to
    be set aside.  The decision therefore stands.


Notice of Decision

There being no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
these appeals are dismissed.

Appeals dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


