

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/10670/2015

                                                   HU/10673/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2017                          |On 18 September 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                               ebrima Suwaneh
                               ALHAGIE SUWANEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ali of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellants were born on 9th September  1997  and  3rd  April  1999,
    respectively, and are citizens of  Gambia.   It  is  claimed  on  their
    behalf that they are brothers and that Basidy Suwaneh  ("the  sponsor")
    is their father.

2.   They applied for entry clearance to settle with their  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom, but their applications  were  refused  on  8th  October
    2015.  The appellants appealed and their appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thomas at Sheldon Court on 22nd February 2017.

3.    The  respondent's  refusal  of   entry   clearance   highlighted   the
    respondent's reasons for refusing the application under  paragraph  297
    of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395, as  amended  ("the
    Immigration  Rules").   The  refusal  of  entry  clearance  for  Ebrima
    Suwaneh, the first named appellant, dated 8th October, 2015 said:-

         "You have applied to join your father, Basidy Suwaneh, who I  shall
         refer to as your sponsor.  You have stated on your application form
         that your sponsor has been in the UK since December 2003.


         You have not produced sufficient documentary  evidence  to  confirm
         your relationship with your sponsor.   The  birth  certificate  you
         have provided was not registered until 11/01/2010 -  a  significant
         time after your claimed birth.  You  have  produced  no  reasonable
         explanation for this delay in registering your birth.  There are  a
         number of  documents  that  you  could  have  submitted  with  your
         application to confirm your  relationship.   The  absence  of  such
         documents leads me  to  doubt  your  family  circumstances  are  as
         stated.  Furthermore I note you have provided only  one  photograph
         that has  been  taken  with  your  sponsor.   I  am  therefore  not
         satisfied  that  this  photograph   in   isolation   satisfactorily
         evidences that you and your sponsor are related as claimed.


         In support of your application you have provided a letter from your
         sponsor.  Your sponsor states in the letter, "since we all left for
         the UK, they were in my dad's guidance".  I note that  your  mother
         was granted entry clearance to join your  sponsor  in  2010.   Your
         sponsor goes on to state that your mother suffers the worst due  to
         the separation, which is causing her  stress  all  the  time.   The
         letter also states that your grandfather, due to his health, is  no
         longer able to look after you properly.  Your sponsor  also  states
         in his letter that your  sibling  (Lamin  Suwaneh)  and  aunt  (Aja
         Ceesay) is your main point of contact in Gambia.  The only evidence
         that you have provided to  demonstrate  what  your  current  living
         arrangements are is the letter mentioned above.


         I also note you have submitted money transfer  slips  addressed  to
         your elder  sibling  (Lamin  Suwaneh);  however,  I  must  consider
         whether  your  sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility   for   your
         upbringing.  Sole responsibility is not simply made up of financial
         contributions.  It encompasses the whole panoply of essentials  for
         the proper upbringing of a child including accommodation,  material
         provision, discipline and guidance in such matters as social, moral
         and religious affairs.


         I have also taken into consideration  the  call  records  for  your
         sponsor between January 2015 and June 2015.  However,  I  am  aware
         your sponsor has other family members in Gambia, and  there  is  no
         satisfactory evidence that these calls were made to you.  Therefore
         I cannot be satisfied the above call  records  demonstrate  regular
         contact between you and your sponsor throughout the period of  your
         relationship.  I also note your sponsor states that he contacts you
         via the applications Viber  and  Skype.   However  no  satisfactory
         evidence has been provided to confirm this.


         I have also taken into consideration the copy of a calling card and
         three mobile top  up  vouchers,  however  there  are  no  names  or
         personal details on these and of themselves do not demonstrate what
         calls the cards were used for, or even if the cards were brought by
         and used by you or your sponsor.  I therefore cannot  be  satisfied
         they demonstrate the stated phone contact.


         Furthermore, I need to establish whether your sponsor in the UK has
         had sole responsibility for you.  As  a  parent  claiming  to  have
         'sole responsibility' for you,  your  sponsor  must  satisfactorily
         demonstrate that he has, usually for a substantial period of  time,
         been the main  person  exercising  parental  responsibility.   Your
         sponsor must show that he has had,  and  still  has,  the  ultimate
         responsibility for the major decisions relating to your upbringing,
         and provides you with the majority of the financial  and  emotional
         support you require.  It must also be shown that  he  has  had  and
         continues to have care and control over you.  Your sponsor has  not
         lived with you for almost 12 years, since you were four years  old,
         and there is no satisfactory evidence as to how many times  he  has
         been to visit you or that he has had any involvement in your  life.
         Therefore given the duration you have not lived  with  the  sponsor
         and the lack of evidence of his involvement in your life, I am  not
         satisfied that he has had sole responsibility for you  now.   I  am
         not satisfied that  your  current  arrangements  are  not  able  to
         continue.  I am therefore not satisfied that  the  parent  you  are
         applying to join in the UK is your sole surviving parent  nor  that
         he has had sole responsibility for your upbringing.  I am also  not
         satisfied that there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
         considerations that make your exclusion from the UK undesirable, as
         I am also aware your mother left you to join your sponsor in  2010.
         Paragraph 297(i)(e)(f).


         Furthermore, I note  you  state  your  biological  mother  is  also
         currently living in the UK living with your sponsor.   Our  records
         show that your mother holds limited leave to remain.   Therefore  I
         am not satisfied that both your parents are present and settled  in
         the United Kingdom;; or that the one  parent  who  is  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom  has  sole  responsibility  for  your
         upbringing.  297(i)(a)(e)


         I have considered your rights under Article 8 of ECHR.   Article  8
         of the ECHR is a qualified right proportionate  with  the  need  to
         maintain an effective immigration and border control and  decisions
         under the Immigration Rules are deemed to be compliant  with  human
         rights legislation.  Given the concerns raised above regarding  the
         relationship, I am not satisfied that you have a family  life  with
         the sponsor.  As this is the case, Article 8(1) does not  apply  to
         you.  However, if you do have a family life with the sponsor, I  am
         satisfied the decision is proportionate under Article 8(2).  I note
         that no satisfactory reason has been put  forward  as  to  why  the
         sponsor in the UK is unable to travel to Gambia to be with you.   I
         am therefore satisfied the decision is justified  by  the  need  to
         maintain an effective immigration and border control.


         [Omitted from the copy supplied by the Home  Office]  contained  in
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights might  warrant
         a grant of entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
         requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Following  a  thorough
         assessment of the application I am satisfied that there is no basis
         for such a claim.  Additionally, as you applied as a child I have a
         duty to  safeguard  children  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  and  have  considered  your
         situation in light of this.  It has  therefore  been  decided  that
         there are no exceptional circumstances in this case.  Consequently,
         you will not be issued entry clearance outside the Rules.


         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  meet  all  of
         the requirements of the relevant paragraph of  the  United  Kingdom
         Immigration Rules."

4.   That was the Notice of Refusal for Ebrima Suwaneh.  I  do  not  have  a
    copy of the refusal for his brother, but  it  appears  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's appeal review that the decision in respect  of  his
    brother, the second applicant, was based on the same facts.

5.   The judge decided that the principle issue in  these  appeals  was  the
    relationship between the sponsor and the  appellants.   The  appellants
    relied  on  birth  certificates.   These   birth   certificates   were,
    apparently, issued in 2010, more than ten years after  the  appellants'
    births.

6.   Unfortunately, the birth certificates were not before the  judge.   The
    judge refers to having considered letters from the Registrar certifying
    the birth certificates as being genuine, but without sight of the birth
    certificates it is not possible to know whether  the  letter  from  the
    Registrar relates to the birth certificates which  were  considered  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer or not.  The judge concluded that the birth
    certificates were not reliable and that looking at the other  documents
    in the round the judge did not believe that  they  were  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof on the issue of relationships.

7.   The judge refused the appeals.

8.   The appellants appealed and on  the  basis  that  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to apply the correct standard of proof in assessing  the  birth
    certificates, perversity by requiring  evidence  of  birth  records  in
    addition to birth certificates and the Registrar's letter  and  in  not
    balancing the birth  certificate  with  evidence  of  genuine  parental
    relationship accepted by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager.  Mr Ali pointed  out  that  it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's decision that the judge was seeking an explanation  as  to  why
    the births had not  been  registered  earlier,  but  the  sponsor,  the
    appellants' father, gave an explanation in his  witness  statement  and
    the letters from the Registrar also give an explanation.   The  sponsor
    explains that in the Gambia it is not  common  to  register  births  of
    children as it is done in the  United  Kingdom.   The  only  reason  to
    register the births was to apply for passports and he applied  in  2010
    knowing that he would need birth certificates to obtain  passports  for
    his sons.  The Presenting Officer suggested that there was no error  in
    the determination.  The relationship between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor was the  issue  in  this  appeal  and  the  response  from  the
    Registrar in Gambia at page 9 of the bundle does not  explain  why  the
    births were not registered until more than ten years after the births.

9.   I have concluded that the judge has materially erred in law.

10.  The judge considered the letter from the Registrar appearing at page  9
    of the appellants' bundle which refers to a birth certificate  numbered
    [                      ] in the name of Ebrima Suwaneh and  also  to  a
    similar letter from him at page 17 ("the letters") where the  Registrar
    deals with a birth certificate numbered [                ] in the  name
    of Alhagie Suwaneh.  Unfortunately, neither birth  certificate  was  in
    the respondent's bundle or the appellants' bundle, so that it was quite
    impossible for the judge to have  considered  the  evidence  which  was
    placed before him.  That must amount to an error of law.

11.  I believe that the judge further erred by  requiring  evidence  of  the
    source  of  the  information  that  enabled  the  official   to   issue
    certificates so long after the births.  An obvious explanation would be
    that the Registrar  relied  on  information  supplied  to  him  by  the
    children's father.   In  the  letters,  the  Registrar  says  that  the
    information is contained in records under the custody of the  Registrar
    and the judge complains that copies are not before him.  With  respect,
    it was incumbent upon the judge to look at  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round and to recognise that  information  before  the  Registrar  would
    clearly remain in his possession.

12.  Unfortunately, the judge did not deal with the  other  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules as an alternative.  Had the judge  done  so,  any
    errors of law on the judge's part might not have been material.

13.  I have concluded that I must set aside the judge's determination.

Notice of Decision

14.  I have given  consideration  to  retaining  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and deciding  the  appeal  myself  at  an  adjourned  hearing.
    Unfortunately, experience shows that this course  can  result  in  very
    long delays and I have concluded,  therefore,  that  the  interests  of
    justice require that I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh by a judge other than  Judge  D  A  Thomas.   Two  hours
    should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.  An interpreter is not
    required.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                   Date: 15 September 2017

