

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/10068/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April 2018                         |    On 03 May 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Suryaman Limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, counsel instructed by Everest Law
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 11 January  2018,  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Khawar of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  17  July  2017,
    allowing the appeal of the Respondent against a decision dated 10 March
    2016 refusing to grant entry clearance.

 2. The Respondent is a national of Nepal born on 11 March 1985.  He sought
    entry clearance in order to join his  father  Mr  Rai  Kumar  Limbu,  a
    former Ghurkha soldier.  This application was  refused  in  a  decision
    dated 10 March 2016, both in respect of the Home Office policy set  out
    in Annex K of the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,  chapter  15,
    Section 2A at 13.2  and  in  respect  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The grounds in respect  of  which  permission  was  granted  assert  as
    follows:

      1) that the judge found that the Appellant is emotionally dependent on
         the Sponsor at [38], but this was not explained  and  there  was  a
         failure by the Respondent to provide  evidence  to  show  emotional
         dependency bearing in mind the judgment in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ
         31;

      2) the Tribunal had disregarded  the  fact  that  the  Respondent  and
         Sponsor had lived apart for eleven years and although there may  be
         a financial relationship there was nothing  to  show  an  emotional
         dependency beyond normal emotional ties;

      3) the evidence as to financial dependency was insufficient  in  light
         of the judgment in AAO v Entry Clearance Officer  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
         840 at 35 which is essentially the Kugathas test; and

      4) that the Tribunal erred in having no regard to the public  interest
         considerations set out in Section 117B of the NIAA 2002.

 4. There was no Rule 24 response submitted on behalf of the Respondent.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Kotas sought to rely on  the  first  three
    grounds of appeal however in respect of ground 4 and the assertion that
    the Tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to  apply  the  public  interest
    considerations as set out in Section 117B of the NIAA 2002, he accepted
    that this had been addressed in the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in
    Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 per Lord Justice Lindblom where the  court  had
    held as follows:

         "55.     With effect from 28 July 2014 Section  117A  of  the  NIAA
             2002 requires that where a court or  Tribunal  is  considering
             the public interest and whether an interference with Article 8
             rights is justified it must have regard in cases not involving
             deportation to the matters set out in Section  117B  including
             that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
             the public interest. Section 117B(1) provides that  it  is  in
             the public interest that those seeking entry into  the  United
             Kingdom speak English Section 117B(2) and that it  is  in  the
             public  interest  that  those  seeking  entry  be  financially
             independent Section 117B(3).

         56.  Mr Jesurum pointed out that the Upper Tribunal Judge  did  not
             consider the matters arising under  those  provisions  of  the
             2002 Act.  He submitted however that in view of the  'historic
             injustice' underlying the Appellant's case such considerations
             would have made no difference to the outcome and certainly  no
             difference adverse to him.  Ms Patry  submitted  that  if  the
             Upper Tribunal's decision  was  otherwise  lawfully  made  the
             considerations arising under Section 117A and B could not have
             made a difference in his favour.

         57.  The submissions made on either side seem right.  Certainly  if
             the Upper Tribunal  Judge's  determination  is  in  any  event
             defective as a matter of law which in my view it is  I  cannot
             see how the provisions in Section 117A and B of the  2002  Act
             can affect the outcome of this appeal".

 6. Mr Kotas further submitted that  there  was  a  substantial  period  of
    separation between the Sponsor  and  the  Respondent  and  it  was  not
    apparent from reading the decision how family life had subsisted during
    that period.

 7. Mr Balroop submitted that [15] of the decision deals with  the  contact
    which was almost daily between the Sponsor and the Respondent.  At [10]
    the judge has set out the circumstances which were quite compelling  as
    to how the Sponsor came to be separated from his son in that he came to
    the United Kingdom in 2006 ostensibly for a visit, however his wife had
    kidney problems and they ended up remaining in the United  Kingdom  for
    treatment. At that time the Respondent was living with another  sibling
    in the family home in Nepal, however he has been on his own since 2012.



 8. Mr Balroop drew my attention to the findings at [34] and [35] that  the
    judge accepted the level of contact between the Sponsor and  Respondent
    and that the Sponsor was financially supporting his son and that  there
    was a joint bank account.

 9. Mr Balroop referred to the decision in Rai (op cit) and submitted  that
    the judge's finding at [40] contained sufficient reasoning to  conclude
    that family life continued despite the separation.  He  submitted  that
    the judge made a clear finding and it was open to him to do so.   There
    was no reply by Mr Kotas.

My Findings

10. I find no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In respect of ground 1 and the  assertion  that  there
    was no explanation or reasoning for the judge's finding  at  [38]  that
    the Respondent was dependent on his father and vice versa this  is  not
    the case. The Judge held as follows at [28] and [40]:

         "38.     The Sponsor also explained that he and the  Appellant  are
             emotionally dependent upon each other in that they  love  each
             other very  much  and  the  Appellant  is  his  youngest  son.
             Further that if the Appellant does not  succeed  in  obtaining
             entry to the United Kingdom he the Sponsor will end up  having
             to consider returning back to Nepal in order to look after his
             son ...

         40.  On the totality of the  evidence  both  oral  and  documentary
             proffered in this case I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
             relationship with the Sponsor  goes  beyond  normal  emotional
             ties because there is clear evidence of real, effective and/or
             committed support. Consequently the Appellant has  established
             Article 8 protected family life which continues to date".

11. The judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor which was in essence not
    challenged by the Entry Clearance Officer at the oral hearing and  gave
    sustainable reasons for accepting that evidence and finding that  there
    is "clear evidence of real, effective and/or committed  support"  based
    on "the totality of the evidence both oral and documentary" [40].

12. The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge had disregarded  the
    fact that the Sponsor and his son had  lived  apart  for  eleven  years
    however that is not the case as is clearly set  out  by  the  judge  at
    [23]:

         "The principle issue in this case is the question  of  whether  the
         Appellant has established and retained an Article 8 protected  life
         with the Sponsor despite the fact that the Sponsor has lived in the
         United Kingdom since 2006 and the Appellant was 30 years of age  as
         at the date of application".

13. The third ground again reverts to the Kugathas test and the  fact  that
    financial dependency, which the judge accepted  was  present,  was  not
    enough in  itself.   However,  it  was  not  disputed  that  the  judge
    correctly directed himself at [25] in  relation  to  the  decisions  in
    Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC); Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and  Rai  (op
    cit) and that he found,  sustainably,  that  the  Respondent  was  both
    financially and emotionally dependent on his father and Sponsor.

14. The judge at [27] found the Sponsor to be an entirely credible  witness
    and also found that despite being cross-examined  at  some  length,  no
    material discrepancies emerged during his oral evidence in relation  to
    his witness statements and the documentary evidence, thus  he  accepted
    his oral evidence in its entirety.

15. He noted the significant volume of documentary  evidence  submitted  in
    corroboration of the account at [29], including at [30] bank statements
    in relation to a joint account which shows monthly cash  deposits  from
    rental income.  He took into account the fact that at [32] the  Sponsor
    did not intend to leave his son behind  when  he  and  his  wife  first
    entered the UK with visit visas in 2006 but this changed  in  light  of
    the fact that the Sponsor's wife and mother of the  son  was  diagnosed
    with kidney failure and required dialysis.

16. At [35] the judge found that the Sponsor's oral evidence  was  entirely
    plausible and consistent with the documentary  evidence  of  the  Viber
    records which showed the frequency of the contact between  the  Sponsor
    and his son and the fact that on occasions they  speak  to  each  other
    daily.

17. The judge was entitled to take into account at [39] the fact  that  the
    Respondent has not formed a family or relationship of his own  and  has
    no girlfriend and this was part of the context of his  conclusion  that
    the relationship goes beyond normal emotional ties and that the failure
    to admit the Appellant was not proportionate.

18. Mr Kotas helpfully conceded the fourth ground of appeal in light of the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Rai set out above.

19. Read as a whole, it is clear that the First tier  Tribunal  Judge  took
    account of all the material matters  raised  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, including emotional and financial dependency and the
    fact that father and son had been separated since 2006 and  gave  clear
    and sustainable reasons for finding in favour of the Respondent.





Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out above I  find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  That decision is upheld.

I direct that entry clearance be granted pursuant to Section  87(1)  of  the
NIAA 2002.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 29 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
