
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10294/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Skype for Business               |On 26th August 2020                  |
|On 14 August 2020                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                           YEJIDE OLUWAKEMI OSHODI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Okunowo
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 11 March 1972 and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Nigeria. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the respondent dated 8 March 2019 to refuse her human rights  claim  in
    the context of an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of 10 continuous years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  9  April  2020,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both parties agree that the appellant  was  continuously  and  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  Rules  from  1
    September 2007 until 27 April 2012. On 16 August  2012,  the  appellant
    made an application for an EEA residence card. A card was issued to her
    on 24 January 2013 and remained valid until 24 January 2018.  The  card
    was issued to the appellant on the basis that she was married to an EEA
    citizen  who  was  exercising  Treaty  Rights.  The  appellant  claims,
    therefore, that she has resided lawfully in the United Kingdom  for  10
    years from 2007 - 2017.

 3. Both parties agree that it was possible for the  appellant  in  law  to
    require 10 years' continuous residence made up, as  she  claims,  by  5
    years under the Immigration Rules and a further 5 years as  the  spouse
    of an EEA citizen exercising Treaty Rights. The appellant  had  married
    on 10 March 2012. An application which she made  immediately  following
    her marriage for an EEA residence  card  was  refused  and  her  appeal
    dismissed; she became appeals rights exhausted  on  19  July  2012.  As
    noted above, she made a  further  application  for  a  card  which  was
    successful on 16 August 2012. It would appear, therefore, that there is
    at least one break in the period of the  appellant's  lawful  residence
    between 19 July 2012 16 August 2012. Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellant sought to bridge that gap by relying on section 3C of the
    Immigration Act 1971; the appellant claims  that  she  either  had  (i)
    valid leave under the Immigration Rules or the EEA Regulations 2016  or
    (ii) was in the process of making an application or bringing an  appeal
    when leave had been refused. Judge Pooler, who  heard  the  appellant's
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal did not agree; At [15], he wrote:

         "[the appellant's  representative]  submitted  that  the  appellant
         could rely on section  3C  of  the  immigration  act  1971.  In  my
         judgement,  section  3C  is  not  relevant  does  not  assist   the
         appellant. The effect of section 3C is to extend leave a person  is
         applied for a  variation  of  leave  to  enter  remain  before  the
         existing leave has  expired  and  the  leave  expires  without  the
         application for variation having been decided. The appellant cannot
         benefit from these provisions in relation to the  period  after  27
         April 2012 because she did not make an application for a  variation
         of her leave. She made instead an application for an EEA  residence
         card. Such an application is not made under  by  reference  to  the
         Immigration Rules and  is  not  an  application  for  variation  of
         leave."

    In my judgement, the  judge  was  correct.  The  relevant  Home  Office
    guidance, Leave extended by section 3C (and leave extended  by  section
    3D in transitional cases) Version 9.0 provides at [6]:

         'EEA applications  Section  3C  does  not  extend  leave  where  an
         application is made for a residence card under the EEA  Regulations
         Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006.   An
         application for a residence card is not an application to extend or
         vary leave,  it  seeks  confirmation  that  rights  under  the  EEA
         Regulations are being exercised therefore the  applicant  does  not
         require leave to enter or remain.'

    Section 3C(a) states that the provision applies to 'a  person  who  has
    limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  [and  who]
    applies to the Secretary of State  for  variation  of  the  leave.'  An
    application for and the issue of an EEA residence card did  not  confer
    limited leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  upon  the
    appellant. The appellant, therefore, experienced a break in her  lawful
    residence in excess of 28 days.

 4. As Judge Pooler noted [16], in the alternative the appellant sought  to
    rely upon a period of residence as the spouse of an EEA  national.  She
    points to the fact that, following a second application, she was issued
    with a residence card. However, as the judge observed (and I agree) the
    appellant has misunderstood the nature and legal meaning of a residence
    card. Whilst a residence card is issued prospectively to the  appellant
    for a period of five years, that does not mean that she was, in effect,
    provided by  the  respondent  with  five  years  towards  a  period  of
    continuous lawful residence. As the judge noted  [18],  'the  appellant
    must prove that she had been exercising Treaty  Rights  throughout  the
    period in which she seeks to rely for the  purposes  of  meeting  along
    residence rules.' As Mr Bates, who appeared before the  Upper  Tribunal
    for the Secretary of State, submitted, the issue of a  residence  card,
    although it may be for a future period of years, is  declaratory  only;
    the issue of the card is an acknowledgement by the Secretary  of  State
    that, in this instance, the appellant was legitimately  married  to  an
    EEA national exercising Treaty Rights on the date of issue.  The  judge
    went on to consider the evidence advanced by the appellant with a  view
    to proving that her husband (from whom she had subsequently  separated)
    but exercised Treaty Rights throughout the  period  2012  -  2017.  The
    judge considered documentary evidence which appeared to show  that  the
    appellant's husband had been a director of a  company  between  2017  -
    2018. As the judge noted, 'that evidence has not  proven  that  he  was
    exercising Treaty Rights as a  self-sufficient  person  or  on  another
    basis such as an employee or a self-employed person.'  Judge  concluded
    that, 'the appellant has failed to prove that a husband was  exercising
    Treaty Rights and she has also failed prove that she  was  resident  in
    the UK in accordance with the EEA regulations' [23].

 5. On the facts, therefore, the judge has not erred in law  by  concluding
    that the appellant (i) did not enjoy section 3C leave when she switched
    from the Immigration Rules to the EEA Regulations and that (ii) she had
    not been present lawfully  during  the  period  2012-2017  under  those
    regulations.

 6. There remained a further issue which the judge  addresses  at  [32]  et
    seq. In January 2019, an earlier appeal by  the  appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been withdrawn on the  basis  of  a  concession
    made at the hearing  by  the  presenting  officer.  The  concession  is
    recorded in the judge's record of proceedings in which  references  are
    made to a policy having been 'met' and that 'indefinite leave to remain
    would be  granted'  to  the  appellant.  Judge  Pooler  considered  the
    relevance of this 'concession' in the balancing exercise under  Article
    8 ECHR; he considered whether the  statement  made  by  the  presenting
    officer was 'sufficient to outweigh the public interest in the  removal
    of the appellant.' He concluded that the person making  the  concession
    had lacked the authority to bind the Secretary of State. He noted  also
    that the  presenting  officer  had  misunderstood  the  effect  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Thirdly, he considered that there was  'no  evidence
    to indicate that the appellant has taken any steps to her detriment  in
    reliance on the statement that indefinite  leave  to  remain  would  be
    granted.'

 7. I find that  the  judge's  reasoning  is  legally  accurate.  Mr  Bates
    directed me to the judgement of the Court of Appeal in Rauf [2019] EWCA
    Civ 1276 at [28-29]:

         "The only other basis for the contention  that  the  UT  fell  into
         error is that it did not consider the law relating  to  withdrawals
         of  concession.  Mr  Turner  did   not   pursue   this   with   any
         particularity. He would have had difficulty  doing  so  considering
         the general principles to which we were referred  in  CD  (Jamaica)
         [2010] EWCA Civ 768. The facts of that case are very different from
         this and the ultimate decision that was appealed was a  refusal  to
         allow a concession to be withdrawn  that  was  overturned  in  this
         court. The principle to be applied was extracted from a decision of
         Goldring LJ in NR (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  856  which  is
         summarised at [18] of CD (Jamaica) in the following terms:

             "The real question that the  tribunal  had  to  determine  was
             whether all the essential issues in the case could  fairly  be
             resolved by allowing the concession to be withdrawn or whether
             the prejudice was such, and the damage to the public  interest
             such, that the Secretary of State should  not  be  allowed  to
             withdraw the concession."

         Putting to one side any more sophisticated examination of the  law,
         Mr Turner could not have got past first post in any complaint  that
         a  concession  which  was  simply  an  erroneous  reading  of   the
         Immigration Rules which is mandatory and a proper reflection of the
         legislation  has  any  prospect  of  not  being  withdrawn  in  the
         circumstance where there was no prejudice. There was  no  prejudice
         on the facts of this case because, on his own  case,  the  best  Mr
         Rauf could have achieved was 60 days grace and he had already had 7
         months of the same."

    The  concession  was  granted  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the   legal
    provisions. As is  now  clear,  the  appellant  had  ceased  to  reside
    lawfully and had become an over stayer while she  has  been  unable  to
    show that she was legally resident as the spouse of  an  EEA  national.
    The appellant was never granted leave  to  remain  nor  was  any  leave
    terminated as a result of the mistake/concession. The  judge  correctly
    concluded that the appellant had suffered no detriment  and,  in  turn,
    that the public interest would not be damaged by allowing respondent to
    withdraw the concession. That was a conclusion wholly  consistent  with
    the law.

 8. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                           Date 23 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


