
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10275/2019
     HU/03321/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                             suleman sharif (A1)
                              asma rasheed (A2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Ahmed instructed by Fawad Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckley promulgated on 16 August 2019, dismissing on all
    grounds their linked appeals against the decisions of the Secretary  of
    State  dated  5  February  2019  and  31  May  2019  to  refuse   their
    applications for leave to remain outside the Rules.

 2. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft  refused  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 7  November  2019.  However,  when  the
    application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen granted permission on 11 December 2019.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I find there is no error of  law  in  the
    making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellants are husband and wife, married in Pakistan in  2014,  and
    have a son born in the UK in 2016.  The first appellant  (A1)  has  had
    leave to remain in various capacities, beginning as a student  in  2008
    and later as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.   However,  his  last  valid  leave
    expired in 2016.  The second appellant (A2) joined him as  a  dependant
    in 2014.  A further application for leave to remain made  in  2016  was
    not refused until May of 2018.  That decision was maintained  following
    an Administrative Review in July 2018.  Shortly  thereafter,  still  in
    July 2018, the  appellants  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, which was refused with an out of country only  right
    of appeal on 20 February 2019.  The respondent subsequently  agreed  to
    reconsider the application, resulting in the further  refusal  decision
    of 31 May 2019, which is the subject matter of the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal, dismissed by Judge Buckley in August 2019.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Allen stated only that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  considering  the  matter
    essentially on the basis of it  being  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain, "Whether or  not  there  is  any  materiality  to  the
    apparent error in this regard will be a matter for the Tribunal at  the
    hearing."

 6. I am not satisfied that there was any mistake  or  misunderstanding  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at the nature of the  applications  being
    made by the appellants, as can be seen from  the  refusal  decision  in
    respect of A1, "You made a human rights claim  in  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  your  length  of
    residence and on the basis of your family life with  your  partner  ...
    and your child."  On the same page of the decision, it also notes  that
    the application was for indefinite leave to remain  outside  the  Rules
    but added that as he had "Not specifically stated that you are applying
    for indefinite leave to remain under the Immigration Rules relating  to
    long residence, we would draw your attention  to  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B."  The refusal decision then went  on  to  consider  the
    long residence requirement, noting that the appellant does not qualify.

 7. Further, the application made by A1 on form SET(O) was  accompanied  by
    his representative's letter of 13 July 2018 stating the application was
    for "Indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his private life in the
    UK under the ECHR."  Within the form, A1 stated  that  he  was  in  the
    tenth year of completing his ten years of lawful residence in the UK he
    also claimed to have formed private and  family  life  in  the  UK  and
    stated, "My private life will be disturbed as I have spent the last ten
    years in UK."

 8. The application form signed by A2 states at section 3,

         "My spouse Mr Suleman Sharif on completion of his ten years' lawful
         residence in the UK has submitted his  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain.  It is humbly requested  that  my  application  be
         considered and decided in line with my spouse's application."

 9. It is clear from the above  that  at  the  time  of  application,  both
    appellants were seeking indefinite leave to remain and that ten  years'
    lawful residence was being relied  upon  in  addition  to  private  and
    family life.  It was for that reason the respondent gave  consideration
    to the  ten  years'  long  residence  route.   It  is  not  surprising,
    therefore, that the judge also considered whether the appellants  could
    meet the ten years' continuous lawful residence requirements.  However,
    it was conceded at the First-tier Tribunal, and again today  before  me
    by Mr Ahmed, that they cannot meet the Rules.  Mr Ahmed  concedes  that
    they are not entitled to indefinite leave to remain on the  application
    they made.

10. Curiously, the grounds of application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal state that A1 "Did not make an application for ILR under
    para 276B (as at the date of application he  had  not  had  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK).  Therefore, he was not able  to
    satisfy the Rule of 276B ... he was not seeking ILR etc."  At paragraph
    7 of the grounds, it is again repeated that it was not A1's  case  that
    he was entitled to ILR.  As stated above, that is inconsistent with the
    application made in which both appellants  refer  to  A1's  application
    being for indefinite leave to remain.

11. In any event, there is no merit  in  the  grounds  which  are  entirely
    misconceived in law.  At some length, the grounds  argue  that  A1  was
    relying on paragraph 39E for the purposes  of  his  leave  but  not  in
    conjunction with paragraph 276B.  It is difficult to follow  the  logic
    of the grounds, but the argument  appears  to  be  that  A1  should  be
    regarded as having lawful immigration status from the moment  his  last
    Administrative Review of the refusal decision of May 2018  was  refused
    and the gap that followed of thirteen days between  the  refusal  being
    maintained on Administrative Review, and his  most  recent  application
    for leave to remain made on 13 July 2018, should be treated  as  lawful
    leave.  However, for what purpose the immigration status is  argued  to
    be lawful is not clear, given that it is conceded that A1  cannot  meet
    the long residence requirements of the Rules. Ahmed  makes  clear  that
    the period of time under which a person has Section  3C  leave  pending
    the outcome of appeal  or  request  for  administrative  review  cannot
    convert that period into lawful leave.  Once the Administrative  Review
    maintained the refusal decision, A1 could only be  regarded  as  having
    continuous lawful  leave  until  the  expiry  of  his  leave  in  2016.
    Paragraph 39E  only  provides  that  an  application  made  within  the
    conditions there set out should not be regarded as having been made out
    of time.  The argument in the grounds is peculiar, suggesting  that  in
    an application for discretionary leave outside the Rules, A1 should  be
    regarded as having had continuous lawful  leave  throughout.   Even  if
    that were the case, in my  view,  it  affords  the  appellant  no  real
    assistance.

12. As became clear from Mr Ahmed's submissions, it was not  necessary  for
    the appellant to rely upon paragraph 39E.  The most that these  matters
    can be regarded as relevant and not a red herring is that the appellant
    has not been an illegal  overstayer  in  the  sense  of  having  simply
    allowed his leave to lapse and  not  making  a  prompt  application  or
    appeal.  The fact that there was also a delay  between  2016  and  2018
    before his previous application was decided is potentially relevant, as
    it means he has been in the UK a further period of time,  in  which  he
    has developed further his private and  family  life.   However,  it  is
    clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  all  of  that  into
    consideration in the assessment under Article 8 and, as Mr Tan  pointed
    out, there has been  no  appeal  against  the  judge's  assessment  and
    findings under Article 8.  In any event, neither appellant can meet the
    requirements of the Rules and on consideration of  their  circumstances
    outside the Rules under Article 8 the judge found no basis to allow  an
    appeal.

13. The grounds do not assist the appellants, and the arguments  about  39E
    leave and whether residence should be regarded as lawful were  of  only
    marginal relevance and fully taken into account in  any  event  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing in the grounds demonstrates any error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It  follows  that  the
    appellants' appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal  of  each  appellant  remains  dismissed  on  all
                    grounds.

    No anonymity direction is made.
     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 29 January 2020


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 29 January 2020


